--- Page 1 ---
SOFTWARE—PRACTICE AND EXPERIENCE
Softw. Pract. Exper. 2000;00:1–6 Prepared using speauth.cls [Version: 2002/09/23 v2.2]
Developing Uppaal over 15
years
Gerd Behrmann1, Alexandre David2,∗, Kim Guldstrand Larsen2, Paul
Pettersson3, Wang Yi4
1NORDUnet A/S, Copenhagen, Denmark
2Department of Computer Science, Aalborg University, Denmar k
3M¨ alardalen Real-Time Research Centre, M¨ alardalen University , Sweden
4Department of Information Technology, Uppsala University, S weden
SUMMARY
Uppaal is a tool suitable for model checking real-time syste ms described as networks of
timed automata communicating by channel synchronisations and extended with integer
variables. Its ﬁrst version was released in 1995 and its deve lopment is still very active. It
now features an advanced modelling language, a user-friend ly graphical interface, and a
performant model checker engine. In addition, several ﬂavo urs of the tool have matured
in recent years. In this paper, we present how we managed to ma intain the tool during
15 years, its current architecture with its challenges, and we give future directions of the
tool.
key words: Uppaal , real-time, model-checker, development
INTRODUCTION
Uppaal is ﬁrst of all a research tool born from the collaboration of U ppsala and Aalborg
universities [ 44]. It takes its theoretical roots from Alur and Dill’s pionee r work on timed
automata[ 2].Itsperformanceoriginallycomesfromzones[ 36]asarepresentationforstatesand
the eﬃcient implementation of operators on its canonical da ta-structure known as diﬀerence
bound matrix (DBM) [ 13]. Since then the development has been fuelled by scientiﬁc r esults on
algorithmsornewdatastructures[ 7,8,10,18,37,38],academiccase-studies[ 41,17,24,28,20],
industrial case-studies [ 39,21,12,1,4], and also teaching [ 27].
On the other hand, having such a tool helps to develop and test new theories and algorithms,
which has given us synergy during the last decade between too l development and theoretical
results.
∗Correspondence to: Department of Computer Science, Aalborg University, D enmark
Copyright c/circlecopyrt2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

--- Page 2 ---
2BEHRMANN ET AL.
Recently, the tool has blossomed into several domain speciﬁ c versions, namely, Cora
[8,9] (cost-optimal reachability), Tron[34,35] (online testing), CoVer[29,30] (oﬄine test
generation), Tiga[6] (timed game solver), Port[25] (component based and partial order),
Pro(extension with probabilities, in progress), and Times[23,3] (scheduling and analysis).
These extensions are made based on a common code base, re-usi ng basic data structures to
represent states, store them, and perform common operation s such as delay, intersection, or
computing successor states.
Corais based on linearly priced timed automata [ 11]. The model extends timed automata
with a special cost variable whose rate is speciﬁed for every state. The algorithm uses guiding
to solve minimum cost reachability problems.
Tronis a testing tool suited for black-box conformance testing [ 43,32] of timed systems.
It is mainly targeted for embedded software commonly found i n various controllers. Testing is
done online in the sense that that tests are derived, execute d, and checked while maintaining
the connection to the system in real-time.
CoVer is a tool for creating test suites from Uppaal models with coverage speciﬁed by
coverage observers a.k.a. observer automata.
Tigais an extension for solving reachability and safety problem s on timed game automata.
Its algorithm [ 16] is a symbolic extension of the on-the-ﬂy algorithm suggest ed by Shann
et al [40] for linear-time model-checking of ﬁnite-state systems. I t is used for controller
synthesis [ 31], it has application to testing [ 19], and it has been extended to synthesis under
partial observability [ 15].
Portis a version targeted to component-based modelling and veri ﬁcation. Its interface is
developed as an Eclipse plug-in. The tool supports graphica l modelling of internal component
behaviour as timed automata and hierarchical composition o f components. It is able to exploit
the structure of such systems and apply partial order reduct ion techniques successfully [ 26].
Prois an extension for timed automata with probabilities [ 5,33]. The model is extended
withbranchingnodesthatallow theusertospecifyweights f oreveryoutgoingedge.Theengine
can then compute probability bounds to reach speciﬁed state s. It is work-in-progress.
Timesis a tool-set for modelling, schedulability analysis, synt hesis of (optimal) schedules
and executable code. Its modelling language is timed automa ta extended with tasks. It models
systems that can be described as a set of tasks that are trigge red periodically or sporadically
by time or external events. The release pattern is given by a t imed automaton and the tool
performs schedulability analysis on it. Timesworks by encoding the problem into timed
automata and it uses the Uppaal engine for the checks. It translates back the answer in
terms of Gantt chart to visualise schedules. There are other tools that are using Uppaal as a
back-end veriﬁcation engine, e.g., REX [ 22].
In this paper we focus on the “core” tool Uppaal and present our experience in developing
and maintaining it for the last decade. In particular, we pre sent the backbone architecture
that has allowed us to expand the tool on diﬀerent variants of timed automata. The following
sections give an overview of the tool architecture, our expe rience in the process of building the
tool, and future development directions.
Copyright c/circlecopyrt2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Softw. Pract. Exper. 2000;00:1–6
Prepared using speauth.cls

--- Page 3 ---
DEVELOPING UPPAAL OVER 15 YEARS 3
Figure 1. View of the “concrete” simulator of Tiga.
OVERVIEW OF THE TOOL ARCHITECTURE
Client-server architecture. The tool has two main components: a graphical user interface
written in Java and a model-checker engine written in C++. Th e interface runs almost
eﬀortlessly on diﬀerent platforms and we can exploit the ric h functionalities available for
programming interfaces inherent to the libraries coming wi th the Java programming language.
The C++ language gives us both advanced object oriented prog ramming and performance.
These two components form a basic client server architectur e with the graphical interface
(client) communicating with the model checker (server) via a local pipe†or the network‡. This
separation of concerns makes Uppaal easier to port and maintain on diﬀerent platforms.
The graphical interface has three “tabs” that correspond to the main tasks a user needs to
do: to edit a model in the editor, to simulate it in the simulat or, and submit veriﬁcation queries
†A common inter-process communication mechanism.
‡The veriﬁcation can be done on a remote server, which is a rarely exploit ed feature.
Copyright c/circlecopyrt2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Softw. Pract. Exper. 2000;00:1–6
Prepared using speauth.cls

--- Page 4 ---
4BEHRMANN ET AL.
PWList
Transition SuccessorDelay ExtrapolationInitial state
LazyCopySorterTrace Symmetry
Query
Figure 2. Pipeline architecture for the reachability ﬁlter .
to the model-checker. Additionally, the user may come back t o the simulator to visualise a
trace generated by the veriﬁcation. Figure 1gives a view of the simulator of the tool. The
diﬀerent variants of the tool have specialised interfaces a nd the ﬁgure shows the simulator
used inTiga. On the left is the command part where the user can select transitions, go back
inthetrace,playrandomly,ornavigatethroughthecurrent trace(historyofstates).Thelistin
the middle shows the values of the variables and clocks. The t imed automata are shown on the
right and below them a Gantt chart and a message sequence char t. The simulator of Uppaal
lacks the Gantt chart and has other similar components, alth ough instead of navigating with
concrete clock valuations, the user sees symbolic states. The point here is to stress reuse of
components across diﬀerent tools. It is important to amorti se development costs over time on
diﬀerent specialisations of the tool without having to rewr ite everything from scratch. This is
obvious but the insidious consequence is that it is often diﬃ cult in practice to publish on these
new additions. This is due to the lack of dedicated conferenc es where tool developments can
be reported on.
Pipeline architecture. The model-checker itself (the engine) is designed around a pipeline
architecture [ 7] where each block or ﬁlterprocesses states and sends them to the next stage as
shown in Fig. 2. The ﬁgure shows the conﬁguration for the reachability ﬁlter. Other algorithms
such as the livenessand theleadstocheckers have their own ﬁlters built on the same principle.
In this example, the initial state is pushed to the reachabil ity ﬁlter in its delay component to
start theexploration. Then it runsits main loop that takes s tates from our (uniﬁed passedand)
waiting list structure, explores them, and puts the success ors in that structure. This structure
(also called the PWList) implements one (coloured) state set with states marked wai ting and
passed. It is uniﬁed in the sense that we have one structure in stead of the traditional waiting
and passed lists that need two lookups in hash tables per loop iteration of the reachability
algorithm. Only states coloured as waiting are explored and inclusion check between symbolic
states is done against all states. The main chain for the expl oration is Transition (which
transitions can be taken) - Successor (execution of the transitions) - Delay(let time pass)
Copyright c/circlecopyrt2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Softw. Pract. Exper. 2000;00:1–6
Prepared using speauth.cls

--- Page 5 ---
DEVELOPING UPPAAL OVER 15 YEARS 5
-Extrapolation (apply an appropriate extrapolation to ensure ﬁnite explor ation) - PWList
(inclusion check and mark the state to be explored) - Query(evaluate the formula if the state
was not included).
In fact we inserted a LazyCopy ﬁlter to reduce copies of states between the transition
and successor ﬁlters. This ﬁlter really copies states only w hen necessary, e.g., computing one
successor only does not require a copy and two successors req uire one copy only. It acts as
a one place buﬀer. When priorities are used in the model, this ﬁlter is swapped by another
ﬁlter that is going to buﬀer transitions and sort them by prio rity, without changing the rest
of the pipeline. Some ﬁlters are optional, such as Sorterthat can sort transitions, Tracethat
is used to store traces, or Symmetry that is projecting the states to a representant of its
equivalence class (orbit) when symmetry is used in the model . In addition, diﬀerent kinds
of extrapolations can be used depending on the model, which r esults in diﬀerent kinds of
instances for the Extrapolation ﬁlter. We note that it is simpler to have the logic (in terms of
if statements) to instantiate the right type of a component o nce and use the generic design
to connect the components and use them transparently. The re ader understands that the
combination of these features gives rise to a lot of conﬁgura tions. The point here is to keep
orthogonal features separated.
The overall pipeline architecture allows us to reason about the algorithm in terms of blocks
that we can change if we need another semantics. Implementin g another checker, e.g. a timed
game solver, is relatively easy and consists in adding compo nents that will do the backward
propagation, changing the ﬁrst ﬁlter to either explore forw ard or backward, add a post-
processing ﬁlter to detect what is winning or losing in the ga me after Extrapolation , and
changing the graph representation. The new pipeline still h as the same structure and follows
the same design. To change the semantics of the game, e.g. to i mplement simulation checking
[14], we change Transition that implements the transition relation and Delayto allow turn-
based delays.
There are two important points that this architecture illus trates: object-oriented
programming and reuse of components. The ﬁlters are in pract ice abstract classes so these
components are managed at a high level. Second, we can reuse t hese ﬁlters for diﬀerent pipeline
conﬁgurations, i.e., for diﬀerent checkers. We note that th e architecture is also ﬁt for functional
languages.
Additional components. In addition to these components, Uppaal contains a virtual machine
to execute the compiled byte-code of our C-like input langua ge supporting user deﬁned
functions and types. This allows the user to write complex an d compact models while still
limiting the state-space explosion – complexity can be conc entrated in functions to avoid
using intermediate states.
We currently distribute some open source components, such a s the parser and the diﬀerence
bound matrix (DBM) library. The DBM library has a Ruby bindin g, which allows for quick
prototyping. The parser understands the XML format we use in Uppaal, which allows other
researchers to use the same format. The DBM library handles D BMs and federations (unions
of DBMs) used to represent symbolic states. The DBM library s upports a wide range of
operations including subtractions and merging of DBMs.
Copyright c/circlecopyrt2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Softw. Pract. Exper. 2000;00:1–6
Prepared using speauth.cls

--- Page 6 ---
6BEHRMANN ET AL.
TOOL BUILDING PROCESS
Tools are not prototypes. It is relatively easy to produce prototypes as proofs of conc ept of
some theory or algorithm to strengthen a paper but it is notor iously more diﬃcult to develop
a tool that is going to survive the test of time. Unfortunatel y, prototypes are more common in
practice. Building and maintaining tools takes a lot of time and is generally given less academic
credits compared to more theoretical work, which explains t he limited number of maintained
tools. In the domain of formal methods, tools are crucial and they also serve as a dissemination
means for theoretical results. Tools do have a positive impa ct through the case-studies they
allow other users to do, often in collaboration, which is imp ortant to amortise the development
cost (in terms of time) and earn publications (otherwise we p erish)§.
Who develops? The ﬁrst question for developing tools is who is going to do it ? Most of the
time it is done by master or Ph.D. students, which makes sense economically since professors
cannot aﬀord writing C++ code. However, when temporary deve lopers who have their own
agenda (own thesis to write) work on the tools, there is the ob vious issue that someone needs
to take over otherwise the tool will disappear. In addition, temporary developers do not have a
long term vision and are interested (rightfully so) in their own thesis. Over the years, changing
teams without a common interest or focus means that the code w ill degrade if there is no
control. What happened for us was that there were some Ph.D. s tudents who stayed in the
team for a long time, long enough to lay down a solid architect ure and durable design. As a
ﬁrst rule of survival, one should have a solid design and encourage people to stick to it even if
they do not like it. At some point in time old design decisions will not make sense any more
but this is a diﬀerent issue.
Code size. When the code grows (see Fig. 3) it is increasingly diﬃcult for new people to
use the code so it becomes important to have some permanent st aﬀ to take care of it and
revise it so it can oﬀer a limited and more useful interface. T his is a considerable eﬀort that
is essential to the survival of the tool. In the past we had a fe w such revisions: the pipeline
architecture, the virtual machine , and handling of federations in the model-checker. The size
and complexity of the code has now become a barrier for new int ernal people but it is also a
serious problem for external collaboration. We need a new re vision to update the interfaces of
the diﬀerent components and add more abstraction to the code . For long term development,
it is important to have some permanent staﬀ to take care of suc h revisions and keep a long
term vision. However, it is a trade-oﬀ between academic and d evelopment work.
Code aging. Curiously code ages. This is due to the fact that developers f orget old code
and new methods or libraries appear over the years, which mak es the code become older or
deprecated.Inaddition,progressincompilersalsomeanst hatspecialeﬀortsinthepasttomake
some algorithms eﬃcient are now obsolete, e.g., we can commo nly address iteratively elements
§The well-known motto publish or perish emphasised by a system holding that name is a testament of the tool
development dilemma in academia.
Copyright c/circlecopyrt2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Softw. Pract. Exper. 2000;00:1–6
Prepared using speauth.cls

--- Page 7 ---
DEVELOPING UPPAAL OVER 15 YEARS 7
in matrices by expressions like dbm[i∗dim+j] with conﬁdence that the compiler will notuse
relativelyexpensivemultiplicationsforelementaccesse s.Tocountercodeaging,documentation
is vital. Our experience has been to “document” the code usin gdoxygen formatted comments.
There is no real documentation apart from these comments, al though some eﬀorts have been
made to describe overall design decisions and the communica tion protocol. We have crash
courses to inform new programmers, which is a limited soluti on. As for the comments, they are
extensive and they keep the memory of former developers. It i s a weakness in the development
process to lack stand-alone white papers that give technical details on the code but this has
not been our priority.
Life cycles. The tool has gone over diﬀerent life cycles over the years. A l ife cycle can be
deﬁned by major changes in architecture that are needed to ac commodate new developments.
It happens when old designs become too obsolete for new addit ions that were not foreseen in
the past. The ﬁrst cycle was with the original ATGgraph editor¶and an early custom simulator.
The second cycle introduced an integrated graphical editor , the client-server architecture still
in use today, and an improved engine. The third cycle is the cu rrent one with a modular
pipeline architecture. This pipeline architecture is prob ably the determinant factor for keeping
additions of new features without breaking the tool. In term s of features it is interesting to note
that early developments eﬀorts were focused on performance improvements and then later on
interface and language features. The later developments of the tool introduced new algorithms
to handle diﬀerent problems rather than improvements of the current algorithms.
During a cycle, the development is incremental, following t he current design and making
changes until the amount of desired new features and algorit hms conﬂicts too much with
the design. At this point there is a major eﬀort to redesign (o r re-factor) the code. The
current architecture has lived up to its expectations for th e approximately 8 years, during
which we could re-use existing components and create new one s that we could litteraly plug
together. However, the plethora of new variants of the tool h ides current internal issues with
the architecture and now is the time for a major update.
Distributed development. We use a centralised version management system ( CVSand later
subversion), which allows distributed teams to work on the s ame code. This is common for
distributed projects. A given checkout of the repository co ntains all variants of the tool but
eachofthemislocatedinitsownseparatedmodule.Develope rsareresponsibleforfewmodules
(their own) and modify other modules occasionally only. The key here is to have responsibility
for the diﬀerent parts for maintenance. In addition, we have the simple rules committed code
must compile andany distributed code must pass the regression test . Since breaking these rules
produces heated reactions, they tend to be observed. The goa l here is to keep discipline.
Testing. For a tool in the ﬁeld of formal methods we would expect to appl y formal veriﬁcation
techniques to it to ensure its correctness. Let’s say resear ch is not there yet. The code base has
currently 200+ KLoC in C++ that implement algorithms that ar e themselves notoriously
¶This is an editor tool used by Uppaal from 1995 to 1999.
Copyright c/circlecopyrt2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Softw. Pract. Exper. 2000;00:1–6
Prepared using speauth.cls

--- Page 8 ---
8BEHRMANN ET AL.
diﬃcult to prove. There are tools we have used to assist us, su ch asgcov,purify, and
valgrind . However, what we routinely do is to test. We use regression t esting on a battery of
known examples and results. When a bug is discovered, we inse rt that new example in the test
suite and make sure new versions pass the new tests. This is an automatic process handled by
a script.
Bug management. Another well known tool we are using is the bug management sys tem
bugzilla. Bugs are not only program errors but also requested feature s. They are sorted by
priority that developers can set. Errors usually come with e xamples to reproduce them. They
are added to the regression tests when the errors are correct ed. Sometimes a change in the
code triggers a new error that was not present in the past. We u se binary search on the
revision number (in our subversion repository) to ﬁnd which revision introduced the changes
that triggered that error. This is a simple and very eﬀective technique.
Cross-platform. An integral part of the development process is to take care of cross-platform
development. Early on we decided to stick with one compiler, gcc/g++. We can use the same
code and change a few headers only and compile for Windows, Li nux, and MacOS. By doing so
we can also take advantage of some useful gnu extensions. We d ropped support for SunOS due
to absence of users and also machines installed with SunOS. A ll three supported platforms
are actively used with an increase for MacOS in recent years. What we do to manage this
is to keep third party libraries at a minimum. Currently we ne edlibxml2 compiled for all
platforms and we use boostheaders only. The rest is generated code by tools like bisonand
flex. Compilation is done under Linux for Linux and Windows, MacO S binaries are compiled
on a Mac. We foresee problems in the future when supporting mu lti-threads since we will have
to use additional libraries such as Win32-pthread to support POSIX threads (to begin with,
the library needs to be patched for Win64).
Community. Finally, to survive, a tool needs its community. We have a dis cussion forum/bardbl
that our user community uses to ask or answer questions and ma intain an active discussion
on the tool. In fact, this helps us tremendously because we ca nnot handle all newcomers to
the tool individually and we are grateful to users who help ea ch other. The community also
provides us with new problems and case-studies, which in tur n instill progress in algorithms
and theory.
CHALLENGES
The ﬁrst challenge is to manage complexity and size of the pro ject. Implementing advanced
algorithms is tricky, specially when it is in a formal tool th at is used for veriﬁcation. As
shown in Fig. 3the code (in kilo lines of code of C/C++) has been steadily gro wing. This
growth comes from new variants and algorithms that are added to the repository. The count
/bardblhttp://tech.groups.yahoo.com/group/uppaal/
Copyright c/circlecopyrt2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Softw. Pract. Exper. 2000;00:1–6
Prepared using speauth.cls

--- Page 9 ---
DEVELOPING UPPAAL OVER 15 YEARS 9
 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200 220 240
 0  10  20  30  40  50  60  70  80kLoC
Months from 2004kLOC over the years
Figure 3. Evolution of the code base.
includes all code (used or not) for all variants of Uppaal for the model-checker engine only.
The graphical interface adds 40+ kLoC in Java.
The second challenge is to keep improving performance and fe atures of the tool despite
growing algorithm complexity. Table Ishows the evolution of the performance of the tool.
Experiments have been performed on a Pentium D 2.80GHz with 1 GB RAM. We use memtime
that measures time and polls memory (not reliable below 0.1s ). Entries marked ’-’ denote
veriﬁcations that were stopped after 2h or 900M. The models a re available on www.uppaal.org
underExamples/benchmarks . Apart from the performance improvements, recent versions
support user-deﬁned functions and symmetry reduction. The se features are not used in the
experiments but they would further improve performance.
The third challenge is to cope with new extensions of the tool to explore diﬀerent theoretical
paths. The current architecture has been pushed to implemen t the diﬀerent known ﬂavours
ofUppaal but also to extend every checker. Recent extensions to Uppaal include priorities
and stop-watches. Tigawas recently extended with a simulation checker. It is being extended
with a new timed interface checker. Although the overall pip eline architecture accommodates
these extensions, we have reached the limit of some “impleme ntation details”. These are: 1)
there can be only one global system, 2) long wished features, such as clock constraints on
receiving edges of broadcast synchronisations, are now nee ded, 3) the engine is designed for
Copyright c/circlecopyrt2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Softw. Pract. Exper. 2000;00:1–6
Prepared using speauth.cls

--- Page 10 ---
10BEHRMANN ET AL.
Table I. Evolution of performance in terms of time (seconds) and memory consumption (MB).
Version CSMA5 CSMA7 CSMA12 Fischer5 Fischer7 Fischer12 HDDI7 HDDI12
3.0.39 8.4s - - 4.2s - - 36.3s -
7.2MB - -10.6MB - -20.1MB -
3.2.12 0.3s 417s - 1.6s - - 7.2s -
3.8MB 145MB - 6.8MB - -11.9MB -
3.3.25 0.2s 198s - 1.1s - - 3.2s -
3.4MB 113MB - 6MB - - 8.4MB -
3.4.6 <0.1s 40.7s - 0.3s 4706s - 0.1s 5.3s
3.1MB 34.5MB - 4.9MB 267MB - 1.6MB 14.1MB
4.0.11 <0.1s 0.2s 33.8s <0.1s 0.4s 418s <0.1s 0.4s
1.6MB 38MB 115MB 1.6MB 38.1MB 300MB 1.6MB 38MB
4.1.2 <0.1s 0.2s 41.9s <0.1s 0.3s 341s 0.05s 0.2s
1.6MB 21.6MB 99MB 21MB 21.6MB 248MB 1.6MB 22.9MB
32-bit architectures, 4) there is no multi-core support, 5) there is only one kind of symbolic
state, and the list goes on. These are obstacles for doing com positional model-checking where
we would need to handle several systems and combine results. In addition, it is diﬃcult to
adapt the engine to diﬀerent kinds of systems without changi ng core structures such as the
states. Currently, when compiling Cora, one C macro is changed to swap to a diﬀerent type
of DBM supporting costs. That works because we made sure the c ommonly needed interface
was exactly the same. This is a very limited solution.
Another challenge is to use modern technology to its full pot ential. Updating to 64-bit is
mainly technical. Taking real advantage of 64-bit is challe nging. Modern compilers have the
ability to vectorize code∗∗but this is still limited to simple algorithms and not to crit ical
O(n3) algorithms that we have. Going for multi-core support (mul ti-threaded Uppaal) is
more diﬃcult. There have been experiments in the past in this direction and we know that the
currentarchitecturecouldbeadaptedbyhavingonethreadp erpipelinecopy.Thisﬁtsmemory
locality but we also know that it did not work so well because b locking data-structures (access
protected by mutex) were major bottlenecks. It is crucial to have non-blocking structures such
as [42] if we want to use multi-cores eﬃciently, even though this is a temporary solution that
will last at most 10 years††. In addition, we want to make the components extendable more
easily in particular to allow more people to work on Uppaal without having to know what
most of the code is doing. The bottom line is that there are res earch opportunities but not all
issues are research related.
∗∗This in essence allows the use of SIMD instructions (single instruction, multiple data) on streams of data.
††Shared memory architectures do not scale and message passing based architectu res will take over.
Copyright c/circlecopyrt2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Softw. Pract. Exper. 2000;00:1–6
Prepared using speauth.cls

--- Page 11 ---
DEVELOPING UPPAAL OVER 15 YEARS 11
FUTURE
We have shown in this paper the main challenges that we have fa ced in building Uppaal
over the years along with our own solutions. The conclusion i s to get the synergy theory–
implementation–case-studies that in turn provides with publications . There is no bullet-proof
solution and we consider ourselves to have been lucky to have started at the right time and
got such a good response from the community to get this synerg y.
Uppaal has already spawned one company, UP4ALL‡‡, that sells a version of the tool for
commercial uses. Another market we intend to target is testi ng. Research tools really have
a future if they can be applied and used outside academia, as w itnessed by Lustre/SCADE.
However, their future as free academic tool is uncertain as d iscussed in this paper in relation
with the dilemmas. The situation is that tool paper tracks ex ist and show the interest in
academic tool development but they are often on the side of ma in conferences and they usually
accept short papers with short talks. This could be improved to stimulate tool development
in the community.
To continue the development on the academic path, we are expl oring diﬀerent domains
as the diﬀerent ﬂavours of Uppaal show. That also means that a new life-cycle with another
architectural revision is now needed to cope with more exten sions ofUppaal. That will enable
us to let other researchers experiment with the internals of Uppaal and still maintain our
core engine.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
It is important to remember that Uppaal is the result of the cumulative eﬀorts of many
collaborators. Among them we would like to thank early pione ers Johan Bengtsson and Fredrik Larsen,
former contributor of the graphical interface Carsten Weis e, and active contributor and maintainer
Marius Mikuˇ cionis ( Uppaal andTron). Wealsothankcontributorsofdiﬀerent extensions of Uppaal,
amongthemDidierLime( Tiga),JohnH˚ akansson( Port),AndersHessel( CoVer),LeonidMokrushin
(Times), Jakob Illum ( Cora), Arild Haugstad ( Pro). Last but not least we thank our supporting
user community.
REFERENCES
1. I. AlAttili, F. Houben, G. Igna, S. Michels, F. Zhu, and F.W. Va andrager. Adaptive scheduling of data
paths using uppaal tiga. In S. Andova et. al., editor, Proceedings of the First Workshop on Quantitative
Formal Methods: Theory and Applications (QFM’09) , number 13 in Electronic Proceedings in Theoretical
Computer Science, pages 1–12. arXiv:0912.1897v1, 2009.
2. Rajeev Alur and David L. Dill. Automata for Modeling Real-Time Systems. In Proc. of ICALP , volume
443 ofLNCS, pages 322–335, 1990.
3. Tobias Amnell, Elena Fersman, Leonid Mokrushin, Paul Pettersson, an d Wang Yi. Times: A tool for
modelling and implementation of embedded systems. In J.-P. Katoen and P. Stevens, editors, Proc. of
‡‡To contact UP4ALL email sales@uppaal.com .
Copyright c/circlecopyrt2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Softw. Pract. Exper. 2000;00:1–6
Prepared using speauth.cls

--- Page 12 ---
12BEHRMANN ET AL.
the 8thInternational Conference on Tools and Algorithms for the Construct ion and Analysis of Systems ,
number 2280 in Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 460–464. Spring er–Verlag, 2002.
4. Yoann Arnaud, Jean-Louis Boimond, Jos´ e E.R. Cury, Jean Jacqu es Loiseau, and Claude Martinez. Using
uppaal for the secure and optimal control of agv ﬂeets. In 7th Workshop on Advanced Control and
Diagnosis ACD 2009 , 2009. http://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-00463480.
5. Dani` ele Beauquier. On probabilistic timed automata. Theoretical Computer Science , 292:65–84, 2003.
6. Gerd Behrmann, Agnes Cougnard, Alexandre David, Emmanuel Fleury , Kim G. Larsen, and Didier Lime.
Uppaal-tiga : Time for playing games! In CAV’07, number 4590 in LNCS, pages 121–125. Springer, 2007.
7. Gerd Behrmann, Alexandre David, Kim G. Larsen, and Wang Yi. Uniﬁca tion & Sharing in Timed
Automata Veriﬁcation. In SPIN Workshop 03 , volume 2648 of LNCS, pages 225–229, 2003.
8. Gerd Behrmann, Ansgar Fehnker, Thomas Hune, Kim G. Larsen, Paul Petter sson, and Judi Romijn.
Eﬃcient Guiding Towards Cost-Optimality in Uppaal. In T. Margaria and W. Yi, editors, Proc. of the
7th Int. Conf. on TACAS , number 2031 in LNCS, pages 174–188. Springer-Verlag, 2001.
9. Gerd Behrmann, Ansgar Fehnker, Thomas Hune, Kim Guldstrand Larsen, P aul Pettersson, Judi Romijn,
andFritsW.Vaandrager. Minimum-costreachabilityforpricedtim edautomata. In HSCC,pages147–161,
2001.
10. Gerd Behrmann, Kim G. Larsen, Justin Pearson, Carsten Weise, and Wang Yi . Eﬃcient Timed
Reachability Analysis Using Clock Diﬀerence Diagrams. In Proc. of the 12th Int. Conf. on CAV , volume
1633 ofLNCS, pages 341–353. Springer, 1999.
11. Gerd Behrmann, Kim Guldstrand Larsen, and Jacob Illum Rasmussen. Pri ced timed automata:
Algorithms and applications. In FMCO, pages 162–182, 2004.
12. Johan Bengtsson, W.O. David Griﬃoen, K˚ are J. Kristoﬀersen, Kim G. Larsen, Fredrik Larsson, Paul
Pettersson, and Wang Yi. Automated veriﬁcation of an audio-control p rotocol using uppaal.Journal of
Logic and Algebraic Programming , 52–53:163–181, 2002.
13. Johan Bengtsson and Wang Yi. Lectures on Concurrency and Petri Nets , volume 3098 of LNCS, chapter
Timed Automata: Semantics, Algorithms and Tools, pages 87–124. Sp ringer-Verlag, 2003.
14. Peter Bulychev, Thomas Chatain, Alexandre David, and Kim G. La rsen. Eﬃcient on-the-ﬂy Algorithm for
Checking Alternating Timed Simulation. In FORMATS’09 , number 5813 in LNCS, pages 73–87. Springer,
2009.
15. F. Cassez, A. David, K. G. Larsen, D. Lime, and J.-F. Raskin. Timed con trol with observation based
and stuttering invariant strategies. In Proceedings of the 5th International Symposium on Automated
Technology for Veriﬁcation and Analysis , volume 4762 of LNCS, pages 192–206. Springer, 2007.
16. Franck Cassez, Alexandre David, Emmanuel Fleury, Kim G. Larsen, an d Didier Lime. Eﬃcient on-the-
ﬂy algorithms for the analysis of timed games. In CONCUR’05 , volume 3653 of LNCS, pages 66–80.
Springer–Verlag, August 2005.
17. P.R. D’Argenio, J.-P. Katoen, T.C. Ruys, and J. Tretmans. The b ounded retransmission protocol must
be on time! In E. Brinksma, editor, Proceedings of the Third Workshop on Tools and Algorithms for
the Construction and Analysis of Systems, Enschede, The Netherlands, volume 1217 of Lecture Notes in
Computer Science , pages 416–431. Springer, 1997.
18. Alexandre David, John H˚ akansson, Kim G. Larsen, and Paul Petter sson. Model Checking Timed
Automata with Priorities using DBM Subtraction. In Proc. of the 4th Int. Conf. on FORMATS , volume
4202 ofLNCS, pages 128–142, 2006.
19. Alexandre David, Kim G. Larsen, Shuhao Li, and Brian Nielsen. Coo perative testing of uncontrollable
real-time systems. In 4th workshop of Model-Based Testing (MBT’08) , 2008.
20. Alexandre David, M. Oliver M¨ oller, and Wang Yi. Formal Veriﬁ cation of UML Statecharts with Real-
Time Extensions. In Ralf-Detlef Kutsche and Herbert Weber, editors, FASE, 5th Int. Conf. 2002 , volume
2306 ofLNCS, pages 218–232. Springer, 2002.
21. Alexandre David and Wang Yi. Modelling and Analysis of a Comm ercial Field Bus Protocol. In Proc.
of Euromicro-RTS’00 , pages 165–172. IEEE Computer Society, 2000.
22. AnneMarie Ericsson, Mikael Berndtsson, Paul Pettersson, and Lena Pettersso n. Veriﬁcation of an
industrial rule-based manufacturing system using rex. In 1st International Workshop on Complex Event
Processing for Future Internet . ISSN 1613-0073 ceur-ws.org, September 2008.
23. Elena Fersman, Paul Pettersson, and Wang Yi. Timed automata with a synchronous processes:
Schedulability and decidability. In J.-P. Katoen and P. Stevens, edi tors,Proc. of the 8 thInternational
Conference on Tools and Algorithms for the Construction and Analys is of Systems , number 2280 in
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 67–82. Springer–Verlag, 2002.
24. Biniam Gebremichael, Frits Vaandrager, and Miaomiao Zhang. A nalysis of the zeroconf protocol using
uppaal. In Proceedings of the 6th ACM & IEEE International conference on Embed ded software , pages
Copyright c/circlecopyrt2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Softw. Pract. Exper. 2000;00:1–6
Prepared using speauth.cls

--- Page 13 ---
DEVELOPING UPPAAL OVER 15 YEARS 13
242–251. ACM, 2006.
25. John H˚ akansson, Jan Carlson, Aurelien Monot, Paul Pettersson, an d Davor Slutej. Component-Based
Design and Analysis of Embedded Systems with UPPAAL PORT. In Sung Deok Cha, Jin-Young Choi,
Moonzoo Kim, Insup Lee, and Mahesh Viswanathan, editors, ATVA, volume 5311 of LNCS, pages 252–257.
Springer, 2008.
26. John H˚ akansson and Paul Pettersson. Partial Order Reduction for V eriﬁcation of Real-Time Components.
InProc. of the 5th Int. Conf. on FORMATS , LNCS, pages 211–226. Springer-Verlag, 2007.
27. R. Hamberg and F.W. Vaandrager. Using model checkers in an intro ductory course on operating systems.
Operating Systems Review , 42(6):101–111, 2008.
28. F. Heidarian, J. Schmaltz, and F.W. Vaandrager. Analysis of a clock synchronization protocol for wireless
sensor networks. In A. Cavalcanti and D. Dams, editors, Proceedings of FM 2009: Formal Methods , volume
5850 ofLNCS, pages 516–531. Springer-Verlag, 2009.
29. Anders Hessel and Paul Pettersson. A Test Case Generation Algorithm for R eal-Time Systems. In Hans-
Dieter Ehrich and Klaus-Dieter Schewe, editors, Proc. of the Fourth ICQS , pages 268–273. IEEE Computer
Society, 2004.
30. Anders Hessel and Paul Pettersson. Cover — A Test-Case Generation Tool for Timed Systems. In
Alexandre Petrenko, Margus Veanes, Jan Tretmans, and Wolfgang Grieska mp, editors, Testing of Software
and Communicating Systems: Work-in-Progress and Position Papers , Tool Demonstrations, and Tutorial
Abstracts of TestCom/FATES , pages 31–34. Institute of Cybernetics at Tallinn University of Tech nology,
2007.
31. Jan Jakob Jessen, Jacob Illum Rasmussen, Kim G. Larsen, and Alexandre D avid. Guided controller
synthesis for climate controller using uppaal-tiga . InProceedings of the 19th International Conference
on Formal Modeling and Analysis of Timed Systems , number 4763 in LNCS, pages 227–240. Springer,
2007.
32. Moez Krichen and Stavros Tripakis. Model Checking Software , volume 2989 of LNCS, chapter Black-Box
Conformance Testing for Real-Time Systems, pages 109–126. Springer- Verlag, 2004.
33. Marta Kwiatkowska, Gethin Norman, Jeremy Sproston, and Fuzhi W ang. Symbolic model checking for
probabilistic timed automata. In Formal Techniques, Modelling and Analysis of Timed and Fault-Tole rant
Systems, volume 3253 of LNCS, pages 293–308. Springer-Verlag, 2004.
34. K.G. Larsen, M. Mikuˇ cionis, and B. Nielsen. Online Testing of Real-t ime Systems Using Uppaal. In
FATES’04 , LNCS, pages 79–94, Linz, Austria, September 2004.
35. Kim G. Larsen, Marius Mikucionis, and Brian Nielsen. Testing real-ti me embedded software using uppaal-
tron: an industrial case study. In the 5th ACM international conference on Embedded software , pages 299
– 306. ACM Press New York, NY, USA, September 18–22 2005.
36. Kim G. Larsen, Paul Pettersson, and Wang Yi. Model-Checking for Rea l-Time Systems. In Proc. of
Fundamentals of Computation Theory , number 965 in LNCS, pages 62–88, August 1995.
37. Fredrik Larsson, Kim G. Larsen, Paul Pettersson, and Wang Yi. Eﬃcient Veriﬁcation of Real-Time
Systems: Compact Data Structures and State-Space Reduction. In Proc. of the 18th IEEE RTSS , pages
14–24. IEEE Computer Society Press, December 1997.
38. Fredrik Larsson, Paul Pettersson, and Wang Yi. On Memory-Block Tra versal Problems in Model Checking
Timed Systems. In Susanne Graf and Michael Schwartzbach, editors, Proc. of the 6th Conf. on TACAS ,
number 1785 in LNCS, pages 127–141. Springer-Verlag, 2000.
39. Magnus Lindahl, Paul Pettersson, and Wang Yi. Formal Design and Analysis of a Gear-Box Controller.
InProc. of the 4th Workshop on TACAS , number 1384 in LNCS, pages 281–297. Springer-Verlag, March
1998.
40. X. Liu and S. Smolka. Simple Linear-Time Algorithm for Min imal Fixed Points. In Proc. 26thConf.
on Automata, Languages and Programming (ICALP’98) , volume 1443 of LNCS, pages 53–66. Springer,
1998.
41. Henrik L¨ onn and Paul Pettersson. Formal Veriﬁcation of a TDMA Pr otocol Startup Mechanism. In Proc.
of the Paciﬁc Rim Int. Symp. on Fault-Tolerant Systems , pages 235–242. IEEE Computer Society Press,
December 1997.
42. Chien-Hua Shann, Ting-Lu Huang, and Cheng Chen. A practical no nblocking queue algorithm using
compare-and-swap. In Seventh International Conference on Parallel and Distributed System s, pages 470–
475, 2000.
43. Jan Tretmans. A Formal Approach to Conformance Testing . PhD thesis, University of Twente, 1992.
44. Wang Yi, Paul Pettersson, and Mats Daniels. Automatic Veriﬁcatio n of Real-Time Communicating
Systems By Constraint-Solving. In Dieter Hogrefe and Stefan Leue, edito rs,Proc. of FORTE’94 , pages
223–238. Chapman & Hall, 1994.
Copyright c/circlecopyrt2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Softw. Pract. Exper. 2000;00:1–6
Prepared using speauth.cls
