--- Page 1 ---
Modeling and Veriﬁcation of IEEE 802.11i Security
Protocol for Internet of Things
Yuteng Lu and Meng Sun
LMAM & Department of Informatics, School of Mathematical Sciences,
Peking University, Beijing, China
{luyuteng,sunm}@pku.edu.cn
Abstract —IEEE 802.11i is the IEEE standard that provides
enhanced MAC security and has been widely used in wireless
networks and Internet of Things. It improves IEEE 802.11(1999)
by providing a Robust Security Network (RSN) with two new
protocols: the 4-way handshake and the Group-key handshake.
These protocols utilize the authentication services and port access
control described in IEEE 802.1X to establish and change the
appropriate cryptographic keys. In this paper, we carry out
a formal modeling and veriﬁcation approach based on timed
automata for IEEE 802.11i protocol, using the UPPAAL model
checker, to check correctness of the changes in IEEE 802.11i
protocol and provide better security.
Keywords: IEEE802.11i Protocol, Model Checking, 4-Way Hand-
shake, Group-Way Handshake, UPPAAL
I. I NTRODUCTION
The Internet-of-Things (IoT) [5], [17] is an evolving
paradigm that offers a family of sophisticated computing
services and physical instruments which cooperate with each
other over the Internet. It has gained increased attention in
the past decade due to rapid development in computing and
storage technologies and easy access to the Internet, and brings
promising opportunities and challenges. IoT has played a
key role in the next generation of information, network, and
communication systems. With the rapid development of IoT,
security of communication, being of paramount importance,
has attracted more and more attention. Since the intruder can
attack a network remotely, the industry has been trying to
introduce various security protocols to improve the security
of the wireless network and IoT.
IEEE 802.11 is a set of standards deﬁned by IEEE for
wireless network communication, such as 802.11e for QoS en-
hancement of 802.11, 802.11k for radio resource management,
and 802.11n for high throughput enhancement, and so on. In
the actual usage, IEEE802.11 exposed a lot of security issues,
so IEEE also developed a set of IEEE802.11 amendment
to make up for its fragile security encryption, which is the
IEEE802.11i protocol being studied in this paper.
Industrial practice has shown that in the design of a complex
protocol, more time and effort are usually spent on veriﬁcation
of the correctness of the protocol, rather than in the formu-
lation of the protocol itself. Formal veriﬁcation techniques,
especially model checking [3], aim to establish correctness
with mathematical rigor and offer a large potential to obtain
DOI reference number: 10.18293/SEKE2018-060.an early integration of veriﬁcation in the design process,
to make veriﬁcation activities more effective, and to reduce
the veriﬁcation time. For these reasons, model checking has
been recognized as an important method to guarantee the
correctness of protocols formally and avoid further odious
problems caused by errors in early stage.
A large body of literature for analysis and veriﬁcation of
IEEE 802.11i protocol already exist. For example, the High-
level Petri Net (HPN) model was adopted in [10] to specify
the protocol framework of the 4-way handshake protocol, and
model checking techniques are used to carry out the security
veriﬁcation on the HPN models. In [11] a logic based approach
is taken to verify several properties of some typical methods in
extensible authentication protocol, which are major solutions
in IEEE 802.11i implementation. The behavior tree models for
IEEE 802.11i RSN were developed and veriﬁed by using the
SAL model checker in [15]. The IEEE 802.11i amendment
is analyzed and a number of potential threats are identiﬁed in
[18]. The 4-way handshake authentication WPA-PSK protocol
in IEEE802.11i was veriﬁed in [13] using the CasperFDR
model checker. On the other hand, the 4-way handshake phase
in IEEE 802.11i Standard has been analyzed in [1] using
theorem prover Isabelle to identify a new Denial-of-Service
(DoS) attack. A key refreshing technique to reduce 4-way
handshake latency in 802.11i based networks was proposed
in [14] which provides per frame key freshness and generates
a new refreshed secret key for encryption of each frame.
However, most of these works only focus on part of IEEE
802.11i protocol and ignore the other parts.
In this paper, we investigate the usage of UPPAAL [16]
to analyze and verify different protocols in the IEEE 802.11i
standard. UPPAAL is a toolbox for veriﬁcation of real-time
systems that can be modeled as networks of timed automata
(TA) [2] extended with integer variables, structured data
types, and channel synchronization. UPPAAL can be used to
automatically check whether a given property is satisﬁed by
a system. The query language of UPPAAL used to specify
the properties to be checked is a subset of CTL. It uses a
client-server architecture, splitting the tool into a graphical
user interface and a model checking engine. The UPPAAL
model checker is based on the theory of timed automata and its
modeling language offers additional features such as bounded
integer variables and urgency. In the past decades, UPPAAL
has been applied successfully in various industrial case studies

--- Page 2 ---
ranging from communication protocols to multimedia applica-
tions, such as Bounded Retransmission Protocol [4], Bang &
Olufsen audio / video protocol [6] and Philips audio protocol
[9].
In an actual network communication, after the user login the
network, whether its landing time is more than the scheduled
time and in each time period whether it is still online are the
problems that the authentication side must concern about. So
timing parameters play an essential role in the IEEE 802.11i
protocol, especially for communications in wireless networks
and IoT. In addition, our work also examines whether the
protocol will be deadlocked, which is a vital security attribute
in communication. For wireless network and IoT, it is also
an important issue that the interactive port can eventually be
opened normally.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: The IEEE
802.11i standard is brieﬂy described in Section II. Section
III presents the analysis of the IEEE 802.1x protocol which
is used in the authentication process of IEEE 802.11i. Then
the veriﬁcation of 4-Way Handshake for key management and
distribution and the Group Key Handshake in UPPAAL is
provided in Section IV. Section V concludes the paper and
discusses possible future work.
II. T HEIEEE 802.11 IPROTOCOL
IEEE802.11i is an IEEE standard designed to provide
enhanced MAC security in wireless networks, which enhances
the IEEE 802.11 standard in terms of security by providing a
Robust Security Network (RSN) [7]. The protocol consists of
several parts, including a 802.1X authentication phase using
TLS over EAP, the 4-way handshake protocol to establish
a fresh session key, and an optional Group Key Handshake
protocol for group communications. This series of protocols
together deﬁne a RSN.
The 4-way handshake protocol and the Group Key Hand-
shake protocol utilize the authentication services and port
access control described in IEEE 802.1X [8]. Authentication
services involve three parts: the applicant, the certiﬁer, and
the authentication server. The applicant is a client device that
needs to be connected to a LAN / WAN, and can also refer
to software that runs on the client and provides credentials to
the certiﬁer. The veriﬁer behaves like a guard of a protected
network. Applicants (such as client devices) do not allow
authenticated access to the protected side of the network
until the identity of the applicant is veriﬁed and authorized.
And the authentication server is typically a host running
RADIUS and EAP-enabled protocols. The EAP data is ﬁrst
encapsulated in an EAPOL frame and transmitted between
the supplicant and the authenticator, and then encapsulated in
RADIUS or Diameter, transmitted between the veriﬁer and the
authentication server.
The initial authentication process is carried out either using
a pre-shared key (PSK), or following an EAP exchange
through 802.1X. If a 802.1X EAP exchange was carried out,
the PMK is derived from the EAP parameters provided by
the authentication server. The supplicant and the authenticatoruse this handshake to conﬁrm the existence of the PMK, verify
the selection of the cipher suite, and derive a fresh Pairwise
Transient Key(PTK), based on the shared PMK, the nonces
and MAC addresses. In case of multicast application, the au-
thenticator will generate a fresh Group Temporary Key(GTK)
and may distribute a GTK to supplicants. During the Group
Key Handshake, the same PMK may be used repeatedly for
multiple times.
III. V ERIFYING THE IEEE802.1X P ROTOCOL
In this section we ﬁrst introduce the working principle of the
IEEE 802.1x protocol and verify some important properties.
The details of the message forwarding in the protocol and its
speciﬁc implementation process are described in Figure 1.
Figure 1. Message Forwarding in the IEEE 802.1X Protocol
When a user requests to access the network, the sup-
plicant receives the user’s request login information and
sends the start message “ EAPoL-Start ” to the authentica-
tor to trigger the authentication process. Once receiving the
“EAPoL-Start ” packet from the supplicant, the authentica-
tor sends a request to the supplicant asking for the user iden-
tity. After receiving the “ EAPoL-Request[Identity] ”
packet from the authenticator, the supplicant sends the
user identity to the authenticator. Then, the authentica-
tor passes the user identity through the RADIUS Access-
Request “ EAPoL-Response[Identity] ” to the server.
After receiving the packet, the server sends an Access-
Challenge packet “ EAPoL-Request[MD5 Challenge] ”
to the authenticator to request a password, and then the
authenticator sends the message “ EAPoL-Request[MD5
Challenge] ” to the supplicant. After the supplicant receives
the packet, it sends the password to the authenticator through
the message “ EAPoL-Response[MD5 Challenge] ”.

--- Page 3 ---
Figure 2. UPPAAL Model for Supplicant in IEEE 802.1x Protocol
Figure 3. UPPAAL Model for Authenticator in IEEE 802.1x Protocol
After receiving the packet, the authenticator sends the
message to the server for veriﬁcation. If the authentication
succeeds, the server sends the authenticator success message
“EAP-Success ” to the device. The authenticator sends the
message “ EAPoL-Success ” to the supplicant to notify the
user that the authentication is successful. Otherwise, the server
sends an authenticator failure packet, and the authenticator
informs the supplicant of the failure of the authentication
message so that the user knows that the authentication fails.
The user can communicate normally once the authentication
successes. However, although the authentication is successful,
the legitimate users may be disconnected due to abnormal
circumstances, there may be the situation that illegal users
replace legitimate users, so the re-certiﬁcation mechanism was
introduced. That is, after successful authentication for the ﬁrst
time, the server authenticates the user to determine whether
the user is online and whether it is legitimate over a period of
time.
Figure 4. UPPAAL Model for Server in IEEE 802.1x Protocol
The UPPAAL templates of the automata for the supplicant,
the authenticator and the server in the IEEE 802.1x model are
provided in Figure 2, 3 and 4. They run exactly as the protocol
orders them. The main work of the IEEE802.1x protocol is to
carry out the exchange of information, for which we have
deﬁned a number of channels. For example, the supplicant
model moves from state S0to state S1, and sends the authen-
tication start message “ EAPoLStart ”, synchronizing with
the authenticator by output action EAPoLStart! , for which
we deﬁne the channel EAPoLStart . As a receiver terminal
apparatus, the authenticator moves from state A0to state A1,
and synchronize with the supplicant by the corresponding
co-action EAPoLStart? . The supplicant, the authenticator
and the server interact with each other and their concurrent
composition leads to the protocol.
After the supplicant receives the “ EAPoL-Request[MD5
Challenge] ” packet, it sends the password to the authen-
ticator through the corresponding “ EAPoL-Response[MD5
Challenge] ” and the authenticator sends the message to the
server for veriﬁcation. Once the authentication is successful,
we need to consider re-certiﬁcation issues. Our model intro-
duces the time variable xto record the elapsed time after
the ﬁrst authentication succeeds and the ReCertiﬁcationTIME
records re-authentication interval. After the authentication is
successful, the port is opened and the recording time starts,
correspondingly, xis initialized to 0. The state transition of the
authenticator sending the re-certiﬁcation request is guarded by
“x == ReCertificationTIME ”, so once the property “ x
will eventually be equal to ReCertiﬁcationTIME” is satisﬁed,
it is guaranteed that the re-certiﬁcation process can occur
normally.
Since the IEEE 802.1x protocol is used to authenticate the
identity of the user, the ﬁrst property being required is that
once the authentication is successful, the network port will
open normally. Correspondingly, once the authentication fails,
the network port will not open. In addition, the protocol should
also ensure that the port can always be closed or opened, so
as to avoid the situation that the port is always closed or

--- Page 4 ---
open. Since we also consider the issue of re-authentication,
we should also ensure that the port can be opened or closed
according to the situation after each re-authentication.
Figure 5. UPPAAL Model for DosAttack in IEEE 802.1x Protocol
Authentication phase of 802.11i suffers against DoS attacks
mainly due to lack of authentication of packets [12]. In Figure
5 we deﬁne the DosAttack model to simulate a denial of
service and deﬁne a new channel, FakeEAPoStart . After
a denial of service attack, if there is no manual recovery,
a deadlock will occur and the authenticator model will stay
in the state A14. Once the Repair channel is added to the
model, the deadlock behavior will disappear.
A family of properties can be reformulated as CTL formula.
For example:
1)E<>port==1 , on behalf of the port can be opened.
2)E<>port==0 , on behalf of the port can be closed.
3)A[] not deadlock , on behalf of the IEEE 802.1x
protocol will not be deadlocked.
4)authenticator.A10->port==0 , representing that
the port will be closed once the re- authentication
process begins.
5)authenticator.A8->port==0 , representing that
once the authentication failed the port will not be
opened.
6)E<>x==ReCertificationTIME , representing that
the re-certiﬁcation process will occur.
7)authenticator.A0->port==0 , representing that
the port was closed initially.
The veriﬁcation results given by UPPAAL show that all
these properties have been proved to be satisﬁed. Thus, the port
can be normally opened or closed, and there is no deadlock
in authenticating the identity of the user. After the 802.1X
authentication, a shared secret key is generated, called the
Pairwise Master Key (PMK). The PSK is derived from a
password that is put through the cryptographic hash function.
In a pre-shared-key network, the PSK is actually the PMK. If
a 802.1X EAP exchange is carried out and no deadlock can
be guaranteed, the PMK is derived from the EAP parameters
provided by the authentication server.
IV.4-WAYHANDSHAKE AND GROUP KEYHANDSHAKE
PROTOCOLS
In this section, we ﬁrst consider security properties of the
4-way handshake protocol. During the handshake, the authen-
ticator and the supplicant generate fresh nonces, then derive
a fresh PTK based on the shared PMK, the nonces, and their
MAC addresses, so that the authenticator and the supplicant
can independently prove to each other that they know thePMK, without ever disclosing the key. They authenticate the
key material generated using keyed hashes. After this stage,
the IEEE 802.1x ports are unblocked for data packets.
Figure 6. The Authentication Process in the 4-Way Handshake Protocol
Figure 6 describes the authentication process in the 4-
way handshake protocol. In the form of ﬁrst message the
authenticator (AP) sends the random number “ ANonce ” and
MAC address of itself. In response, the supplicant generates
another random number “ SNonce ”, and sends it to the AP
with the MAC address and message integrity code (MIC)
using PTK. Then, a third message is sent by the AP after
generating GTK and verifying MIC based on the PTK derived.
The supplicant veriﬁes MIC of this message and sends a
MIC and install PTK at supplicant. After receiving the MIC
message, AP also installs PTK and the 4-way handshake
communication is completed. This is the normal way of
handshake behavior. Once the supplicant does not receive
the ﬁrst message “ ANonce+MAC ” within the expected time
interval, it will try the authentication again. On the other
hand, the authenticator will timeout and retry the message if it
does not receive the expected message “ SNonce+MAC+MIC ”
within the conﬁgured time intervals.
Figure 7. UPPAAL Model for Authenticator in the 4-Way Handshake Protocol

--- Page 5 ---
Figure 8. UPPAAL Model for Supplicant in the 4-Way Handshake Protocol
Figure 9. UPPAAL Model for Hacker in the 4-Way Handshake Protocol
The UPPAAL templates of authenticator and supplicant in
the4-way handshake protocol are described in Figure 7 and
8. The authenticator and the supplicant synchronize through
the channel. For example, Msg1! represents authenticator
sends the ﬁrst message “ ANonce+MAC ” to supplicant, syn-
chronizing with Msg1? , representing supplicant has received
the message.
In Uppaal, we build a Hacker model and consider the
number of attacks. Hacker multiple attacks will exhaust the
memory and complete a denial of service attack. Here we
have a FakeMsg1 channel. Every time when the hacker sends
FakeMsg1 message, the Supplicant will be attacked. We use
Attack to record the number of hacker attacks. Combined
with the experience of the industry, we can notice that the
agreement will collapse when the number of attacks exceeds
a certain number limitation. In our model, once we set the
number of attacks more than 100 times, Supplicant will not
be able to reject the false information normally, thus it cannot
be restored to the initial state.
A family of properties related to the 4-way handshake
protocol have been veriﬁed in UPPAAL. For example, we have
checked whether the handshake behavior will be deadlocked,
and can eventually generate PTK. The corresponding proper-
ties are reformulated in CTL as follows:
1)A[] not deadlock , representing that the 4-way
handshake behavior will not be deadlocked.2)E<>MIC==1 , meaning that MIC eventually can be
veriﬁed so that the last message can be sent successfully
and PTK will be installed by the supplicant.
The veriﬁcation results in UPPAAL show that the above
properties are satisﬁed.
We have not consider the attacker in this model. In the
transition from state S0to state S1,ANonce is updated to
1, followed by the state transition as a guard so that once
ANonce has not been updated normally, the model blocks in
stateS1. Attacker is in accordance with this principle on the
handshake attack. This Dos attack arises from the vulnerability
of the message Msg1 . Actually, the 4-way handshake protocol
is vulnerable to Dos attack during handshake. So we use the
guard y<=ExpectedTIME1&&ANonce==1 to make sure
that we get the correct ANonce .
The authenticator may distribute a Group Temporary Key
(GTK) to supplicants in multicast applications. PTKs are used
to encrypt unicast data between a supplication station and an
authenticator, and GTKs are used to encrypt multicast data
between a supplicant station and an authenticator.
Group-key handshake contains 2-way handshake. The au-
thenticator sends message GrpMsg1 containing the new GTK
to each supplicant in the network. The GTK is encrypted and
assigned to the supplicant, and protects the data from tamper-
ing, by using a MIC. Then, the supplicant conﬁrms receipt
of the new GTK and sends reply to the authenticator. MICs
are used to provide authentication and message integrity. This
2-way handshake lends simplicity and much less overhead to
multicast key generation and distribution to supplicants.
Figure 10. UPPAAL Model for Group Key Handshake Protocol
Figure 10 shows the models in the group-key handshake
protocol. Since group-key handshake is 2-way handshake, we
only need to deﬁne two states respectively. The authentica-
tor sends GrpMsg1 to the supplicant. Once the supplicant
synchronizes with the authenticator successfully (represented
byGrpMsg1? in Figure 10), the GTK used to protect the
data from tampering is updated (represented by the assignment
GTK:= 1 in Figure 10). Once the GTK has been updated to 1,

--- Page 6 ---
it means that the GTK has been successfully encrypted. Thus,
what we should ensure in our model now is that the supplicant
sends reply to the authenticator after conﬁrming receipt of the
new GTK. The edge transforming from state A1to state A0
is guarded by the condition GTK==1 so that only when GTK
is successfully received, the supplicant can send a reply.
Through the veriﬁcation of our model, we can prove that
the property A[] not deadlock is satisﬁed, which means
that the model is not deadlock. It is further illustrated that
once the GTK has been successfully encrypted and sent to
the supplicant, group-key handshake will be able to keep
proceeding.
V. C ONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This paper analyzes the IEEE802.11i protocol for mutual
authentication, group communications and key establishment.
And we have considered the case of re-certiﬁcation in the
protocol, which means we need adding timing issues to the
extended protocol. Using UPPAAL allows us to simulate,
debug and verify the IEEE802.11i protocol in a real time
setting. UPPAAL can be used to generate the protocol’s
simulation path and the study of time allows us to ensure
that the re-authentication process will occur. In addition, we
introduced a validation analysis of deadlock. Ensuring that
the deadlock does not occur in the protocol is the primary
requirement for regulatory security.
Designing secure and efﬁcient key management protocol
in 802.11i standard is a signiﬁcant issue. In this paper, we
model the 4-way handshake protocol with four synchroniza-
tion channels, simulating the interaction of the protocol and
consider the timeout issues. Based on the formal model,
we perform an integrated formal veriﬁcation of the protocol
using UPPAAL. The veriﬁcation results show that the 4-way
handshake protocol will not be deadlock if the Dos attack can
be prevented. Thus, in our further study we will consider an
enhanced 4-way handshake to repair vulnerability to attack.
Basic analysis for the 4-way handshake protocol in this
paper is based on the idealized handshake protocol shown in
Figure 6. In our model we have not considered subsequent
veriﬁcation, such as verifying Message Integrity Code based
on the PTK. The PTK is generated by concatenating the
attributes PMK, ANonce ,STA SNonce , MAC address of au-
thenticator and supplicant. In fact, the attacker precisely makes
the handshake deadlock by providing the wrong ANonce to
derive a wrong PTK. In the future, we will also consider
more situations, such as not successfully verifying MIC, in
our model.
Furthermore, we have just considered whether the protocol
is safe and proceeds normally and simpliﬁed the key passing
process in this work. Assuming that once the key has been
generated, the sub-protocol can run normally. This means
that we have not considered emergencies that can cause
transformation of the key failed. We will add the impact of
the environment into the formal model in the future work as
well.ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The work was partially supported by the National Natu-
ral Science Foundation of China under grant no. 61772038,
61532019, 61202069 and 61272160.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Alabdulatif, X. Ma, and L. Nolle. Analysing and attacking the 4-way
handshake of ieee 802.11i standard. In Proceedings of 8th International
Conference for Internet Technology and Secured Transactions , pages
382–387. IEEE, 2013.
[2] R. Alur and D. L. Dill. A theory of timed automata. Theoretical
Computer Science , 126(2):183–235, 1994.
[3] C. Baier and J.-P. Katoen. Principles of Model Checking . The MIT
Press, 2008.
[4] P. R. D’Argenio, J. Katoen, T. C. Ruys, and J. Tretmans. The bounded
retransmission protocol must be on time! In Proceedings of TACAS ’97 ,
volume 1217 of LNCS , pages 416–431. Springer, 1997.
[5] S. Dustdar, S. Nastic, and O. Scekic. Smart Cities - The Internet of
Things, People and Systems . Springer, 2017.
[6] K. Havelund, A. Skou, K. G. Larsen, and K. Lund. Formal modelling
and analysis of an audio / video protocol: An industrial case study using
uppaal. In Proceedings of the 18th IEEE Real-Time Systems Symposium ,
pages 2–13. IEEE Computer Society, 1997.
[7] IEEE Std 802-2014. Ieee standard for local and metropolitan area
networks: Overview and architecture, 2014.
[8] IEEE Std 802.1X-2010. Ieee standard for local and metropolitan area
networks–port-based network access control, 2010.
[9] K. G. Larsen, P. Pettersson, and W. Yi. Diagnostic model-checking
for real-time systems. In Proceedings of the 4th DIMACS Workshop
on Veriﬁcation and Control of Hybrid Systems , volume 1066 of LNCS ,
pages 575–586. Springer, 1996.
[10] J. Liu, X. Ye, J. Zhang, and J. Li. Security veriﬁcation of 802.11i 4-
way handshake protocol. In Proceedings of ICC 2008 , pages 1642–1647.
IEEE, 2008.
[11] X. Liu and A. O. Fapojuwo. Formal evaluation of major authentication
methods for IEEE 802.11i WLAN standard. In Proceedings of VTC Fall
2006 , pages 1–5. IEEE, 2006.
[12] S. pyo Hong and J. Lee. Supporting secure authentication and privacy
in wireless computing. In 2006 International Conference on Hybrid In-
formation Technology(ICHIT) , pages 594–599. IEEE Computer Society,
2006.
[13] K. V . K. Raju, V . Vallikumari, and K. Raju. Modeling and analysis
of ieee802.11i wpa-psk authentication protocol. In Proceedings of 3rd
International Conference on Electronics Computer Technology , pages
72–76. IEEE, 2011.
[14] R. Singh and T. P. Sharma. A key refreshing technique to reduce 4-
way handshake latency in 802.11i based networks. In Proceedings of 4th
International Conference on Computer and Communication Technology ,
pages 157–162. IEEE, 2013.
[15] E. Sithirasenan, S. Zafar, and V . Muthukkumarasamy. Formal veriﬁca-
tion of the IEEE 802.11i WLAN security protocol. In Proceedings of
(ASWEC 2006) , pages 181–190. IEEE Computer Society, 2006.
[16] UPPAAL. http://www.uppaal.org/.
[17] R. H. Weber and R. Weber. Internet of Things - Legal Perspectives .
Springer, 2010.
[18] X. Xing, E. M. Shakshuki, D. G. Benoit, and T. R. Sheltami. Security
analysis and authentication improvement for IEEE 802.11i speciﬁcation.
InProceedings of GLOBECOM 2008 , pages 1887–1891. IEEE, 2008.
