--- Page 1 ---
Using Timed Automata in Requirements
Analysis for Engine Control Units?
Sebastian GroboschVolker Kamin
Kriengkrai KrirkkawinStefan Kowalewski
VEMAC GmbH & Co. KG (lastname@vemac.de)
Embedded Software Laboratory RWTH Aachen University
(lastname@embedded.rwth-aachen.de)
Abstract: To reduce the development costs for engine control units in small series, uniform
software platforms are used. On the customer side, however, non-uniform systems are required.
In order to realize dierent customer projects a tool set is needed to add functions to a
common software basis. The resulting software variants, which consist of modules arranged
by the costumer, are key drivers for the selection of the microcontrollers used in the system
designs. Each software module has real-time requirements that must be fullled for the whole
system to work properly. Violations of these real-time requirements should become visible during
requirements analysis to avoid expensive redesigns.
The state of practice is to oversize the target hardware based on experience in order to
minimize the risk that not all requirements can be fullled with the chosen hardware. In
this paper, we show how a combination of timed automata analysis and variant management
supports consistency during the development process and guarantees compliance with real-time
requirements.
1. INTRODUCTION
This paper presents a novel approach to combine timed
automata analysis and variant management in order to
help developers to select cost-optimal hardware platforms
for real-time controllers. Our method supports developers
during the requirements analysis step of the V-Model,
when cost estimates have to be made although the com-
plete design has not been developed yet.
One major issue during the development of engine control
units (ECU) for small series are the costs for hardware and
software development. These costs are spread among just
a small amount of units. Compared to high volume series
the eect on the unit price is conspicuous.
Therefore, small and medium enterprises (SME) try to
use uniform hardware platforms that can be used for
various projects. On these platforms, the microcontroller
unit (MCU) that is the main cost factor can be easily
replaced by any MCU within its family. This allows cost
optimization by selecting an appropriate MCU without the
need for a costly hardware redesign. Additionally, using
the same platform for multiple projects is benecial due
to high volume series. On the software side, a uniform
hardware platform allows the development of a framework
with interchangeable software modules. These modules can
be arranged exible to cover a wide range of applications.
The idea is to provide single software modules that can be
selected by the customer out-of-the-box to generate the
software for the uniform hardware platform.
?The research reported in this paper was (partly) funded by the
European FP7 project MULTIFORM, contract number INFSO-ICT-
224249, http://www.ict-multiform.eu. This support is very gratefully
acknowledged.The ECUs evaluated for our case study are commonly
used to run, e. g., chain saws, go-carts, and small aircrafts.
This way, the price per unit is lower than the price a
conventional small series development would yield.
Our approach focuses on ECUs for small-power combus-
tion engines that run on MCUs, but it can be applied to
other elds as well due to its high degree of abstraction.
1.1 Problem Description
Customers demand cost estimates already during re-
quirements analysis, although this requires the selection
of a target hardware that, according to the V-Model
(IABG [2009]), should be done in a later phase of the
development process. Due to the huge amount of dierent
combinations of the out-of-the-box software modules an
intuitive selection is uncertain. For each interesting combi-
nation of functions, software engineers need to nd a MCU
that is able to realize this combination and which costs as
little as possible. Currently, this is done by oversizing the
microcontroller based on experience in order to minimize
the risk of selecting a MCU that turns out to be unsuitable.
In order to reduce oversizing, which results in less at-
tractive cost estimates, developers need to be able to
verify in advance if a certain MCU is suitable. To support
the developer during this estimation process, information
about certain properties of out-of-the-box software mod-
ules should be accessible, e. g., worst-case execution times
(WCET). An early prototype of the software helps to ver-
ify properties like needed program memory and maximum
stack size. Furthermore, execution time limits for currently
unimplemented new software modules requested by the
customer can be dened before the implementation phase.Preprints of the 18th IFAC World Congress
Milano (Italy) August 28 - September 2, 2011
Copyright by the
International Federation of Automatic Control (IFAC)12503

--- Page 2 ---
These early limitations should guarantee the unproblem-
atic interaction with the other selected software modules
running on the MCU.
For real-time requirements, however, this estimation can-
not be done by just measuring the execution times of each
function using the prototype. Adding maximum execution
times can identify a MCU as unsuitable, but it cannot
guarantee that all software components will nish their
computations in time (i. e., meet their deadlines). In order
to verify the fulllment of all real-time requirements, all
possible executions have to be considered. Therefore, a
formal approach is necessary.
1.2 Overview
Following this introduction, Sect. 2 introduces related
work. The variant framework and its process ow is the
topic of Sect. 3. Next, Sect. 4 describes our abstract timed
automata model and explains its components in detail.
The evaluation of the approach is shown in Sect. 5. Finally,
Sect. 6 gives a conclusion and an outlook on future work.
2. RELATED WORK
The scheduling analysis with monotonic rates by Liu and
Layland [1973] is a good start for analyzing the real-time
requirements. This approach is suitable when using task
deadlines which are not equal to their periods. In our case
study, task periods can dier from their deadlines, which
is why we need a more general approach.
WCET analysis is a technique to gather timing informa-
tion about single software functions (Kirner et al. [2004]).
The interaction of dierent software modules is not in-
cluded. The important property for schedulability analysis
is the worst-case response time (WCRT).
Standard WCRT analysis approaches of real-time tasks
use so called critical instant for the calculation (Bril et al.
[2007]). So as not to overaproximate one needs to know
which task constellation is possible due to the system
behavior. Our approach of schedulability analysis with
timed automata (Alur and Dill [1990]) combines WCRT
analysis with a realistic model of the software system to
minimize this overaproximation.
A widely known static analyzer that can compute WCETs
isAbsInt (Heckmann et al. [2004]). It uses binary code as
input for its analysis and utilizes detailed hardware models
to obtain a precise overapproximation. Unfortunately, it
does not support the low budget microcontroller we focus
on.
Static analysis is a widely known technology that has
been successfully applied to embedded software. Abstract
interpretation (Cousot and Cousot [1977]), for example, is
used to combat stack overows (Regehr et al. [2005]) and
determine WCET (Lundqvist and Stenstr om [1999]).
A tool for schedulabilty analysis for real-time tasks us-
ing timed automata is TIMES (Amnell et al. [2003]).
The tool solves the schedulabilty analysis by reachability
analysis on timed automata. Unfortunately, the project
development has stopped in a state that does not allow
its integration in our approach. TIMES utilizes the timedmodel checker Uppaal (Larsen et al. [1997]) that is also
used in our approach.
For handling dierent software modules the approach of
variant management is widely known (Dalgarno et al.
[2008]). While this kind of tools can combine dierent
software modules to a resulting software system, they can
not verify the schedulability of the resulting system. A
combination of dierent approaches is necessary.
To the best of our knowledge, there is no approach sup-
porting developers in choosing target hardware during
requirements analysis considering real-time requirements
and variant management.
3. VARIANT FRAMEWORK
To support the developer during the cost estimation pro-
cess, we choose variant management to provide an early
C-code prototype of the software system and to generate
aUppaal model for schedulability analysis. To improve
consistency throughout the development process, the vari-
ant management also stores data regarding each software
module (e. g., WCET) and also manages test scenarios and
test queries. Such improvements are expected to increase
software quality and support reproducibility of variants.
Furthermore, they should improve maintainability and
reusability of software modules provided.
3.1 Overview
As described before, for various variants of a software sys-
tem the developers are required to provide a cost ecient
product to the customer. These variants dier in software
modules which are used to cover functional requirements.
Figure 1 shows the process of variant management. The
variant system combines various functions to a new sys-
tem. Next to the system architecture including, e. g., the
scheduler, functions such as special controllers for com-
bustion engines, bus system drivers, and basic I/O drivers
are provided. Each function is dened by a module which
consists of its meta data and the concrete implementation.
The meta data, which is provided by a XML database, is
passed to the variant management where it is used together
with the variant model to generate the new variant. The
XML data is than processed by a transformation engine
to generate the resulting documents (C-code and Uppaal
model).
3.2 Process Flow
The main idea using the variant management is to separate
information about interfaces and the implementation from
the architecture. This information is stored as meta data
(see Fig. 1) in a database, which is realized as an XML
le. The software architecture is represented as template
les with dened placeholders used as interfaces to the
XML database. The variant management combines this
meta data with the appropriate template les to generate
C-code and the Uppaal model. The C-code is compiled,
linked, and ashed onto the MCU to obtain an early
running prototype. With the generated Uppaal model,
scheduling analysis (see Sect. 4) can be performed toPreprints of the 18th IFAC World Congress
Milano (Italy) August 28 - September 2, 2011
12504

--- Page 3 ---
check whether the selected variant will run on the micro-
controller. The transformation process is done with the
help of XSLT (W3C [2010]) and SED (SED [2010]) that
generates the output documents using the meta data and
the template les.
The templates les for the C-code represent the software
architecture of the microcontroller code. There are start-
up les which initialize, e. g., the oscillator, memory and
peripheral devices of the microcontroller hardware as well
as setup vector tables that link all interrupts to specic
C-code functions. Beyond these hardware dependent com-
ponents, the template les also include the task scheduler
and the entry point function ( main() ). Each module can
use these template les by adding own C-code at dened
placeholders in every .c and .h template le. In main() a
placeholder is set up where all modules can insert their
initializing routines, which are executed after the boot up
of the microcontroller. There is also a placeholder where
various I/O ports provided by the microcontroller need
to be activated for later usage by the module. Further
#include statements can be inserted to provide module
functions to the rest of the system. In the interrupt vector
table section a placeholder is used to dene which interrupt
service routine is executed when a specic interrupt is
triggered. If a module provides such a routine, the function
name needs to be inserted here. For the communication
between dierent modules, global variables are used. These
variables need to be dened at the appropriate place-
holder.
The second type of template les is used for the Uppaal
model. There, the prototypes of the tasks used are dened
by a set of parameters (see sec. 4.2). These les also include
the scheduler which is independent from the tasks used.
3.3 Meta Data
Every module consists of various data which is stored in
the XML database. As described above, this data is used
to generate C-code and the Uppaal model together with
the template les. The available properties are described
as follows:
Library inclusion: If the module needs special library func-
tions (e.g. math.h) they can be included into the software
system by using this property.
External peripheral settings: During the boot-up process
on the microcontroller several external peripheral func-
tions are initialized. To use these peripherals in a module
they have to be initialized rst. This can be done by
parameterize them with this property.
Initialization routine: After the boot-up process every
module can run a dened routine once to initialize the
module, e.g. to set default values to variables or outputs.
Global communication: To enable data exchange between
dierent modules, this property can be used to specify
global variables. Such variables are accessable for other
modules.
Scheduler data: The scheduler provides periodic tasks with
dierent periods (100 ms, 500 ms and "as fast as possible").
Every module can add its own routines to the periodic
task queues, which are than executed with the appropriate
period.
Interrupt behavior: Several interrupts are provided by the
UPPAAL
TemplateUPPAAL
(Scheduling Analysis)
C-code
TemplateVariant 
Manage-
mentMetadata
compileUPPAAL Model
C codeupload to 
MCUFig. 1. Variants process ow
#ifndef DATATYPES_H
#define DATATYPES_H
.
.
typedef struct 
{
      //GLOBALVAR
}GlobalType;
#endif /*DATATYPES_H*/UINT16 
Var_Module_B#ifndef DATATYPES_H
#define DATATYPES_H
.
.
typedef struct 
{
 UINT16 Var_Module_A;
 UINT16 Var_Module_B;
...
}GlobalType;
#endif /*DATATYPES_H*/UINT16 
Var_Module_AModule A Module B C-code template file Resulting C-code file
Transformation
Fig. 2. Transformation process
microcontroller. To use these interrupt every module can
add routines to the appropriate interrupt service routine
which is executed when the interrupt occurs. Furthermore
this property is used to update the interrupt vector table
to register an interrupt to the microcontroller.
Scheduling analysis ( Uppaal model): For using the timed
automata model in Uppaal , information about the mod-
ule behavior is needed ( ID,period ,execution time ,dead-
line,preemptible and interrupt ). The detailed description
of these parameters can be found in subsection 4.2.
Figure 2 illustrates the process of the transformation at
the example of the global variables. Two modules A and B
have been selected by the customer. The C-code template
le contains the placeholder GLOBALVAR where the
global variables of all modules should be inserted. Both
modules want to use a global variable which is inserted into
the C-code template during the transformation process.
The resulting C-code le is than ready to compile.
4. ABSTRACT MODEL
In order to solve the problem of checking real-time re-
quirements of software running on a given microcontroller
as introduced above, we created an abstract model based
on ideas of David et al. [2010]. We extended these ap-
proaches for the use of microcontroller systems. To model
the behaviour of interrupts used in microcontrollers we
used preemtion and we introduced preemptible and non-
preemptible tasks. Furthermore, we added the calculation
of WCRT for each task. The system consists of one sched-
uler and multiple tasks, which we modeled using timed
automata (Alur and Dill [1990]).
These components form a network of timed automata
(Behrmann et al. [2004]), for which real-time properties
can be veried using the model checker Uppaal (Larsen
et al. [1997]). First, this section gives an overview of the
components of the abstract model and describes how they
interact. Then, the scheduler and tasks are explained in
detail.Preprints of the 18th IFAC World Congress
Milano (Italy) August 28 - September 2, 2011
12505

--- Page 4 ---
4.1 Overview
The abstract model consists of multiple tasks and a sched-
uler controlling these tasks. Each component is modeled
as a timed automaton. Tasks request computing time
and the scheduler grants and revokes it. This is done by
passing messages from one timed automaton to another
forming a network of timed automata. Note that these
messages do not represent actual communication between
software components but might stand for events such as
the activation of an interrupt service routine. Therefore,
tasks only need to communicate with the scheduler and
not with each other.
When a task needs computation time, it sends an activate
message to the scheduler. At the same time it announces
whether it is able to interrupt other tasks and whether it
may be interrupted itself. If a task that is able to interrupt
other tasks becomes active and the task that currently is
assigned computation time allows itself to be interrupted,
the current task is preempted. Otherwise, the current task
keeps running until it sends a terminate message to the
scheduler. Each time a task is preempted or terminates,
the scheduler checks which active task has the highest
priority and sends a start message to that task. A task that
sends an activate message while no other task is running
is started immediately.
Each task has two clocks. One stops the time from acti-
vation while the other one stops the computation time of
that task. The former is used to verify that no task violates
its deadline; the latter ensures that each task cannot use
up more computation time than its WCET to eliminate
spurious counterexamples. The scheduler does not stop
time, but it ensures that only one task is granted com-
putation time at a time and that priorities are considered
properly. Using this level of abstraction, the model can be
used for any kind of microcontroller while still considering
microcontroller specic behavior (e. g., interrupt service
routines). Due to the exibility of Uppaal these abstract
model can be extended to represent more complex systems
and to increase accuracy of the results.
In our abstract model, we utilize stop watches. We are,
however, not concerned with decidability issues because
Uppaal guarantees termination by using overapproxima-
tion (see David et al. [2010]).
4.2 Tasks
The timed automata modeling tasks in our abstract model
contain all the information that is needed to verify compli-
ance with real-time properties. Each task is parameterized
using six properties: ID,periodicity ,WCET ,deadline ,pre-
emptable and interrupt .
IDis a unique number that is used by the scheduler
to address tasks. Currently, the function determining the
priority of a task also uses IDbecause we have no need
for dynamic priorites yet. In embedded systems priorities
are, e. g., used to dene the order in which interrupts are
executed.
Periodicity species how frequently a task is activated.
Some tasks are activated in xed time intervals, e. g., 1 ms.
Other tasks are activated as a reaction to an irregularexternal trigger. In the latter cases, worst-case periods are
assumed in order to obtain valid overapproximations.
Deadline is assigned the maximum amount of time that
may pass after activation before a task has to nish its
computation.
Preemptable and interrupt are microcontroller specic
properties. Preemptable indicates whether a task is atomic
or can be interrupted by other tasks. Interrupt declares
whether a task is part of the main program or an interrupt
service routine, which is activated by hardware when
a certain event occurs. Usually, exactly one of these
properties is true, but there are exceptions. On one hand,
time critical parts of the main program may be protected
from interrupts. On the other hand, interrupts, which
by default cannot be interrupted, may explicitly allow
other interrupt service routines to preempt them. The
latter leads to so-called nested interrupts, which cause
great problems when using static analysis and other formal
methods that do not consider timing (Regehr et al. [2005]).
These six parameters are used to instantiate a template
shown in Fig. 3. For clarity, we simplied the original
timed automata. Initially, a task is Suspended , which is
a urgent state. Urgency is a concept that ensures that the
state is left immediately (i. e., no time may pass while any
component is in an urgent state) and, therefore eliminates
spurious behavior such as a component that simply does
not announce its readyness. Using two internal states not
depicted in Fig. 3 the task sends an activate message to the
scheduler including ID,preemptable , and interrupt . At the
same time, the activation time (AT) clock and execution
time (ET) clock are reset and AT is started. The task
is now Ready and waits for the start message from the
scheduler allowing it to enter the Running state. As soon
as the task reaches this state, ET is started. If the task
is preempted, only ET is stopped and the task returns
to the Ready state waiting for another start message.
When ET reaches WCET of the task, it is forced to leave
the Running state by an invariant. Internal states not
shown in Fig. 3 ensure that such a task is not preempted,
which would cause spurious counterexamples. Instead, it is
checked whether the task nished its computation in time,
i. e., whether AT is greater than deadline . If the deadline
has been violated, the Error state is reached, otherwise
the task enters EndPeriod sending a terminate message.
In this state time passes until the next period of that task
starts and an invariant forces the task to advance to its
Suspended state again.
4.3 Scheduler
As mentioned above, the scheduler does not contain any
information about real-time properties and, therefore, does
not need to be parameterized. Its duty is to guarantee
that tasks are assigned computing time in order of their
priorities, that the CPU does not run idle while tasks are
ready, and that at most one task is running at a time.
The scheduler model shown in Fig. 4 represents the behav-
ior of the software scheduler and the hardware interrupt
system. Again, the gure has been simplied for clarity.
The scheduler model contains three main locations named
Idle,Ready and Busy which represent the states of thePreprints of the 18th IFAC World Congress
Milano (Italy) August 28 - September 2, 2011
12506

--- Page 5 ---
Fig. 3. Task model template
Fig. 4. Scheduler model
CPU. The Idle location is used when no CPU time is
required. Here, time passes until a task sends an acti-
vate message. Using internal states ID,preemptable , and
interrupt are received. In the Ready state, the scheduler
determines which task to start using a priority function.
Here, no time may pass, which is ensured by using a
variant of the urgency concept. Therefore, a start message
is sent immediatly to the most important task, causing
the scheduler to enter the Busy location. Whenever a task
sends an activate message, a chain of urgent internal states
are traversed. If an interrupt sent the message and the
currently running task is preemptable, it is stopped and
the scheduler enters the Ready state, yielding the start
of that interrupt. Otherwise, the scheduler immediately
returns to the Busy state letting the current task continue
its computation.
While it is possible to merge IdleandBusy , we kept them
separate in order to allow a more meaningful visualization
using Gannt charts oered by Uppaal TIGA (Behrmann
et al. [2007]).
Fig. 5. Response time
5. EVALUATION
To evaluate the approach described above, we gener-
ated two dierent variants with the help of pure::variants
(Beuche [2008]) and instantiated corresponding Uppaal
models. For the evaluation of the scheduling analysis, we
used the following two scenarios. The rst one is the
evaluation of the Uppaal model. We test the behavior
of preemption and prioritization of a module combination.
The second scenario calculates the WCRT for a variant
withUppaal and compares this result to the measure-
ments of the real system.
For the rst scenario, we used two modules for the vari-
ant. The rst module consists of the task TRA that is
a periodic task (period: 1000 s, deadline: 1000 s, ex-
ecution time: 929 s, preemptible: true, interrupt: no).
The second module provides the task INT0 which is an
interrupt task (execution time: 258 s, preemptible: true,
interrupt: true). This task depends on the current engine
speed, so the period can dier. We assume the period to
be worst-case (5000 s), which corresponds to an engine
speed of 12000 RPM. After the generation process done
by the variant management, the C-code is compiled and
uploaded to the ECU. Using the integrated timer on the
microcontroller, the response times of TRA are measured
as shown in Fig. 5. The experiment was performed at two
dierent engine speeds (6000 RPM and 12000 RPM). It
is conspicuous that every 5 ms or 10 ms respectively the
response time of TRA is increased by the execution time
of INT0. This behaviour will force the deadline of TRA to
be violated.
To proof this behaviour, we used the verication engine
with the generated Uppaal model and the following
queries. With "A[] not deadlock" we checked if a system
wide deadlock can occur. The verier outputs that this
property may be satised. Note that the use of stopwatches
creates an over-approximation of the state space. If the
query is satised, it is guaranteed that the system is
schedulable under all circumstances. But the query is not
satised. This means that a counter-example exists in
the overapproximation. In order, to check if this counter-
example is a feasible run of the original system, we checked
if the Error states are reachable. Therefore, we used
the query "A[] not TRA.Error" for task TRA and "A[]
not INT0.Error" for task INT0, respectively. For INT0
this property was satised, but the Error state of TRA
may be reached. So, we checked the WCRT of both
tasks. Using the query "sup: INT0.wcrt,TRA.wcrt", we
got both WCRT times by using the supremum function for
additional clocks, named wcrt, in our model. The WCRT
of TRA is higher than its deadline, which is a violation
of the real-time requirements. Therefore, the system isPreprints of the 18th IFAC World Congress
Milano (Italy) August 28 - September 2, 2011
12507

--- Page 6 ---
Fig. 6. WCRT of TRA
not schedulable. Uppaal needed less than a minute on
a standard PC to verify these queries.
The second scenario consists of a variant with two tasks:
A periodic task which is called every 100 ms. This task is
preemptible. The second task has a higher priority and a
period of 500 ms. Fig. 6 shows the response time of the
100 ms task over a period of 5 s. The response time varies
between 1700 s and 2250 s depending on the occurrence
of the task with the 500 ms period. During the 5 s of
measurement the maximum response time is measured to
2250s. Comparing this value with the WCRT calculated
with the Uppaal model (2401 s) the dierence is 151 s
which is about 6% of the Uppaal result. One reason for
this dierence could be the inaccuracy of the input times
for the Uppaal model. The execution times used above
are measured and not calculated. Therefore, the Uppaal
model gives an overapproximation of the WCRT of the
chosen task.
6. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This paper described the problem of selecting optimal
MCUs for certain combinations of software modules dur-
ing the requirements analysis. Furthermore, this paper
introduced a software framework to support the developer
during the cost estimation process with a variant manage-
ment and a scheduling analysis. The variant management
is able to provide an early C-code prototype of the software
system next to an instantiated Uppaal model for the
scheduling analysis. Additionally, it stores all important
information about a software module such as the tasks
parameters, the C-code, and the test cases, in one central
database. Hence, maintainability and consistency through-
out the whole development process is improved. We intro-
duced an abstract model based on timed automata for
scheduling analysis that can be used to verify real-time
requirements of a software system. This verication allows
developers to refrain from further oversizing the MCU.
Additionally, early limitations of execution times for new
software modules can be dened and evaluated within the
whole software system. We evaluated this approach in our
case study using an ECU and showed that it can be used
to verify the fulllment of real-time requirements.
In future, we will extend our abstract model by replacing
the static priority function with a dynamic one to support
other scheduling strategies and with it open our approach
to more elds of applications. Furthermore, an evaulation
using more complex functions will show the scalability
of our approach. A more precise computation of meta
data for single tasks might improve the overall precision.
Therefore, we plan to use static analysis on reusable code
fragments to obtain better meta data.REFERENCES
Sed, stream editor, 2010. URL
http://sed.sourceforge.net/ .
R. Alur and D. L. Dill. Automata for modeling real-time
systems. In Proceedings of the seventeenth international
colloquium on Automata, languages and programming ,
pages 322{335, New York, NY, USA, 1990. Springer-
Verlag New York, Inc. ISBN 0-387-52826-1.
T. Amnell, E. Fersman, L. Mokrushin, P. Pettersson, and
Wang Yi. Times: A tool for schedulability analysis and
code generation of real-time systems. In FORMATS ,
pages 60{72, 2003.
G. Behrmann, R. David, and K. G. Larsen. A tutorial on
Uppaal . pages 200{236. Springer, 2004.
G. Behrmann, A. Cougnard, A. David, E. Fleury, K. G.
Larsen, and D. Lime. Uppaal-tiga: time for playing
games! In CAV'07 , pages 121{125. Springer-Verlag,
2007.
D. Beuche. Modeling and building software product lines
with pure: : Variants. In SPLC , page 358, 2008.
R.J. Bril, J.J. Lukkien, and W.F.J. Verhaegh. Worst-case
response time analysis of real-time tasks under xed-
priority scheduling with deferred preemption revisited.
InECRTS '07 , pages 269 {279. IEEE Computer Society,
2007.
P. Cousot and R. Cousot. Abstract interpretation: A
unied lattice model for static analysis of programs by
construction or approximation of xpoints. In POPL
'77, pages 238{252. ACM, 1977.
M. Dalgarno, C. Road, and D. Beuche. Variant man-
agement. 3rd British Computer Society Conguration
Management Specialist Group Conference , 2008.
A. David, J. Illum, K. G. Larsen, and A. Skou. Model-
Based Design for Embedded Systems , chapter Model-
Based Framework for Schedulability Analysis Using
UPPAAL 4.1, pages 93{119. CRC Press, 2010.
R. Heckmann, C. Ferdinand, Absint Angewandte, and
Informatik Gmbh. Worst-case execution time prediction
by static program analysis. In IPDPS 2004 , pages 26{
30. IEEE Computer Society, 2004.
Federal Republic of Germany IABG . V-modell xt,
1.3 edition, available from http://www.v-modell.iabg.de
(checked 2009-10-15), 2009.
R. Kirner, P. Puschner, I. Wenzel, and Technische Univer-
sit at Wien. Measurement-based worst-case execution
time analysis using automatic test-data generation. In
SEUS 05 , pages 7{10, 2004.
K. G. Larsen, P. Pettersson, and W. Yi. Uppaal in a
nutshell, October 1997.
C. L. Liu and James W. Layland. Scheduling algorithms
for multiprogramming in a hard-real-time environment.
volume 20, pages 46{61, New York, NY, USA, 1973.
ACM.
T. Lundqvist and P. Stenstr om. An integrated path and
timing analysis method based on cycle-level symbolic
execution. Journal of Real-Time Systems , 17:183{207,
1999.
J. Regehr, A. Reid, and K. Webb. Eliminating stack over-
ow by abstract interpretation. ACM Trans. Embed.
Comput. Syst. , 4(4):751{778, 2005.
W3C. Xsl transformations 2.0, 2010. URL
http://www.w3.org/TR/xslt20/ .Preprints of the 18th IFAC World Congress
Milano (Italy) August 28 - September 2, 2011
12508
