--- Page 1 ---
UPPAAL-Tiga: Time for Playing Games!
(Tool Paper)
Gerd Behrmann1,A g n `es Cougnard1, Alexandre David1, Emmanuel Fleury2,
Kim G. Larsen1, and Didier Lime3
1CISS, Aalborg University, Aalborg, Denmark
{behrmann,adavid,kgl }@cs.aau.dk
2LaBRI, Bordeaux-1 University, CNRS (UMR 5800), Talence, France
fleury@labri.fr
3IRCCyN, ´Ecole Centrale de Nantes, CNRS (UMR 6597), Nantes, France
Didier.Lime@irccyn.ec-nantes.fr
Abstract. In 2005 we proposed the ﬁrst eﬃcient on-the-ﬂy algorithm
for solving games based on timed game automata with respect to reach-
ability and safety properties. The ﬁrst prototype presented at that time
has now matured to a fully integrated tool with dramatic improvements
both in terms of performance and the availability of the extended in-
put language of Uppaal -4.0. The new tool can output strategies or let
the user play against them both from the command line and from the
graphical simulator that was completely re-designed.
1 Introduction
For more than a decade timed, priced and hybrid games have been proposed and
studied by various researchers [AMPS98, DAHM01, MPS95, BCFL04]. Though
several decidability results and algorithms have been presented, so far only pro-
totype tools have been developed [AT02]. Uppaal-Tiga1is the ﬁrst eﬃcient
tool supporting the analysis of timed games allowing synthesis of controllers for
control problems modelled as timed gam e automata and with safety or liveness
control objectives.
2 What Can Be Done with Uppaal-Tiga?
Control Problems. The modeling formalism of Uppaal-Tiga consists of a net-
work of timed game automata [MPS95] (NTGA). A timed game automaton is a
timed automaton [AD94] in which the set of actions is partitioned into control-
lableactions and uncontrollable actions. The former are actions that can be trig-
gered by the controller, the latter by the environment/opponent. The opponenthas
1http://www.cs.aau.dk/ ∼adavid/tiga/
W. Damm and H. Hermanns (Eds.): CAV 2007, LNCS 4590, pp. 121–125, 2007.
c/circlecopyrtSpringer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

--- Page 2 ---
122 G. Behrmann et al.
priority over the controller. Given a NTGA, we are mainly interested in two types
of control objectives:
Thereachability objective: Is it possible to ﬁnd a strategy for the triggering of
controllable actions guaranteeing that a given set of (goal) states of the system
is reached regardless of what and when uncontrollable actions are taken?
Thesafety objective: Is it possible to ﬁnd a strategy for the triggering of
controllable actions guaranteeing that a given set of (bad) states of the system
are never reached regardless of what and when uncontrollable actions are taken?
Formally, control objectives are formulated as ” control:P ”, wherePis TCTL
formula specifying either a safety property ( A[]φorA[φ1Wφ 2]) or a live-
ness property ( A<>φorA[φ1Uφ2]). Given a control objective ” control: P ”
the search engine of Uppaal-Tiga will provide a strategy (if any such exists)
under which the behaviour will satisfy P. Here a (winning) strategy is simply a
function describing for each state of the system what the controller should do
either in terms of ”performing a particular controllable action” or to ”delay”.
/lscript1
/lscript2
/lscript3
/lscript4Goal/lscript5
x≤1;c1x>1;u1
x<1
u2
x:= 0
x≥2;c2
x<1
u3
c3x≤1;c4
Fig.1. Timed game automaton
exampleExample. To illustrate the use of Uppaal-Tiga ,
consider the example in Fig. 1, consisting of a
timed game automaton Awith one clock x.I th a s
two types of edges: controllable ( ci) and uncon-
trollable ( ui).Adeﬁnes the rules of the game. In
our current example (Fig. 1), we deﬁne the simple
reachability objective “ control: A<> A.Goal ”.
Uppaal-Tiga searches for a winning strategy
on this game using the algorithm proposed in
[CDF+05]. Each winning condition, entered in
Uppaal-Tiga as a regular query, is marked as
“satisﬁed ” if there exists a winning strategy and
“not satisﬁed ” if none exists. Hence, in our ex-
ample, the query “ control: A<> A.Goal ” will
be marked “ satisﬁed ”. Moreover, the tool can
output the corresponding strategy from the com-
mand line or let the user play against it in the
simulator as shown in Fig. 2. For controllable games (here), Uppaal-Tiga plays
the controller and the user is the opponent. The ﬁrst transition is for the con-
troller ( Uppaal-Tiga ), the second for the opponent (user), and the third is for
the opponent but it will be countered by the controller ( Uppaal-Tiga takes the
transition to /lscript2), hence it is greyed – the opponent cannot take this action.
Applications. Uppaal-Tiga has recently been used for an industrial case study
with the company Skov A/S specializing in climate control systems used for mod-
ern pig and poultry stables [DJLR07]. The synthesis capability of the tool has
been combined with Simulink and Real-Time Workshop to provide a complete tool
chain for synthesis, simulation, and automatic generation of production code.
Uppaal-Tiga has also been recently applied to check for (bi-)simulation be-
tween timed automata and timed game automata [CDL07]. Given two timed

--- Page 3 ---
UPPAAL-Tiga: Time for Playing Games! 123
Fig.2. View of the simulator when playing a strategy
automata, the tool can check if one (bi-)simulates the other and similarly for
timed game automata with applications for controller synthesis with partial ob-
servability. This technique has been applied to the compositional veriﬁcation of
the ZeroConf protocol.
Our tool is being used in the AMAES project2, a French national project
on Advanced Methods for Autonomous Embedded Systems. Uppaal-Tiga has
been successfully applied for controlling the autonomous robot Dala [LC04] in
charge of taking pictures and transmitting them back to Earth during limited
transmission windows. It is desirable in such control problems to optimize the
moves to save power.
3W h a t I s N e w ?
Input Language. The new generation of Uppaal-Tiga inherits the enriched
input language of Uppaal -4.0, with the only excepti on of priorities. The user
has now access to C-like syntax to d eclare functions, custom types, etc.In addi-
tion, users can now deﬁne more complex winning conditions by means of logical
formulas in the indicated subset of TCTL.
Strategies. Uppaal-Tiga is able to generate a strategy for the controller, which
ultimately corresponds to a control program, or a “counter-strategy” for the
opponent as a proof that the controller cannot win. These strategies can now
be output as decision graphs (hybrid BDD/CDD graphs). The discrete part of
the states is represented as a BDD and the symbolic part as a CDD [LPWY99].
Finally, Uppaal-Tiga allows the user to play against the strategy in both the
GUI3and CLI.
Performances. Uppaal-Tiga is faster by several orders of magnitude on large
examples (more than 1000 times faster) and consumes much less memory (100
2http://www-verimag.imag.fr/ ∼krichen/AMAES/
3This is a major new feature for the next major release.

--- Page 4 ---
124 G. Behrmann et al.
times less) than the ﬁrst prototype presented at CONCUR’05. This comes from
the full integration of the algorithm in the Uppaal -4.0 [BDH+06]4framework.
This brings to Uppaal-Tiga some of the reliability and performances achieved
by years of Uppaal developments. Also improvements have been made on the
DBM library, in particular on subtractions, partitions, federations, speciﬁc oper-
ations for timed games ( e.g.the computation of controllable predecessors w.r.t.
delay), and the essential operation of merging several diﬀerence bound matrices
(DBMs) into one.
4C o n c l u s i o n
Uppaal-Tiga is a new (and the only eﬃcient) tool for controller synthesis for
control problems modeled as timed game automata. Its performance and usabil-
ity has greatly been improv ed by its integration with Uppaal -4.0. In a future
version methods for preventing synthesis of strategies generating zeno behaviour
will be provided. Also the computationally much more complex problem of syn-
thesis under partial observability is under investigation.
References
[AD94] Alur, R., Dill, D.: A Theory of Timed Automata. Theoretical Computer
Science 126(2), 183–235 (1994)
[AMPS98] Asarin, E., Maler, O., Pnueli, A., Sifakis, J.: Controller Synthesis for Timed
Automata. In: Proc. IFAC Symp. on System Structure & Control, pp. 469–
474. Elsevier, Amsterdam (1998)
[AT02] Altisen, K., Tripakis, S.: Tools for controller synthesis of timed systems.
In: RT-TOOLS’02 (2002)
[BCFL04] Bouyer, P., Cassez, F., Fleury, E., Larsen, K.G.: Optimal Strategies
in Priced Timed Game Automata. In: Lodaya, K., Mahajan, M. (eds.)
FSTTCS 2004. LNCS, vol. 3328, pp. 148–160. Springer, Heidelberg (2004)
[BDH+06] Behrmann, G., David, A., H˚ akansson, J., Hendriks, M., Larsen, K.G., Pet-
tersson, P., Yi, W.: UPPAAL 4.0. In: Proc. of 3rdInt. Conf. on the Quanti-
tative Evaluation of Systems, pp. 125–126. IEEE Computer Society Press,
Los Alamitos (2006)
[CDF+05] Cassez, F., David, A., Fleury, E., Larsen, K.G., Lime, D.: Eﬃcient On-the-
ﬂy Algorithms for the Analysis of Timed Games. In: Abadi, M., de Alfaro,
L. (eds.) CONCUR 2005. LNCS, vol. 3653, pp. 66–80. Springer, Heidelberg
(2005)
[CDL07] Chatain, T., David, A., Larsen, K.: Playing Games with Games (Unpub-
lished)
[DAHM01] De Alfaro, L., Henzinger, T.A., Majumdar, R.: Symbolic Algorithms for
Inﬁnite-State Games. In : Larsen, K.G., Nielsen, M. (eds.) CONCUR 2001.
LNCS, vol. 2154, pp. 536–550. Springer, Heidelberg (2001)
[DJLR07] David, A., Jessen, J.J., Larsen, K.G., Rasmussen, J.I.: Guided Controller
Synthesis for Climate Controller Using UPPAAL-TIGA. Unpublished
4http://www. uppaal.com

--- Page 5 ---
UPPAAL-Tiga: Time for Playing Games! 125
[LC04] Lemai-Chenevier, S.: IxTeT-eXeC: planiﬁcation, r´ eparation de plan et
contrˆole d’ex´ ecution avec gestion du temps et des ressources. PhD thesis,
Institut National Polytechnique de Toulouse (2004)
[LPWY99] Larsen, K.G., Pearson, J., Weise, C., Yi, W.: Clock Diﬀerence Diagrams.
Nordic Journal of Computing 6(3), 271–298 (1999)
[MPS95] Maler, O., Pnueli, A., Sifakis, J.: On the Synthesis of Discrete Controllers
f o rT i m e dS y s t e m s .I n :M a y r ,E . W . ,P u e c h ,C .( e d s . )S T A C S9 5 .L N C S ,
vol. 900, pp. 229–242. Springer, Heidelberg (1995)
