--- Page 1 ---
Formal analysis of timeliness in the RaSTA protocol
Billy Naumann, Christine Jakobs, Matthias Werner
TU Chemnitz
Faculty of Computer Science
Chemnitz, Germany
Email: {billy.naumann,christine.jakobs,matthias.werner}@informatik.tu-chemnitz.de
Abstract —Formal reasoning about the correctness of safety-
critical system properties is crucial since such systems may
impact their environment when malfunctioning. The Rail Safe
Transport Application (RaSTA) Protocol is a protocol for systems
used in railway applications such as signaling. It claims to
provide highly available and timely communication based on
the application’s demands. We investigate timeliness, i.e., the
property that application data do not become obsolete.
We analyze the protocol’s speciﬁcation and provide assump-
tions necessary to resolve imprecisions. Under the speciﬁed error
model, we ﬁnd that the deadlines proposed bound until messages
are considered timely is too restrictive, disabling RaSTA’s mech-
anisms to recover from lost messages in time. We formalize the
speciﬁcation of timeliness to provide a counterexample for the
proposed bound and create an improved bound that does not
lead to violated deadlines under the same assumptions and error
model.
I. I NTRODUCTION
THERail Safe Transport Application (RaSTA) [1] is a
protocol used in railway signaling technology between
diverse communication endpoints. It is independent of the
overlaying application. Since it may be usable for safety-
critical applications, its correctness is essential. The object of
this paper is to formally verify the correctness of a part of the
RaSTA protocol. We formally investigate RaSTA’s timeliness
property using networks of timed automata and the tool Uppaal
for formal reasoning [2].
RaSTA’s speciﬁcation rests upon natural language. The
interpretation of such a speciﬁcation often relies on either
explicit or implicit assumptions, allowing to focus on aspects
considered necessary while abstracting from others. Those
assumptions pose the danger of creating a model that cannot
reﬂect the wanted properties. The following quote from Sir
Tony Hoare shows that formal approaches are a necessary and
helpful tool to discuss such assumptions:
The job of formal methods is to elucidate the as-
sumptions upon which formal correctness depends.
In this investigation, we discuss necessary assumptions
about imprecisions in RaSTA’s speciﬁcation, prove that the
bound for messages’ timeliness given in RaSTA’s speciﬁcation
is insufﬁcient, and provide an improved bound.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: Section
II provides an overview of the normative requirements applica-
ble to RaSTA and an overview of the protocol itself, including
assumptions made in the RaSTA speciﬁcation. Section III
introduces the formal semantics of networks of timed automataand Uppaal. In Section IV we present our model and the
evaluation of RaSTA’s timeliness property. Finally, section V
gives a conclusion of our work.
II. R ASTA P ROTOCOL
The RaSTA [1] protocol is speciﬁed in a pre-standard by
the DKE/UK 351.3, a national working committee of the
Association for Electrical, Electronic and Information Tech-
nologies for railway signaling facilities. It is used in railway
signaling technology to achieve safe and highly available
communication.
A. Requirements
Strict normative requirements exist, as safety is a crucial
concern in this ﬁeld. RaSTA implements the requirements of
[3] for safe communication in open communication systems
of category 2, including networks consisting of safety-critical
and non-safety-critical systems that can read, write, process,
and transmit data. Safety-critical systems use safety-critical
transmission functions, assuring Authenticity, Integrity, Time-
liness, and Sequence of sent messages. Speciﬁcally, RaSTA
deﬁnes timeliness as a state in which information is available
in time according to the requirements. The number of users is
generally unknown, as well as their application. Thus unknown
amounts of data in arbitrary formats are sent in such networks.
There might be routing and management facilities and the
communication media may be prone to unforeseen external
faults. Authorized access with malicious intentions is explicitly
negligible in this category. Thus no cryptographic means are
enforced.
The system’s functionality must ensure the aforementioned
properties of safety-critical transmission functions. The imple-
mentation of such a system implies an evaluation of possible
safety threats. Appropriate means must be used to mitigate
these threats. In [3], a list of speciﬁc safety means is provided,
consisting of short descriptions and their requirements.
B. Architecture
RaSTA is implemented between a typical communication
stack’s application layer and the transport layer, as pictured
in Figure 1. There are only a few requirements on the
transport layer, making RaSTA suitable for different scenarios:
It must be possible to send messages to speciﬁc receivers. The
network, including the communication partners, must process
the messages in a best-effort manner. It is unnecessary to
Proceedings of the of the 17thConference on Computer
Science and Intelligence Systems pp. 505–514DOI: 10.15439/2022F176
ISSN 2300-5963 ACSIS, V ol. 30
IEEE Catalog Number: CFP2285N-ART ©2022, PTI 505

--- Page 2 ---
Application-
Layer
Safety- and
Retransmission-
Layer
Redundancy-
Layer
Transport-
LayerMessage
SRL-Header Safety-Code
RL-Header Check-Code
TL-Header TL-Trailer
Fig. 1: Architecture of the RaSTA Protocol Stack
TABLE I: Protocol Data Unit of the SRL
Byte(s) Content
0 - 1 length
2 - 3 type
4 - 7 receiver ID
8 - 11 sender ID
12 - 15 sequence number
16 - 19 conﬁrmed sequence number
20 - 23 timestamp
24 - 27 conﬁrmed timestamp
28 - 28+k-1 payload ( kbytes)
28+k - (28, 35, 42)+k safety code
enforce deadlines, but safety reasons imply fast transmission
and adequate quality. Reference [1] states that commercial of
the shelf transport services such as UDP or TCP are well
suited.
RaSTA introduces two new layers between application and
transport: the upper Safety- and Retransmission-Layer (SRL)
and the lower Redundancy-Layer (RL) , also shown in Figure 1.
The SRL provides a safe communication mechanism for net-
works according to [3], while the RL aims to provide a highly
available communication service via so-called Redundancy-
Channels . The RL uses multiple transport layer channels
(possibly with different transport services) for redundant com-
munication. In this way, messages that get lost or altered on a
single transport channel do not affect the communication on
SRL-level. Since most of the means to ensure the necessary
properties reside in the SRL, this paper only brieﬂy covers the
RL.
Table I shows the design of the Protocol Data Unit (PDU)
of the SRL. We omit a representation of the RL at this point.
The SRL makes use of IDs for sender and receiver to
ensure authenticity as well as a safety code based on the
message digest 4 (MD4) [4] algorithm to ensure integrity.
Depending on the individual requirements, the latter can
take either all, a few, or none of the result’s bytes. The
protocol uses the sequence number ( SN)and the conﬁrmed
sequence number ( CS)to maintain the correct sequence of all
communicated messages: With each communicated message,
SN gets incremented. At the same time, CS represents the
last received sequence number of the communication partner.
Both timestamp ( TS)andconﬁrmed timestamp ( CTS )ﬁeldsare used to ensure timeliness. Here, TSrepresents the time at
which the sender created the message, and CTS represents the
last received timestamp of the communication partner, analog
to the conﬁrmed sequence number. The insurance of both
Sequence and Timeliness requires additional logic, discussed
in the protocol speciﬁcation.
The RL has a more lightweight PDU. There are two primary
choices: it uses CRC for its check code with different possible
conﬁgurations. Also, using an additional sequence number
ensures noticing any race conditions between messages via the
individual transport channels. Please note that additional logic
is necessary to ensure a correct transmission on the receiver
side.
C. Protocol speciﬁcation
Since RaSTA is a relatively new protocol stack, there is not
much work regarding formalizing and verifying its properties,
even though its usage in safety-critical scenarios. However,
a shortcoming is using MD4 as safety code as described in
section II-B, shown by [5]. Here, possible changes to the
protocol stack extend RaSTA’s abilities to withstand attacks
such as the injection of forged messages or replay attacks.
Such malicious attacks are not in the scope of RaSTA’s
requirements for category 2 networks according to [3], but
it raises the question if these assumptions are valid in the use
case of railway signaling.
RaSTA deﬁnes message types for the SRL, used in different
situations. Figure 2 shows the abstract state machine for the
SRL. Deﬁned are Connection Request (ConnReq) ,Connec-
tion Response (ConnResp) ,Disconnect Request (DiscReq) ,
Heartbeat (HB) ,Data ,Retransmission Request (RetrReq) ,
Retransmission Response (RetrResp) , and Retransmitted Data
(RetrData) messages, from which Data ,RetrData and HB
messages are deﬁned as relevant for time monitoring. Using
the ﬁrst two message types, connections are established and set
up by performing a handshake between both communication
partners. This is visualized in Figure 2 with arrows (a),
(b), and(c). ADisconnect Request message is sent prior to
closing an established connection or to indicate errors during
the establishment or regular transmission. The corresponding
transitions shows Figure 2 as dashed arrows. The communi-
cation partners monitor the connection quality via messages
of type HB. Such Heartbeats are automatically sent after a
deﬁned time interval during which no other messages were
sent. Application messages carrying a payload are transmitted
asData messages. The remaining message types handle error
situations: A lost message leads to a corrupted sequence
of messages is corrupted. The receiver can recognize this
situation, in which he sends a RetrReq message. Figure 2
reﬂects this situation with transition (d). The original sender
of the lost or corrupted message answers with a RetrResp
message (corresponding to transition (f)in Figure 2), after
which he repeats all messages with an unconﬁrmed sequence
number as RetrData messages. To ﬁnalize, a Data orHBmes-
sage is sent to indicate that the retransmission is completed,
returning to normal operation by transition (e)in Figure506 PROCEEDINGS OF THE FEDCSIS. SOFIA, BULGARIA, 2022

--- Page 3 ---
Closed
Down
Start
Up
Retransmission
requestedRetransmission
running(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)(e)
(f)
(g)
Fig. 2: Abstract State Machine of the SRL [1]
2. Finally, transition (g)corresponds to the situation where
another message gets lost during a running retransmission,
where another retransmission is initiated.
Besides the abstract states shown in Figure 2, each instance
has to manage an internal state, consisting, among other things,
of a set of sequence numbers, timestamps, and timers:
SNT: the sequence number of the next transmitted message
SNR: the expected sequence number of the next received
message
CST: the conﬁrmed sequence number of the next transmitted
message
CSR: the conﬁrmed sequence number of the last received
message
TSR: the last received timestamp
CTSR: the last received conﬁrmed timestamp
THB: a timer representing the remaining time until the in-
stance has to send a new message
TDL: a timer representing the remaining time in which re-
ceived messages are considered timely
The maximum values for the timer TDLandTHB are
deﬁned as conﬁgurable parameters, depending on the appli-
cations demands. We use TDL,max andTHB,max to represent
them.
To transmit data, the sender has to create a new PDU
according to Table I using SN=SNT,CS=CST,
CTS=TSR, andTS=t, wheretis the sender’s current
timestamp. After creating and sending the message, SNTis
incremented ( SNT=SNT+1) andTHBis reset to THB,max .
The sender has to store a copy of the message until a message
withCSgSN is received.
The message receiver has to check the sequence of SN,CS,
andCTS . First, plausibility checks evaluate if SN2SNRis
below a conﬁgured limit. Also, CSRfCS < SN Thas to
hold, stating that the received and conﬁrmed sequence number
is plausible, too. If these conditions do not hold, the receiver
discards the message. Otherwise, he performs more vigorous
checks on SN andCTS . A boolean variable SNinSeq is
set to true, if SNPDR=SNRholds. Also, another boolean
variableCTSinSeq is set to true, if for messages relevant
for time monitoring 0fCTS2CTSR< TDl,max holds.
Note that the receiver does not discard the messages if theA B
TS=t
CTS=t
TS > t
CTS=t
CTS > tTDL,maxTDL,max
Fig. 3: Adaptive Channel Monitoring
checks result in negative results. The state transitions shown
in Figure 2 depend on these variables. Summarizing the
resulting behaviors, if CTSinSeq does not hold, the receiver
responds by sending a DiscReq and closing the connection. If
SNinSeq does not hold, the receiver initiates retransmission
of all messages with unconﬁrmed sequence numbers (i.e.
CSTfSN < SN T).
D. Timeliness in RaSTA
RaSTA ensures timeliness by applying a concept called
Adaptive Channel Monitoring (ACM) . The necessary infor-
mation is included in each SRL-PDU but will be evaluated
only for time monitoring relevant messages. According to
[1], clocks may not be synchronized and can have different
resolutions, consequentially disallowing the interpretation of
timestamps of the communication partner.
ACM applies the Double-Timestamp -Principle, deﬁned in
[3] to check the message round trip times on both commu-
nication partners. A sent message carries the sender’s local
timestamp in TS. Upon receiving this message, the receiver
stores this exact value as TSR=TS in his local state.
The following answer of the receiver will carry the conﬁrmed
timestamp CTS=TSRback to the original sender, allowing
the round trip time calculation as RTT=t2CTS wheretis
the current timestamp. A message’s timeliness is analyzable by
constraining the round trip time since this value overestimates
the timestamp of the send-event. Since multiple messages can
carry the same CTS value, a round trip completes once a
message with a new, greater CTS value arrives. This fact
naturally implies that the original sender sent a message with
TS > t in the meantime. This message also starts the next
round trip, overlapping the current one. This is visualized in
Figure 3 for an error-free communication.
After a message with a speciﬁc new value of CTS ar-
rives, the receiver updates CTSRin the local state. All later
messages with CTS=CTSRare considered timely, ifBILLY NAUMANN, CHRISTINE JAKOBS, MATTHIAS WERNER: FORMAL ANALYSIS OF TIMELINESS IN THE RASTA PROTOCOL 507

--- Page 4 ---
they arrive in an interval of length TDL,max sinceCTSR.
If another message with CTS > CTS Rarrives, the stored
value of CTSRwill be replaced by the new one, indicating
that no further messages with the old CTS value should arrive
anymore.
To implement these conditions, [1] uses the timer TDL,
which is reset with each update to CTSRtoTDL=
TDL,max2RTT . If this timer reaches its limit, arriving
messages may carry outdated information, which would be
the case when CTS=CTSR. Figure 3 visualizes this timer
as dashed and dotted lines where the dashed portion represents
the actual timer running while the dotted portion corresponds
to the time since the reference point or until the deadline,
respectively.
AsTDL,max is a conﬁgurable parameter, it is possible to
adjust it according to the application’s needs. However, [1]
states that TDL,max should include enough buffer to take
possible retransmissions into account, and gives the following
suggestion for its minimal value:
TDL,max>3·THB,max+2·(TAB+TBA)+TRL,seq (1)
Here, according to [1], THB,max refers to the commu-
nication partner’s maximum time between two consecutive
messages. TABandTBAindicate the worst-case transmission
time of the channel from sender to receiver, where Aand
Bare the communication partners, and TRL,seq indicates the
maximum time a message can get delayed in the RL because
of race conditions.
As speciﬁed in [1], the reasoning behind this formula is as
follows: the round trip time of a message can be overestimated
byTHB,max+TAB+TBA, a lost message will be noticed at
worst after 2·THB,max and the following retransmission can
be estimated as TAB+TBA, which sums up to the right hand
side of Equation 1.
This bound results in an assumed error model where
only one message per round trip can be lost. We examine
this bound and see it as problematic since it introduces
artiﬁcial dependencies between the communication partners
and their communication channels: As soon as one channel
loses one message, the other must deliver correct messages.
This assumption is unrealistic since, in reality, the channels
themselves cannot share such information.
E. Assumptions regarding RaSTA’s speciﬁcation
Before modeling RaSTA’s communication to show timeli-
ness, we need to state some assumptions regarding open or
imprecisely deﬁned aspects.
1) Violation of message sequence: Since the RL aggregates
multiple transport connections between sender and receiver
to a single redundancy channel, the correct order of the
messages has to be assured since race conditions along the
individual channels can occur. The conﬁguration parameter
TRL,seq states the delay of messages to be able to restore
sequence before delivery to the SRL. We assume that this
parameter is set to 0, effectively allowing messages to overtakeeach other unhandled. This assumption is reasonable since the
SRL notices the incorrect message sequence in the same way
a lost message would, triggering the retransmission.
2) Immediate Responses: The speciﬁcation [1] is unclear
about internal delays of messages that should be transmit-
ted immediately. This delay is signiﬁcant in the case of a
retransmission of unconﬁrmed messages. We assume that no
additional delay is introduced between two such messages,
effectively sending all of them in the correct order simultane-
ously.
3) Handshakes: We focus on analyzing timeliness for the
central part of the protocol: The data exchange, in essence,
by the behavior of a message’s round trip. By that decision,
we exclude the handshake to establish the connection and any
disconnection semantics. The initial handshake includes a ﬁnal
time-critical heartbeat message. However, this message must
be sent immediately after receiving the connection response
message. Thus, it will set the initial reference point for the
upcoming data exchange. If the receiver discards the message,
the handshake fails, and the connection is not established.
Additionally, we reduce the second part of the retransmis-
sion handshake, i.e., the RetrResp, RetrData, HB sequence to
transmit all missing messages to a single RetrResp message.
This reduction is feasible since we use the assumptions in
Section II-E2, together with the transmission error model.
The handshake is only carried out when a communication
partner previously discarded a message. Hence, during this
handshake, no further messages are discarded. All messages
are sent without any delays. Hence, the retransmitting side
immediately sends the (ﬁnal) heartbeat message carrying the
CTS > t information. This assumption allows us to abstract
from the speciﬁc messages to be conﬁrmed.
F . Discussion of RaSTA’s timelines property
A derivation of Equation 1 according to [1] is given in sec-
tion II-D. However, we like to point out that the interpretation
ofTHB,max as the communication partners parameter is not
feasible for all scenarios.
Under the assumption that only one message per round trip
can get lost, there are, in essence, two different scenarios that
lead to retransmission, shown in Figure 4. Both scenarios
share the loss of the information used to ﬁnish the round
trip, i.e., a timestamp TS > t or a conﬁrmed timestamp
CTS > t . We describe these scenarios from the view of
the ﬁnal CTS > t message, as the receiver will consider
this message’s timeliness. Hence, communication partner A
is the receiver while B is the sender in the scenarios. In
Figure 4a, the receiver’s ﬁrst message containing TS > t is
lost during transmission. Subsequently, the sender discards the
following message also carrying this information. Since the
message sequence is not correct at this point, the sender initi-
ates retransmission. He continues to send heartbeat messages
containing the CTS=tinformation until the ﬁnalization of
the retransmission. We omitted them for readability reasons.
In the worst case, a heartbeat containing CTS=tis sent just
before the TS > t information reaches the sender, leading508 PROCEEDINGS OF THE FEDCSIS. SOFIA, BULGARIA, 2022

--- Page 5 ---
A B
TS=t
TS > t

TS > t
RetrResp
,TS > tRetrReq
CTS=t
CTS > t
2∗THB,A TABTBATAB THB,BTBA
(a) receivers (A) faultA B
TS=t
TS > t
RetrReqCTS=t
CTS > t

CTS > t
RetrResp,CTS > t
THB,ATAB 2∗THB,B TBATABTBA
(b) senders (B) fault
Fig. 4: Retransmission scenarios
to sending the CTS > t information with the next heartbeat.
Figure 4a also shows the individual worst case delays.
Accumulated, they lead to the following upper bound shown
in Equation 2:
TDL,A= 2·THB,A+THB,B+2·(TAB+TBA)(2)
Analogously, we show the situation where the sender’s ﬁrst
message containing CTS > t is lost in Figure 4b. The
receiver’s message containing TS > t arrives at the sender
just after a message containing CTS=twas sent. Hence,
theCTS > t is sent as the next heartbeat and gets lost.
The receiver discards the next heartbeat since the message
sequence is incorrect. At this point, the receiver initiates
the retransmission. After this retransmission, the CTS > t
information reached the receiver. Equation 3 presents the
according upper bound.
TDL,B= 2·THB,B+THB,A+2·(TAB+TBA)(3)
Since both scenarios can occur under our assumptions, we
propose to use the maximum of both as the bound for the
deadline, referred to by T2
DL,max , as shown in Equation 4.
T2
DL,max>max(TDL,A,TDL,B) (4)
Please note that we used THB,·andTDL,·to indicate
THB,max, ·andTDL,max, ·for spacing reasons. In the following
sections, we show a formal analysis of both limits presented in
Equations 1 and 4 using timed automata supported by Uppaal.
III. T IMED AUTOMATA AND UPPAAL
To check the correctness of both limits presented in Equa-
tions 1 and 4, we modeled the interesting aspects of RaSTA
as timed automata and checked this model with the help of
Uppaal.A. Uppaal
Uppaal [6], [2] is described as "an integrated tool envi-
ronment for modeling, validation, and veriﬁcation of real-
time systems modeled as networks of timed automata, ex-
tended with data types (e.g., bounded integers, arrays)." It
is developed jointly by Basic Research in Computer Science
at Aalborg University in Denmark and the Department of
Information Technology at Uppsala University in Sweden.
Many applications of Uppaal in scientiﬁc case studies are
shown on Uppaal’s website [2], such as the veriﬁcation of
different versions of the well-known Fischer Protocol [7] for
mutual exclusion in [8]. Nevertheless, also industrial protocols
such as the Philips Audio Protocol for exchange of con-
trol information [9], or the Bang and Olufsen Audio/Video
Protocol for transmission of messages between audio and
video components over a single bus [10] have been model
checked by Uppaal. Primarily the latter was known to be
faulty. Uppaal’s generation of (erroneous) traces allowed us
to ﬁnd the error. Also, Uppaal was used to ﬁnd and verify a
ﬁx for this problem.
B. Modelling
Timed automata exist in multiple ﬂavors, but they generally
combine the known concept of ﬁnite state machines and
clocks, unique variables used to represent time. Uppaal uses
a dense time model, where clocks evaluate real numbers and
advance synchronously. For evaluation, Uppaal can express
clock valuations as symbolic constraints, thus reducing the
state space by collapsing all clock valuations that share com-
mon properties. Further, Uppaal allows systems to be modeled
as networks of timed automata by composition from individual
automata. Every automaton may engage in (enabled) transi-
tions, also used to synchronize multiple automata. [11]
In [11], the deﬁnition of the Timed Automata used in Uppaal
is as follows:
A timed automaton Ais a tuple (L,l0,C,A,E,I ), where
Lis a set of locations, l0is the initial location, Cis the set
of clocks, Ais a set of actions, co-actions and the internal
τ-action,E¦L×A×B(C)×2C×Lis a set of edges
between locations with an action, a guard and a set of clocks
to be reset, and I:L³B(C)assigns invariants to locations.
Reference [11] also provides the deﬁnition and semantics of
a network of timed automata, consisting of ntimed automata
Ai,1fifn. The location vector l= (l1,...,ln)corresponds
to the locations of each individual automation. Further, the
invariants are merged to an invariant function over the location
vectorsI(l) ='iIi(li). Finally, the notation l[l2
i/li]denotes
the location vector where the ith element liis replaced by l2
i.
The semantics are then given by [11] as follows: Let
Ai= (Li,l0
i,C,A,E i,Ii)be a network of timed automata and
l0= (l0
1,...,l0
n)the vector of initial locations. The semantics
is deﬁned as a labelled transition system ïS,s0,³ð with
S¦(L1×...×Ln)×RCas the set of states, s0= (l0,u0)is
the initial state and ³¦S×Sis the transition relation such
that:BILLY NAUMANN, CHRISTINE JAKOBS, MATTHIAS WERNER: FORMAL ANALYSIS OF TIMELINESS IN THE RASTA PROTOCOL 509

--- Page 6 ---
"(l,u)d³(l,u+d)if"d2: 0fd2fd=óu+d2*I(l),
and
"(l,u)a³(l[l2
i/li],u2])if#liτgr2³l2
i:u*g,u2= [r³0]u
andu2*I(l[l2
i/li]).
"Further,(l,u)a³(l[l2
j/lj,l2
i/li],u2)if#lic?giri2³l2
i'
ljc!gjrj2³l2
j:u*(gi'gj),u2= [ri*rj³0]u'u2*
I(l[l2
j/lj,l2
i/li])
Hence, possible transitions are categorized in delay and
action transitions. The former are described by (l,u)d³
(l,u+d), letting the system evolve in time for dtime units
by mapping each clock c*Cto the value u(c) +d, if the
invariants of all locations aren’t violated for any time point
until the delay has occurred. The latter corresponds to a single
edge or a pair of edges in the automaton. Here, either a
single automaton or a pair of automata in the network change
their locations according to action ain(l,u)a³(l[l2
i/li],u2])
and(l,u)a³(l[l2
j/lj,l2
i/li],u2)respectively. Either are only
possible if their guards are satisﬁed. Taking the transition
resets all referenced clocks, and the resulting locations’ in-
variants must be satisﬁed. When two automata perform such
a pairwise transition, it is also necessary to label the transitions
by corresponding co-actions, expressing active and passive
synchronization at these points.
Uppaal extends such networks of timed automata with many
features shown in the following list, as well as other constructs
borrowed from C-like programming languages such as arrays,
initializers, record- and custom-types as functions. [11]
"Templates for instantiating automata
"Invariants over internal state variables
"Non-deterministic choice of binary synchronization chan-
nels when multiple co-actions are possible
"Urgent and committed locations which disallow the pas-
sage of time
Within such templates, Uppaal uses additional labels for
locations and edges, which allow to deﬁne the behavior of the
automaton in an easy way, for example, to express a location’s
invariants. Actions can have select labels, which can be used
to non-deterministically bind values from a given range to
variables which can then be used in the remaining labels of the
action. Also, guards enable actions upon fulﬁllment or disable
them in case of violation. Synchronization labels allow the use
of synchronization channels, where edges with complementary
synchronization labels c!andc?over a shared channel c
synchronize on taking the c!labeled action, reassembling co-
actions. Finally, update labels can alter the current internal
state by changing variables’ values or assigning values to
clocks. [11], [12]
Figure 5 shows an example of a timely bounded syn-
chronous communication channel. We use this cannel to model
the communication between two RaSTA communication part-
ners. Messages are accepted from the sender via the send ?
co-action, transiting from the Idle to theTransmitting
location. The variable content refers to the channel’s con-
tent, taken from whatever resides in data_send , the senders
send buffer. To reduce the state space, the send buffer is
Fig. 5: Model of the RaSTA Communication Channel
reset toempty as soon as the channel has accepted the
message. As long as t <= delay , the channel may reside
in theTransmitting location, transitions back to Idle
are possible immediately. There are two possible transitions
corresponding to the correct and faulty transmission. In the
latter case, the channel’s content is not altered and copied into
the receive buffer. Instead, the lost! co-action indicates an
altered message to discard. The clock tis reset when transiting
back toIdle , where it is stopped via the location’s invariant.
These measures are also made to reduce the state space.
To deﬁne a model, Uppaal uses a system deﬁnition , which
allows instantiating templates to processes . Here, it is possible
to bind the template’s parameters to actual values or deﬁne
partial instantiations to reuse similar processes. They are
composed concurrently to a system by enumerating them after
thesystem keyword.
C. Veriﬁcation
Uppaal allows checking different properties for a system
via model checking. Queries to the model express these
properties using a simpliﬁed version of Timed Computation
Tree Logic (TCTL) [13]. Queries consist of the path- and
state formulae, where state formulae describe individual states
and path formulae quantify over the model’s traces. Uppaal
does not allow the nesting of path formulae [11]. Such
formulae are categorized depending on their semantic and
matched runs. We explain the used state formulae and safety
formulae in the following sections. Additionally, the standard
version of Uppaal supports reachability formulae and liveness
formulae. Note that many extensions extend classical Uppaal,
for example, by examining statistical properties.
1) State Formulae: State formulae express the properties
of individual states without considering the model’s behavior.
They are similar to guards in that they are described by
side-effect-free expressions, for instance, x==42. Besides
statements over internal variables, it is also possible to test if
a automaton Ais in a certain location lby the expression A.l.
Internal state variables of a single Automaton are accessible in
the same way. Further, deadlocked states (where no outgoing
action transitions from the state or delayed successors are
possible) can be expressed via the keyword deadlock . [11]510 PROCEEDINGS OF THE FEDCSIS. SOFIA, BULGARIA, 2022

--- Page 7 ---
2) Safety Formulae: Safety Formulae describe that some-
thing bad will never happen . A general technique is to express
something bad in the model’s terms, for instance, the violation
of a deadline, and then invariantly assure that the model
never fulﬁlls this condition. Analogously, the model must
fulﬁll something good invariantly. Uppaal uses TCTL formulae
A¥φ, which are expressed in Uppaal as A[]φfor a state
formulaφ, expressing that φmust be true for all reachable
states. [11]
IV. V ERIFYING TIMELINESS
While it is possible to build a system in Uppaal reassem-
bling the whole SRL and ﬁnd a suitable formula to describe
timeliness in this model, we decided to abstract from this
approach for multiple reasons. First, we are only interested in
the property of timelines. Therefore, it is feasible to abstract
from unnecessary parts of the protocol. Our model abstracts
the exact Protocol Data Unit shown in Table I while keeping
each message’s sequence and time information. Note that it is
possible to omit CSsince the receiver will discard messages if
the plausibility checks fail as described in section II-C. Also,
by maintaining an appropriate communication channel model,
one can abstract from the RL, leaving only a concentrated
portion of the protocol for veriﬁcation. It is possible to reduce
this model further since we are only interested in the timeliness
of a single message, expressed as a round trip as shown
in Figure 3. This reduction is possible since RaSTA claims
to ensure timeliness for all time-critical messages, so it is
sufﬁcient to ﬁnd a single situation where RaSTA fails to do
so to show the violation of this property. This reduction aims
to ﬁnd a Uppaal model with only a few locations and internal
state variables.
Most model checking tools try to explore the whole state
space of the model by ﬁnding all possible execution paths
and states on them. This approach becomes infeasible quickly
since the number of possible states grows exponentially with
the number of used internal state variables. Ultimately, this
state space explosion leads to an infeasible time demand
for evaluating the properties. There exist ways to approach
this problem, such as symmetry reductions, but especially for
software veriﬁcation, this problem is still not solved [14]. This
issue emphasizes the importance of a compact and abstract
model.
A. Modelling assumptions
We discussed some possible abstractions and why they are
feasible at the beginning of this section. Such abstractions’
bases are usually on assumptions that restrict the system’s
modeled behavior in a certain way. While such abstractions
allow the formulation of a simpler model, it is essential
to ensure that the result is still a valid model of reality,
including all necessary aspects of the system to reason about
the properties of interest. Otherwise, the model might still be
correct but becomes irrelevant since it does not lead to any
desired statements.We have shown assumptions necessary to formalize the
speciﬁcation of RaSTA in Section II-E. The following sections
discuss the consequences of formalization and make assump-
tions regarding which aspects the model of the protocol stack
needs and which can be abstracted.
1) Redundancy Channels: As described in section II-E1,
we assume that the redundancy channels used in the RL lead
to possible violations of message sequence. Since we are not
interested in showing availability improvements, we decided to
abstract from the RL and model only the SRL. The underlying
communication channels are seen as per message, meaning
that a new virtual communication channel is available for
each message. Since Uppaal supports the dynamic instantiation
of templates only for statistical queries, we have to limit
ourselves to a constant number of available channels, thus
limiting the number of messages sent simultaneously. Since,
in real-world scenarios, communication always is limited by
a speciﬁc throughput, we ﬁnd this assumption feasible. We
restrict our analysis to the case where TAB< THB,max,A and
analogously for the values of B. This restriction allows the
assumption of FIFO channels so messages cannot overtake
each other. Alternating messages during transmission, leading
to discarding the message by its receiver, is still possible.
Such errors have the same impact on possible retransmissions
initiated by the SRL.
2) Message semantics: Heartbeat and Data messages share
the same information except for an empty application payload.
The sender sends Heartbeat messages only when the appli-
cation is ready to send ( Data ) messages in a deﬁned time
interval since the last message. Since RaSTA is independent
of the overlying application, we can use this fact to abstract
from both message types and reduce them to a single kind of
message.
3) Timestamp relationship: Since we aim to show timeli-
ness for a single message round trip, we can abstract from
the speciﬁc values of the timestamps and use a relative
representation during this round trip. Additionally, such a
relative representation can abstract from the actual values since
only the relationship between their corresponding send- and
receive-events is necessary to capture the behavior, as shown in
Figure 3. Hence, we directly represent the relationship between
the ongoing time and the messages TSandCTS values using
state variables.
4) Message Sequence: Another critical assumption is that
the speciﬁc values of the sequence numbers and conﬁrmed
sequence numbers do not matter to show the timeliness of
a single message. The sequence numbers are used to trigger
retransmission if SNinSeq is false, as described in Section
II-C. The receiver sets this ﬂag if two consecutive messages do
not have consecutive sequence numbers. To be able to abstract
from the speciﬁc values, we inform the receiver of a message
about the alternation of the message. In reality, the receiver
would check the message’s integrity via the safety code and
discard it if the check fails. Hence, we update SNinSeq
before the reception of the following message. The receiver
can then react appropriately based on this information byBILLY NAUMANN, CHRISTINE JAKOBS, MATTHIAS WERNER: FORMAL ANALYSIS OF TIMELINESS IN THE RASTA PROTOCOL 511

--- Page 8 ---
Fig. 6: Model of the RaSTA Receiver
engaging in a retransmission handshake.
5) Immediate Responses: We assume that the sender will
not delay messages from being sent immediately. There are
two signiﬁcant points in the protocol where this is important:
The initial ConnReq, ConnResp, HB handshake to establish
the connection and the handshake to perform retransmission,
including the transmission of the RetrData messages carrying
the previously lost messages. As stated in II-E2, [1] covers this
not explicitly: The visualizations show a delay of one time unit
per message while the descriptions state that the sender has to
send messages immediately.
6) Number of retransmitted messages: When a message is
lost, the sender of this message must retransmit all uncon-
ﬁrmed messages, as described in Section II-C. Such messages
may be sent before the modeled round trip. Hence, it is im-
possible in our model to ﬁnd a representation of the messages
to be retransmitted. However, the only information about these
messages we care about is if one of them will complete
the current round trip. Especially the ﬁnal HBmessage will
contain the CTS > t information. Therefore, we reduced
the set of retransmitted messages to a single one carrying
the relevant information. This reduction is feasible since we
already assumed that there is no additional delay between
immediately sent messages in Section IV-A5.
B. Model and Veriﬁcation
In this section, we show our model and the analysis of the
SRL of RaSTA in Uppaal based on the assumptions shown in
the previous sections. Since we want to model a single round
trip, our model uses asymmetrical behavior, even if the RaSTA
protocol is symmetrical after connection establishment. Hence,
individual templates in Uppaal model sender and receiver.The channel is also an individual template model, which is
instantiable multiple times to enable communication between
sender and receiver.
Since we abstract from the speciﬁc values of the timestamps,
it is necessary to model the relation between the reference
pointt7when the receiver sends an initial message and the
values ofTS_R andCTS_R . We deﬁned constant values EQ_T
andGT_T to express if a received (conﬁrmed) timestamp is
equal to or greater than t7. Transmitted messages carry this
information instead of concrete time information.
Both sender and receiver use a clock T_HB . This clock
represents the time since sending the last heartbeat message.
With appropriate location invariants and action guards, we
enforce that both communication partners never send two
consecutive messages more than T_HB_max time units apart,
where the concrete value depends on the chosen parameter
for sender and receiver. Additionally, we use a clock Tfor the
receiver model to indicate the current time during the round
trip, by which the receiver determines the duration until the
arrival in the End location, where this clock is stopped.
Further, sender and receiver use urgent states whenever a
message is received and during retransmissions. This reﬂects
that the time for the evaluation of the messages header and
the decision of the upcoming actions is negligible and serves
as an implementation of assumption in section II-E2.
The upcoming sections describe the individual templates.
1) Receiver: The Receivers model is shown in Figure 6.
As the evaluation of a message’s round trip time depends
on a deﬁned reference timestamp, the receiver starts sending
a message carrying its current timestamp t7inTS, which
is implemented in the send_msg(MSG, TS_S) update. At
this pointTS_S has the value EQ_T and is updated to GT_T512 PROCEEDINGS OF THE FEDCSIS. SOFIA, BULGARIA, 2022

--- Page 9 ---
Fig. 7: Model of the RaSTA Sender
after the message is sent. The receiver will use this information
for sending all further messages. He will reside in the location
Waiting until either a new message has to be sent or a
message is received or indicated as lost. By the assumption
in section IV-A2, we abstract from distinct HB and Data
messages at this point. We do not abstract from RetrReq
messages. Such messages are identiﬁed via the msg_type
variable and handled appropriately. The clock T_HB together
with the location’s invariant and the transition guards constrain
the time between sending such messages. When a message is
indicated as lost, the receiver sets SNinSeq = false . In
reality, this would happen later when the following message
is received, but since this is causally dependent on a lost
message in our model, we decided to set this ﬂag at this point.
When a message is received, the receiver checks SNinSeq
and either updates its CTS_R value based on the information
in the message or triggers retransmission. If the message is a
RetrReq , indicated by msg_type == RREQ , the according
RetrResp message is sent immediately, carrying GT_T as its
timestamp. By assumption in Section II-E3, this is the only
message necessary to complete this retransmission in our
model. Otherwise, and when no retransmission is necessary,
the receiver either returns to the Waiting location when
the received CTS value is less or equal to t7, i.e.,CTS_R
!= GT_T . In the same case, he moves to the End location,
indicating that a new reference timestamp was conﬁrmed
by the sender via CTS_R == GT_T , thus ending the round
trip. If retransmission is necessary, the receiver will initiate
the corresponding handshake by sending the RREQ messageand transitioning to the RetransRequested location. Here
the receiver continues to send messages as in the Waiting
location and waits until the retransmitted messages arrive.
All other messages with msg_type != RRESP are ignored,
their information will be part of the RetrResp message. Upon
receiving his message, the receiver evaluates the contained
CTS_R as for regular messages.
2) Sender: In our model, the sender takes the role of send-
ing the messages whose timeliness is subject to veriﬁcation.
The sender starts by receiving the reference point t7as its
ﬁrst message, represented by the value of TS_R , which is
EQ_T at this point. At this point, the sender transitions into
theResponding location. From here on, the model is similar
to the receiver, differing only in interpreting the message’s
timing information. Where the receiver uses this information
in theCTS_R variable, the sender uses it to update the state
of theTS_R variable. Also, the End location is absent since
the sender is not informed about ﬁnishing the round trip.
3) Channel: As described in Section IV-A1, we model the
RL and underlying channels as per message. Uppaal supports
the dynamic instantiation of templates only for statistical
queries. Hence we are forced to limit our model by over-
approximating the number of sent messages. At this point,
a single channel will act synchronously, only accepting mes-
sages for transmission when it is in Idle and only allowing
the delivery returning from the Transmitting location, as
shown previously in Figure 5. As long as the channel is in
locationIdle , its clock tis stopped at 0by the location’s
invariant. When a message is accepted via the in? co-action,
the channel transitions to the Transmitting location, andBILLY NAUMANN, CHRISTINE JAKOBS, MATTHIAS WERNER: FORMAL ANALYSIS OF TIMELINESS IN THE RASTA PROTOCOL 513

--- Page 10 ---
after at most the worst-case transmission delay delay the
message is either delivered or lost. Both cases are modeled
as a transition back to the Idle state, resetting both the
internal state of the channel and its local clock t. Only for
successful transmission, the channel copies the message to the
receiver’s buffer out_msg , the receiver is synchronized here
via theout! co-action. The co-action lost! is used for a
faulty transmission, where the channel ignores the message’s
contents. In the case of an erroneous transmission, the channel
also decrements the variable num_losable_msgs to0to
indicate that no further messages should be lost.
4) Veriﬁcation and Results: Since, in our model, the ab-
sence of missed deadlines describes timeliness, the formulation
of the property is possible as a safety formula, stating that there
is no case of deadline violation. We checked both the original
value shown in Equation 1 as well our adapted deadline shown
in Equation 4 via the following formulae for veriﬁcation in
Uppaal, where both the values for TDL,max andT2
DL,max
are calculated as the bounds based on the parameters for the
heartbeat and worst-case transmission times in Uppaal.
A¥(Receiver.End =óReceiver.T fTDL,max) (5)
A¥(Receiver.End =óReceiver.T fT2
DL,max) (6)
Since Uppaal doesn’t allow symbolic constants for
model parameters, we used the values THB,max,A = 5 ,
THB,max,B = 3, andTAB=TBA= 1, resulting in the
boundsTDL,max= 13 andT2
DL,max= 17 . With these values,
we could show that the proposed bound TDL,max by [1] is
violated while our bound is still satisﬁed.
Even though we aim to instantiate channels for each mes-
sage individually, the increased state space limits the feasibility
of the evaluation. We decided to restrict the channel model
to FIFO channels by instantiating only one pair of channels
between sender and receiver. As shown in section IV-A1,
this limits the validity of our results to the case where
TAB< THB,max,A , as in this case, heartbeats are not affected
by unavailable channels.
We were able to show for a few selected values that
this property holds, but a general statement for all possible
assignments is not possible in this way. However, our model
can be used to verify the timeliness of a concrete RaSTA
communication instance within our assumptions.
V. C ONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Safety-critical systems, such as railroad communication
networks, demand a clear and comprehensible analysis of
all aspects that potentially affect the correctness and safety
of the user and the environment. Our analysis shows where
the speciﬁcation of RaSTA is unclear regarding timeliness.
We were able to show that the recommended deadline for
the RaSTA communication protocol is not guaranteed to hold
for the corresponding error scenario. This inherent violationdemonstrates that using formal methods for software veriﬁca-
tion is a viable approach not only to show formal correctness
where necessary but also to elucidate underlying assumptions.
While we were able to show that the proposed bound is not
sufﬁcient, we could not provide a complete formal veriﬁcation
of the correctness of our bound. This open end is caused pri-
marily by inherent problems of model checking, e.g., the state
space explosion when stepping back from speciﬁc abstractions,
such as using concrete timestamps instead of our approach.
We aim to encounter the use of more general communication
channels by lifting our FIFO assumption. Also, we will deal
with more complex scenarios, for example, where the worst-
case transmission delay is higher than the deadline for sending
heartbeats.
REFERENCES
[1] “Electric signalling systems for railways - part 200: Safe transmission
protocol according to DIN EN 50159 (VDE 0831-159),” Jun. 2015.
[2] Home - Uppaal. Date accessed: 2022-21-04. [Online]. Available:
https://uppaal.org
[3] “Railway applications - communication, signalling and processing sys-
tems - safety-related communication in transmission systems; german
version EN 50159:2010,” Apr. 2011.
[4] R. L. Rivest, “The MD4 Message-Digest Algorithm,” Internet Requests
for Comments, April 1992, http://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc1320.txt.
[Online]. Available: http://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc1320.txt
[5] M. Heinrich, J. Vieten, T. Arul, and S. Katzenbeisser, “Security
analysis of the rasta safety protocol,” in 2018 IEEE International
Conference on Intelligence and Security Informatics (ISI) , 2018. doi:
10.1109/ISI.2018.8587371 pp. 199–204.
[6] J. Bengtsson, K. G. Larsen, F. Larsson, P. Pettersson, and W. Yi,
“Uppaal—a tool suite for automatic veriﬁcation of Real–Time
Systems,” BRICS Report Series , vol. 3, no. 58, Jun. 1996. doi:
10.7146/brics.v3i58.18769. [Online]. Available: https://tidsskrift.dk/
brics/article/view/18769
[7] L. Lamport, “A fast mutual exclusion algorithm,” ACM Trans. Comput.
Syst., vol. 5, no. 1, p. 1–11, jan 1987. doi: 10.1145/7351.7352. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/7351.7352
[8] K. G. Larsen, P. Pettersson, and W. Yi, “Compositional and Symbolic
Model-Checking of Real-Time Systems,” in Proc. of the 16th IEEE Real-
Time Systems Symposium . IEEE Computer Society Press, Dec. 1995.
doi: 10.1109/REAL.1995.495198 pp. 76–87.
[9] ——, “Diagnostic model-checking for real-time systems,” in Hybrid
Systems III . Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 1996. doi:
10.1007/BFb0020977. ISBN 978-3-540-68334-6 pp. 575–586.
[10] K. Havelund, A. Skou, K. G. Larsen, and K. Lund, “Formal modeling
and analysis of an audio/video protocol: An industrial case study using
uppaal,” in Proceedings Real-Time Systems Symposium . IEEE, 1997.
doi: 10.1109/REAL.1997.641264 pp. 2–13.
[11] G. Behrmann, A. David, and K. G. Larsen, A Tutorial on
Uppaal , ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Berlin, Heidelberg:
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2004, vol. 3185, p. 200–236. ISBN 978-
3-540-23068-7. [Online]. Available: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/
978-3-540-30080-9_7
[12] Uppaal documentation. Date accessed: 2022-21-04. [Online]. Available:
https://docs.uppaal.org/
[13] T. Henzinger, X. Nicollin, J. Sifakis, and S. Yovine, “Symbolic model
checking for real-time systems,” Information and Computation , vol. 111,
no. 2, p. 193–244, Jun 1994. doi: 10.1006/inco.1994.1045
[14] E. M. Clarke, W. Klieber, M. Nová ˇcek, and P. Zuliani, Model
Checking and the State Explosion Problem , ser. Lecture Notes in
Computer Science. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg,
2012, vol. 7682, p. 1–30. ISBN 978-3-642-35745-9. [Online]. Available:
http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-3-642-35746-6_1514 PROCEEDINGS OF THE FEDCSIS. SOFIA, BULGARIA, 2022
