--- Page 1 ---
Aalborg Universitet
Statistical Performance Verification of FCS-MPC Applied to Three Level Neutral Point
Clamped Converter
Novak, Mateja; Nyman, Ulrik Mathias; Dragicevic, Tomislav; Blaabjerg, Frede
Published in:
Proceedings of 2018 20th European Conference on Power Electronics and Applications (EPE'18 ECCE Europe)
Publication date:
2018
Document Version
Accepted author manuscript, peer reviewed version
Link to publication from Aalborg University
Citation for published version (APA):
Novak, M., Nyman, U. M., Dragicevic, T., & Blaabjerg, F. (2018). Statistical Performance Verification of FCS-
MPC Applied to Three Level Neutral Point Clamped Converter. In Proceedings of 2018 20th European
Conference on Power Electronics and Applications (EPE'18 ECCE Europe) (pp. 1-10). Article 8515598 IEEE
Press. https://www.scopus.com/record/display.uri?eid=2-s2.0-
85056990476&origin=inward&txGid=61a2d2075d383c20252f0ba8217de483
General rights
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright owners
and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
            - Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the public portal for the purpose of private study or research.
            - You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit-making activity or commercial gain
            - You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the public portal -
Take down policy
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us at vbn@aub.aau.dk providing details, and we will remove access to
the work immediately and investigate your claim.

--- Page 2 ---
Downloaded from vbn.aau.dk on: April 01, 2026

--- Page 3 ---
Statistical Performance V eriﬁcation of FCS-MPC Applied to Three Level
Neutral Point Clamped Converter
Mateja Novak1, Ulrik Mathias Nyman2, Tomislav Dragicevic1, and Frede Blaabjerg1
1Department of Energy Technology, Aalborg University, Aalborg, Denmark
2Department of Computer Science, Aalborg University,Aalborg, Denmark
Email: nov@et.aau.dk, ulrik@cs.aau.dk, tdr@et.aau.dk, fbl@et.aau.dk
Keywords
/lessmuchConverter control /greatermuch,/lessmuchRobustness /greatermuch,/lessmuchStatistics/greatermuch,/lessmuchUninterruptible Power Supply (UPS) /greatermuch,
/lessmuchV oltage Source Converter (VSC) /greatermuch
Abstract
In this paper we demonstrate how a statistical model checking approach can be used to check the dy-
namic performance of the ﬁnite set model predictive control algorithm for a standalone 3-level neutral
point diode clamped converter. The robustness of the control algorithm under parameter uncertainty isalso analyzed. Finite control set model predictive control (FCS-MPC) algorithm has found many applica-tions in power electronics due to the straightforward control design and the possibility to include differentcontrol objectives. The control algorithm for 3-level neutral point diode clamped (NPC) converter has toaddress several objectives to provide optimal reference tracking during load transients. Therefore, look-ing from the perspective of the implementation, the FCS-MPC algorithm suits the control requirementsof NPC converter. However, the problem remains in performing an analytical performance veriﬁcationof the algorithm to demonstrate its robustness, which is compulsory for any industrial application. In thispaper, we present how a statistical model checking approach can be used to solve this problem and alsoprovide valuable data about the algorithm’s performance during transients and in the case of parameteruncertainty. A benchmark model is created in Matlab/Simulink to validate the correct system modelingin UPPAAL SMC toolbox.
Introduction
The basic concept of using a higher number of switching devices and sources with the aim to reach higherpower levels was introduced in 1975 [1]. Today the usage of the multilevel converters is unavoidable inthe medium and high voltage applications. However, with the higher number of switching devices andvoltage sources, the complexity of control algorithms has also increased, since multilevel topologiesintroduce additional control objectives. For the Neutral Point Clamped (NPC) topology shown in Fig. 1the additional objective might be the neutral point voltage balancing. During the switching states whenthe neutral point is clamped to the converter output to achieve zero voltage output, a current is ﬂowingthrough the clamping diode resulting in an unbalanced capacitor charging/discharging process. Bothlinear and non-linear algorithms are successfully dealing with the issue using various methods presentedin the literature e.g. [2–6]. Linear methods are dominating in applications as the algorithms are wellknown and have matured over time. However, in this paper we will address the non-linear algorithmsfrom the family of predictive control algorithms. Simple implementation of the control objectives in thecost function is one of the main reasons why Model Predictive Control (MPC) is preferred over linearcontrol algorithms. By adjusting the weighting factors in the cost function the control objective prioritiesof the algorithm can easily be changed.

--- Page 4 ---
3UHGLFWLYH
PRGHO&RVWIXQFWLRQ
PLQLPL]DWLRQYFN
LIN
LRN OHYHO13&
6DEFN/2$'
&I/I
/I
/ID
E
F
YFDEFLRD
LRE
LRFLID
LIE
LIF
YFN9GF&GF
&GF1LGFLGF
LGF
YGFN
YGFN&I &I/&ILOWHU
YGFYGF
Fig. 1: Simpliﬁed system model scheme of stand-alone NPC converter using model predictive control.
One of the most intuitive algorithms in the MPC family is the Finite Control Set (FCS) MPC algorithm
with a prediction horizon length n= 1. In [7] dynamic response and tracking reference of the FCS-MPC
algorithm are compared to the responses obtained by a linear controller. The implemented FCS-MPCalgorithm succeeded in maintaining the dc link voltage balance and reducing the switching frequency.Moreover, no interaction between the load current components and a lower tracking error were observedfor the FCS-MPC. It is stressed that the method can easily be implemented in the available DSPs andthere is no need for large look up tables or additional control blocks in order to achieve the capacitorvoltage balance. FCS-MPC can also be used with a modulator to maintain a ﬁxed switching frequency asimplemented in [8] or by using commutation limitations as demonstrated in [9]. Although the FCS-MPCalgorithms were successfully implemented, to the authors best knowledge, the analytically veriﬁcationof the algorithm’s performance and robustness are yet to be done [10, 11]. For the control algorithm tobe applicable in the industry, it is required to know how it will respond to dynamics and how parameteruncertainty affects its reference tracking abilities. In other words, stability assessment of the closedloop control is needed. Steady-state and transient performance testing are usually done by runningmultiple simulations or experiments [12–14]. Unfortunately, these methods do not deﬁne the closed loopstability and running multiple experiments is rather time consuming and unpractical. The most relevantcontribution in this area was done in [15], where the authors designed a cost function so that Lyapunovstability theory could be used to guarantee the stability of the FCS-MPC algorithm. Still the stability isguaranteed only in the neighborhood of the system reference and the cost function design lost the simplestructure it had before.
To be applicable for use by industrial engineers, the approach for analytical validation should remain as
simple as the control design and it should be adaptable to all topologies. Running multiple simulations
does sound promising but there are certain questions that need to be answered so the procedure can beaddressed as a veriﬁed method:
•How many simulation runs are required to determine the performance?
•How can we design the model to evaluate all possible transient responses and model uncertainties
needed for the robustness test?
•Can we guarantee the reliability of the validation process?
Also some events have a higher occurrence rate and some events are more seldom so they should have anappropriate effect on the ﬁnal results. In this paper we will present a promising approach that can answerthese questions. Statistical model checking (SMC) is an approach that uses powerful tools from statisticsto evaluate the models and obtains results about their behavior with deﬁned reliability of the validationprocess. One of the tools that can be used to perform the SMC is U
PPAAL SMC [16]. Using the Veriﬁer
feature in U PPAAL SMC, the performance of a deterministic or stochastic controller can be veriﬁed in

--- Page 5 ---
a stochastic environment. By running several consecutive simulations in a time efﬁcient manner it will
estimate the probability of the speciﬁed event with conﬁdence levels and its probability distribution.Simulation outcomes are visualized in the form of probability distributions, evolution of the number ofruns with timed bounds and computation of expected values. Schedulability analysis, veriﬁcation ofbiological systems and performance evaluation of controller strategies are some of published U
PPAAL
toolbox applications [16–19]. The system model under performance validation will be described in thenext section. Afterwards we will illustrate the idea behind the SMC and how this approach is suitable forFCS-MPC performance validation. The results will be presented in the last section.
System model
The FSC-MPC algorithm performance veriﬁcation will be presented on a 3L-NPC converter in stan-dalone operation with an LC output ﬁlter and a resistive load as seen in Fig. 1. The execution of thealgorithm can be summed up in a couple of steps that are iteratively conducted during every samplingperiod T
s:
•measurement of the system voltages ( vdc1,vdc2,vc) and currents ( if,io) needed for calculation of
the predicted values
•calculation of the predicted system voltages and currents for all possible converter switching states
•cost function value calculation for each prediction
•selection of the converter switching state that minimizes the cost function
•application of the selected switching state
The calculation of the predicted system voltages and currents is based on the differential equations de-scribing the converter DC and AC side dynamics. The DC side dynamics are modeled through the DClink capacitor charging equations:
v
dc1,2(t)= Cdc1,2didc1,2(t)
dt(1)
idc1(t)= idc(t)−(H1aifa(t)+ H1bifb(t)+ H1bifb(t)) (2)
idc2(t)= idc(t)+( H2aifa(t)+ H2bifb(t)+ H1bifb(t)) (3)
where vdc1,2(t)are voltages across the capacitors Cdc1and Cdc2and idc1,2(t)are the respective charging
currents. idc(t)is the DC source current, if abc(t)are the inverter phase currents, H1xand H2xare indicator
functions. H1xwill return 1 if the phase leg x∈a,b,cis connected to Vdc/2 while H2xreturns 1 if the
phase leg is connected to −Vdc/2, otherwise the function values are 0. The AC side dynamics can be
described by LC output ﬁlter equations in the stationary αβframe:
ifαβ(t)= Cfdv cαβ(t)
dt+ioαβ(t) (4)
viαβ(t)= Lfdifαβ(t)
dt+vcαβ(t) (5)
where ifαβand ioαβare the inductor and load currents, vcαβand viαβare ﬁlter capacitor and inverter
output voltages, Lfand Cfare ﬁlter inductance and capacitance. These system equations are discretized
using the Euler forward method and afterwards used to calculate the future states of system voltages andcurrents. The designed cost function for the NPC converter includes three objectives: minimization ofthe reference tracking error, neutral point voltage balancing and minimization of commutation number

--- Page 6 ---
during two sampling instants. In the algorithm this is formulated as follows:
g=( v∗
cα−vP
cα)2+( v∗
cβ−vP
cβ)2+λdgd+λdcgdc+λswgsw (6)
gd=( iP
fα−ioα+Cfωre f·v∗
β)2+( iP
fβ−ioβ−Cfωre f·v∗
α)2(7)
gdc=( vP
dc1−vP
dc2)2(8)
gsw=∑
x=a,b,c|Sx(k)−Sx(k−1)|, (9)
Weighting factors λd,λdcandλswdeﬁne the importance of each cost function part: the derivative part
(gd) is used to improve the reference tracking by taking into account the heading of the capacitor voltage
trajectory as demonstrated in [20], DC link balance part ( gdc) to minimize the difference between the
capacitor voltages caused by the ﬂow of the neutral point current while the converter leg is clamped tothe neutral point, and the switching frequency minimization part g
swto minimize the number of commu-
tations. The latter part is achieved by comparing the previous Sx(k−1)and current Sx(k)switching state
for all converter phase legs x∈a,b,c.
SMC approach in power electronics
In [16] SMC is deﬁned as a series of techniques that monitor several simulation runs of the system with
respect to some properties and afterwards use the results from the statistical theory in order to get anoverall estimate of the design correctness. To simplify, the system is simulated for a ﬁnite number ofruns, resulting in a number of samples that are used to test the speciﬁed hypothesis. For hypothesistesting, tools from statistics like Monte Carlo simulation or sequential hypothesis testing are used. Theend result of these tests is the probability of satisfaction or violation of the speciﬁed property. The SMCapproach is already successfully being used in aeronautics and embedded automotive systems, sensornetworks, communication systems to solve problems that are beyond the abilities of classical formaltechniques [17,19,21]. The tool used to perform the SMC in this paper is U
PPAAL SMC. U PPAAL SMC
was selected as it has all the necessary features to model a hybrid system that features both continuousand discrete behavior. Moreover, in [22] the performance of U
PPAAL SMC was compared to other tools
that implement the distributed SMC algorithms like U PPAAL SMC. The tests showed that U PPAAL SMC
is at least two orders of magnitude faster in the hypothesis testing.
The family of U PPAAL tools are all based on variants of Timed Automata [16]. So in order to apply the
SMC approach on the system in Fig. 1 we have to describe the system behavior using Timed Automata.First, let’s explain a simple automaton (state machine) structure in Fig. 2. It can be seen that this
automaton has three locations:
InitialState ,HighLoad and LowLoad . To every location we’ve assigned a
value of the variable Rload . The transitions from one location to the other is driven by the clock variable
ywhich value is reset after each transition. A clock is a special type of variable, whose domain consists
of non-negative real numbers. When an automaton is waiting in a location and time is passing then thevalue of its clocks are increasing. Each location has the invariant
y<700, which deﬁnes the maximum
clock value for which the system can stay at each location. The transition edges have guards y>100and
they determine the minimum clock value that has to be reached before the system is allowed to changethe location. In other words, transitions will occur in each simulation run for a clock value between100<y<700. The exact transition time is not predeﬁned, it is random and in this case all clock values
between 100 <y<700 have an equal likelihood to trigger the transition i.e the probability distribution
of the transition is uniform. Because of this ability to randomly change the location i.e. the load value, alot of different simulation runs can be performed to see how the control algorithm of the converter willrespond to transient load changes that occur at different moments.
The same modeling principle is now applied to all model components of the system. The core element of
the system, the converter, is a Timed Automata with 27 locations, which describe the switching vectorsof the converter. Instead of a clock variable that represented the time, system currents and voltages

--- Page 7 ---
Fig. 2: Load model Timed Automata in U PPAAL Statistical Model Checker.
are now used as clock variables to drive the Timed Automata and they are deﬁned by the differential
equations e.g. (1). Which transition in the converter Timed Automata will occur depends on the resultof the cost function of the FCS-MPC. As mentioned before there are series of statistical algorithms thatwill monitor the system simulations. The system veriﬁcation starts by determining a system hypothesiswe want to check e.g the difference between the reference and the control variable to stay below 5%during transient load changes. Next the reliability of the validation process is speciﬁed, for obtaining avery high reliability a lot of simulation samples are necessary. Afterwards using the Chernoff bound thetoolbox will determine the necessary number of simulations to calculate the probability of the hypothesisbeing satisﬁed [16]. Particularly, we can compare the probabilities of the difference value staying belowa speciﬁed threshold for different cost functions or under parameter uncertainties. Inherently, we will getinformation about the algorithm’s robustness. The system model design in UPPAAL is very adaptive andmodular, therefore adjusting the model to the different converter topologies is easy, it is only necessaryto edit the location number according to possible converter switching states and assign the correct outputvoltage values. However, by increasing the number of locations the time needed for evaluation of thequeries will also increase. More information about SMC and U
PPAAL SMC can be found in [23].
Algorithm performance veriﬁcation
The described system with the FCS-MPC algorithm was implemented in a Matlab/Simulink model andused for weighting factors selection of the cost function and also as a benchmark model for the U
PPAAL
model. Values of the model parameters are shown in Table I and they match the experimental set-upparameters in Fig. 3a. Weighting factors λ
d,λdcandλswwere determined performing several parameter
Table I: System parameters used for testing.
Parameter Value
DC-link voltage ( Vdc) 520 V
DC-link capacitors ( Cdc1,Cdc2) 4m F
Output ﬁlter inductance ( Lf) 2.4 mH
Output ﬁlter capacitance ( Cf)1 5 μF
Load resistance ( Rload)6 0 Ω
Reference voltage and frequency ( Vre f,fre f) 230 V , 50 Hz
Sampling time ( Ts)2 5 μs
sweep simulations where λdcwas ﬁrst kept ﬁxed while λdandλswwere varied. In the later simulations
the roles were switched and the λdcvalue was varied. Total harmonic distortion (THD) factor of the
output voltage and average switching frequency fsw avgwere used as performance variables to select the
optimum weighting factors as shown on Fig. 4a and Fig. 4b. The average switching frequency can be

--- Page 8 ---
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 3: 3L-NPC experimental set-up and measured results: (a) 3L-NPC experimental set-up. (b) Mea-
sured load voltage vo abc (THD = 1.13%, fsw avg = 3.2 kHz). (c) Measured load current ioaand ﬁlter
current ifa.
0 0.5 1 1.5 2
d00.511.52sw
0.511.52Selected weighting factors
(a)0 0.5 1 1.5 2
d00.511.52sw
400045005000 Selected weighting factors
(b)
Fig. 4: Inﬂuence of the weighting factor selection on : (a) Capacitor voltage THD. (b) Average switching
frequency.
calculated using the following expression:
fsw avg=n
∑
i=1fsw ai+fsw bi+fsw ci
12, i∈1,2,3,4 (10)
where n=4 represents the number of switches in each phase leg. The values λd= 0.9, λdc= 1 and
λsw= 1.95 were selected and used in the further analysis. The control algorithm was also veriﬁed on an
experimental set-up shown in Fig. 3a, which includes a Semikron 3L SKiiP28MLI07E3V1 EvaluationInverter, MicroLabBox DS1202 PowerPC DualCore 2 GHz processor board and DS1302 I/O board fromdSpace. Good reference tracking results and low ripple in both load and ﬁlter current were obtained as it

--- Page 9 ---
 Time (s) Capacitor voltage (V) Vc
 Vc
(a) Time (s) Capacitor voltage (V) Vc
 Vc
(b)
Fig. 5: Output voltage in αβframe in (a) Simulink model. (b) U PPAAL system model.
 Time (s) Diff(%)
(a)0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5
Time (s) 10-3510152025 Voltage vector nr.Simulink model
UPPAAL model
(b)
Fig. 6: Simulation results from U PPAAL model: (a) Output voltage error. (b) Selected voltage vectors in
Simulink and U PPAAL model.
is seen in Fig. 3. Before starting the algorithm performance veriﬁcation, to demonstrate the correctness
of the U PPAAL model we present the resulting output voltage and its reference trajectory in the stationary
αβframe and the selected optimal voltage vectors (1-27) in the cost function minimization in Simulink
model and U PPAAL model. To each output voltage vector of 3L-NPC was assigned a number from (1-
27). As it can be seen in Fig. 5 and Fig. 6a the model features good reference tracking abilities in steadystate and the exact vector selection proves the matching behavior of both models shown in Fig. 6b.
The performance of the algorithm is tested through queries for time interval of 40 ms:
diff =( v
∗
α−vm
α)2+( v∗
β−vm
β)2(11)
where v∗
αand v∗
βare the real and imaginary parts of reference voltage vector v∗(k),vm
αand vm
βare the
values of measured output voltage vm
c(k). Second query is assessing the simple moving average value
(SMA ) of the difference calculated on n= 10 sample group.
SMA = SMA prev+diffM
n−diffM−n
n(12)
During each simulation run the value of the load is changing randomly in order to check the reference
tracking abilities of the control algorithm through all possible transients. The queries were also testedunder parameter uncertainties to check how much false estimation of the output ﬁlter parameters willaffect the algorithm performance. The results are presented in Table II with 95% reliability of the proba-bility estimation process ( ε= 0.05). A low number of the runs is also an indicator if some event is likely
to happen or not i.e for the ﬁrst query diff<3% the probability is close to 0, meaning the chances that the
difference stays below 3% is very low. On the contrary the query diff<6% has the estimated probability

--- Page 10 ---
Table II: Query probability results from U PPAAL SMC toolbox veriﬁer.
Query Parameter uncertainty Probability No. of sim. runs
di f f <3% 0 0 - 0.097 36
di f f <6% 0 0.874 - 0.974 111
di f f <3% 30% 0 - 0.097 36
di f f <6% 30% 0.901 - 0.999 54
di f f <6% -30% 0 - 0.097 36
di f f <8% -30% 0.415 - 0.515 400
di f f <10% -30% 0.774 - 0.874 238
SMA <3% 0 0 - 0.097 36
SMA <6% 0 0.878 - 0.978 104
SMA <3% 30% 0.013 - 0.112 88
SMA <6% 30% 0.887 - 0.987 88
SMA <6% -30% 0 - 0.097 36
SMA <8% -30% 0.394 - 0.494 397
SMA <10% -30% 0.812 - 0.912 196
close to 1, which means that we can be almost certain that query will be fulﬁlled.
The obtained results have conﬁrmed a good cost function design with high probability of the difference
staying below 6%. In the case of using 30% smaller parameter values of the LC ﬁlter then in the pre-diction model the probability of the difference staying below 6% will be very low, however with a highprobability it will still stay below 10% of the reference during all possible load transients, which is still avery good performance. Furthermore, when the values of the LC ﬁlter parameters were underestimatedin the prediction model the effect on the reference tracking performance was very minor and proving therobustness of the designed algorithm. This type of analytical performance evaluation can also provideuseful data for weighting factor selection or comparison of different cost functions.
Conclusion
In this paper the SMC approach was proposed to perform an analytical veriﬁcation of the FCS-MPCalgorithm for a standalone 3L-NPC converter dynamic performance. The discrete nature of the con-trol algorithm in a continuous system with the stochastic load model was successfully modeled in U
P-
PAAL SMC. A benchmark test with a Simulink model validated the correct modeling approach. Good
reference tracking abilities and the robustness of the FCS-MPC algorithm under parameter uncertainty,especially with underestimated parameter values in the prediction model were demonstrated. Althoughonly a standalone application was analyzed in this paper, the presented approach can add a great contri-bution for grid connected converter models. Through further development of the modeling approach, thebehavior of a more complex model predictive algorithms and converter topologies can also be veriﬁed.
References
[1] J. Rodriguez, J.-S. Lai, and F. Z. Peng, “Multilevel inverters: a survey of topologies, controls, and
applications,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron. , vol. 49, no. 4, pp. 724–738, Aug 2002.
[2] S. Payami, R. K. Behera, and A. Iqbal, “Dtc of three-level npc inverter fed ﬁve-phase induction
motor drive with novel neutral point voltage balancing scheme,” IEEE Trans. Power Electron. ,
vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 1487–1500, Feb 2018.

--- Page 11 ---
[3] K. Li, M. Wei, C. Xie, F. Deng, J. M. Guerrero, and J. C. Vasquez, “A generalized discontinuous
PWM based neutral point voltage balancing method for three-level NPC voltage source inverterwith switching losses reduction,” in Proc. IEEE Appl. Power Electron. Conf. Expo. , March 2017,
pp. 1816–1820.
[4] A. Lange and B. Piepenbreier, “Space vector modulation for 3-level neutral point clamped invert-
ers using predictive control methods for neutral point balancing,” in Proc. European Conf. Power
Electron. and Appl. , Sept 2017, pp. P.1–P.10.
[5] V . Yaramasu, B. Wu, M. Rivera, and J. Rodriguez, “Predictive current control and DC-link capacitor
voltages balancing for four-leg NPC inverters,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Ind. Electron. , May 2013,
pp. 1–6.
[6] B. Tai, C. Gao, X. Liu, and J. Lv, “A voltage balancing controller with fuzzy logic strategy for
neutral point clamped multilevel converter,” in Int. Conf. Elect. Machines and Systems , Oct 2014,
pp. 2490–2494.
[7] R. Vargas, P. Cortes, U. Ammann, J. Rodriguez, and J. Pontt, “Predictive control of a three-phase
neutral-point-clamped inverter,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron. , vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 2697–2705, Oct
2007.
[8] M. Rivera, M. Perez, C. Baier, J. Munoz, V . Yaramasu, B. Wu, L. Tarisciotti, P. Zanchetta, and
P. Wheeler, “Predictive current control with ﬁxed switching frequency for an npc converter,” inProc. IEEE Int. Symp. Ind. Electron. , June 2015, pp. 1034–1039.
[9] M. Norambuena, H. Yin, S. Dieckerhoff, and J. Rodriguez, “Improved ﬁnite control set model
predictive control with ﬁxed switching frequency for three phase NPC converter,” in Proc. PCIM
Eur . 2016 Int. Exhib. Conf. Power Electron. Intell. Motion Renewable Energy Energy Manage. ,
May 2016, pp. 1–8.
[10] S. Vazquez, J. Rodriguez, M. Rivera, L. G. Franquelo, and M. Norambuena, “Model predictive
control for power converters and drives: Advances and trends,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron. , vol. 64,
no. 2, pp. 935–947, Feb 2017.
[11] V . Yaramasu and B. Wu, Model Predictive Control of Wind Energy Conversion Systems , ser. IEEE
Press Series on Power Engineering. Wiley, 2016.
[12] R. N. Fard, H. Nademi, and L. Norum, “Analysis of a modular multilevel inverter under the pre-
dicted current control based on ﬁnite-control-set strategy,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Elect. Power Energy
Convers. Syst , Oct 2013, pp. 1–6.
[13] J. Rodriguez, J. Pontt, C. A. Silva, P. Correa, P. Lezana, P. Cortes, and U. Ammann, “Predictive
current control of a voltage source inverter,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron. , vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 495–503,
Feb 2007.
[14] H. A. Young, M. A. Perez, J. Rodriguez, and H. Abu-Rub, “Assessing ﬁnite-control-set model pre-
dictive control: A comparison with a linear current controller in two-level voltage source inverters,”IEEE Ind. Electron. Mag. , vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 44–52, March 2014.
[15] R. P. Aguilera and D. E. Quevedo, “Predictive control of power converters: Designs with guaranteed
performance,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat. , vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 53–63, Feb 2015.
[16] A. David, K. G. Larsen, A. Legay, M. Miku ˇcionis, and D. B. Poulsen, “Uppaal SMC tutorial,” Int.
J. Softw. T ools T echnol. Transf. , vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 397–415, Aug. 2015.
[17] A. David, K. G. Larsen, A. Legay, and M. Miku ˇcionis, “Schedulability of herschel revisited using
statistical model checking,” Int. J. Softw. T ools T echnol. Transf. , vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 187–199, Apr.
2015.
[18] A. David, K. G. Larsen, A. Legay, M. Miku ˇcionis, D. B. Poulsen, and S. Sedwards, Runtime V eriﬁ-
cation of Biological Systems . Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2012, pp. 388–404.
[19] K. G. Larsen, M. Miku ˇcionis, M. Mu ˜niz, J. Srba, and J. H. Taankvist, Online and Compositional
Learning of Controllers with Application to Floor Heating . Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2016, pp.
244–259.
[20] T. Dragicevic, “Model predictive control of power converters for robust and fast operation of AC
microgrids,” IEEE Trans. Power Electron. , vol. 33, no. 7, pp. 6304–6317, July 2018.

--- Page 12 ---
[21] A. Boudjadar, A. David, J. Kim, K. Larsen, M. Miku ˇcionis, U. Nyman, and A. Skou, “Statistical
and exact schedulability analysis of hierarchical scheduling systems,” Science of Computer Pro-
gramming , vol. 127, pp. 103–130, 5 2016.
[22] P. Bulychev, A. David, K. Guldstrand Larsen, A. Legay, M. Miku ˇcionis, and D. Bøgsted Poulsen,
“Checking and distributing statistical model checking,” in NASA F ormal Methods , A. E. Goodloe
and S. Person, Eds. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2012, pp. 449–463.
[23] K. G. Larsen and A. Legay, On the Power of Statistical Model Checking . Springer International
Publishing, 2016, pp. 843–862.
