--- Page 1 ---
Adding Symmetry Reduction to Uppaal⋆
Martijn Hendriks1, Gerd Behrmann2, Kim Larsen2, Peter Niebert3⋆⋆, and Frits
Vaandrager1
1Nijmeegs Instituut voor Informatica en Informatiekunde,
University of Nijmegen, The Netherlands
{martijnh,fvaan }@cs.kun.nl
2Department of Computing Science,
Aalborg University, Denmark
{behrmann,kgl }@cs.auc.dk
3Laboratoire d’Informatique Fondementale, CMI,
Universit´ e de Provence, France
peter.niebert@lif.univ-mrs.fr
Abstract. We describe a prototype extension of the real-time model
checking tool Uppaal with symmetry reduction. The symmetric data
type scalarset , which is also used in the Mur ϕmodel checker, was added
toUppaal ’s system description language to support the easy static de-
tection of symmetries. Our prototype tool uses state swaps , described
and proven sound earlier by Hendriks, to reduce the space and memory
consumption of Uppaal . Moreover, the reduction strategy is canonical ,
which means that the symmetries are optimally used. For all examples
that we experimented with (both academic toy examples and industrial
cases), we obtained a drastic reduction of both computation time and
memory usage, exponential in the size of the scalar sets used.
1 Introduction
Model checking is a semi-automated technique for the validation and veriﬁcation
of all kinds of systems [8]. The approach requires the construction of a model of
the system and the deﬁnition of a speciﬁcation for the system. A model check-
ing tool then computes whether the model satisﬁes its speciﬁcation. Nowadays,
model checkers are available for many application areas, e.g., hardware systems
[10, 22], ﬁnite-state distributed systems [17], and timed and hybrid systems [21,
27, 25, 16].
Despite the fact that model checkers are relatively easy to use compared to
manual veriﬁcation techniques or theorem provers, they are not being applied on
a large scale. An important reason for this is that they must cope with the state
⋆Supported by the European Community Project IST-2001-35304 (AMETIST),
http://ametist.cs.utwente.nl .
⋆⋆Peter Niebert suggested the method for eﬃcient computation of canonical represen-
tatives at an AMETIST project meeting, and was therefore invited to join the list
of authors after acceptance of the paper.

--- Page 2 ---
space explosion problem, which is the problem of the exponential growth of the
state space as models become larger. This growth often renders the mechanical
veriﬁcation of realistic systems practically impossible: there just is not enough
time or memory available. As a consequence, much research has been directed
at ﬁnding techniques to ﬁght the state space explosion. One such a technique is
the exploitation of behavioral symmetries [18, 23, 20, 19, 12, 7]. The exploitation
offullsymmetries can be particularly proﬁtable, since its gain can approach a
factorial magnitude.
There are many timed systems which clearly exhibit full symmetry, e.g., Fis-
cher’s mutual exclusion protocol [1], the CSMA/CD protocol [24, 27], industrial
audio/video protocols [13], and distributed algorithms, for instance [4].
Motivated by these examples, the work presented in [14] describes how Up-
paal , a model checker for networks of timed automata [21, 3, 2], can be enhanced
with symmetry reduction. The present paper puts this work to practice: a proto-
type of Uppaal with symmetry reduction has been implemented. The symmetric
data type scalarset , which was introduced in the Mur ϕmodel checker [10], was
added to Uppaal ’s system description language to support the easy static detec-
tion of symmetries. Furthermore, the state swaps described and proven sound
in [14] are optimally used to reduce the space and time consumption of the
model checking algorithm. Run-time data is reported for the examples men-
tioned above, showing that symmetry reduction in a timed setting can be very
eﬀective.
Related work. Symmetry reduction is a well-known technique to reduce the
resource requirements for model checking algorithms, and it has been success-
fully implemented in model checkers such as Mur ϕ[10, 19], SMV [22], and Spin
[17, 6]. As far as we know, the only model checker for timed systems that exploits
symmetry is Red [25, 26]. The symmetry reduction technique used in Red, how-
ever, gives an over approximation of the reachable state space (this is called the
anomaly of image false reachability by the authors). Therefore, Red can only
be used to ensure that a state is notreachable when it is run with symmetry
reduction, whereas symmetry enhanced Uppaal can be used to ensure that a
state is reachable, or that it is not reachable.
Contribution. We have added symmetry reduction as used within Mur ϕ,
a well-established technique to combat the state space explosion problem, to
the real-time model checking tool Uppaal . For researchers familiar with model
checking it will come as no surprise that this combination can be made and
indeed leads to a signiﬁcant gain in performance. Still, the eﬀort required to
actually add symmetry reduction to Uppaal turned out to be substantial.
The soundness of the symmetry reduction technique that we developed for
Uppaal does not follow trivially from the work of Ip and Dill [19] since the de-
scription languages of Uppaal andMur ϕ, from which symmetries are extracted
automatically, are quite diﬀerent. In fact, the proof that symmetry reduction for
Uppaal is sound takes up more than 20 pages in [14].

--- Page 3 ---
The main theoretical contribution of our work is an eﬃcient algorithm for the
computation of a canonical representative. This is not trivial due to Uppaal ’s
symbolic representation of sets of clock valuations.
Many timed systems exhibit symmetries that can be exploited by our meth-
ods. For all examples that we experimented with, we obtained a drastic reduction
of both computation time and memory usage, exponential in the size of the scalar
sets used.
Outline. Section 2 presents a very brief summary of model checking and
symmetry reduction in general, while Sections 3 and 4 introduce symmetry re-
duction for the Uppaal model checker in particular. In Section 5, we present
run-time data of Uppaal ’s performance with and without symmetry reduction,
and Section 6 summarizes and draws conclusions.
A full version of the present paper including proofs of lemma 1 and of theorem
2 is available as [15].
2 Model Checking and Symmetry Reduction
This section brieﬂy summarizes the theory of symmetry presented in [19], which
is reused in a timed setting since (i) it has proven to be quite successful, and (ii)
it is designed for reachability analysis, which is the main purpose of the Uppaal
model checker. We simplify (and in fact generalize) the presentation of [19] using
the concept of bisimulations.
In general, a transition system is a tuple ( Q, Q 0, ∆), where Qis a set of
states, Q0⊆Qis a set of initial states, and ∆∈Q×Qis a transition relation
between states. Figure 1 depicts a general forward reachability algorithm which,
under the assumption that Qis ﬁnite, computes whether there exists a reachable
state qthat satisﬁes some given property φ(denoted by q|=φ).
(1) passed :=∅
(2) waiting :=Q0
(3) while waiting /negationslash=∅do
(4) get qfrom waiting
(5) ifq|=φthen return YES
(6) else if q /∈passed then
(7) add qtopassed
(8) waiting :=waiting ∪ {q/prime∈Q|(q, q/prime)∈∆}
(9) ﬁ
(10) od
(11) return NO
Fig. 1. A general forward reachability analysis algorithm.
Due to the state space explosion problem, the number of states of a transition
system frequently gets too big for the above algorithm to be practical. We would

--- Page 4 ---
like to exploit structural properties of transition systems (in particular symme-
tries) to improve its performance. Here the well-known notion of bisimulation
comes in naturally:
Deﬁnition 1 (Bisimulation). Abisimulation on some transition system, say
(Q, Q 0, ∆), is a relation R⊆Q×Qsuch that, for all (q, q/prime)∈R,
1.q∈Q0if and only if q/prime∈Q0,
2. if (q, r)∈∆then there exists an r/primesuch that (q/prime, r/prime)∈∆and(r, r/prime)∈R,
3. if (q/prime, r/prime)∈∆then there exists an rsuch that (q, r)∈∆and(r, r/prime)∈R.
Suppose that, before starting the reachability analysis of a transition system,
we know that a certain equivalence relation ≈is a bisimulation and respects the
predicate φin the sense that either all states in an equivalence class satisfy φor
none of them does. Then, when doing reachability analysis, it suﬃces to store
and explore only a single element of each equivalence class. To implement the
state space exploration, a representative function θmay be used that converts a
state to a representative of the equivalence class of that state:
∀q∈Q(q≈θ(q)) (1)
Using θ, we may improve the algorithm in Figure 1 by replacing lines 2 and 8,
respectively, by:
(2)waiting :={θ(q)|q∈Q0}
(8)waiting :=waiting ∪ {θ(q/prime)|(q, q/prime)∈∆}
It can easily be shown that the adjusted algorithm remains correct: for all (ﬁnite)
transition systems the outcomes of the original and the adjusted algorithm are
equal. If the representative function is “good”, which means that many equiva-
lent states are projected onto the same representative, then the number of states
to explore, and consequently the size of the passed set, may decrease dramati-
cally. However, in order to apply the approach, the following two problems need
to be solved:
–A suitable bisimulation equivalence that respects φneeds to be statically
derived from the system description.
–An appropriate representative function θneeds to be constructed that sat-
isﬁes formula (1). Ideally, θsatisﬁes q≈q/prime⇒θ(q) =θ(q/prime), in which case it
is called canonical .
In this paper, we use symmetries to solve these problems. As in [19], the
notion of automorphism is used to characterize symmetry within a transition
system. This is a bijection on the set of states that (viewed as a relation) is a
bisimulation. Phrased alternatively:
Deﬁnition 2 (Automorphism). Anautomorphism on a transition system
(Q, Q 0, ∆)is a bijection h:Q→Qsuch that

--- Page 5 ---
1.q∈Q0if and only if h(q)∈Q0for all q∈Q, and
2.(q, q/prime)∈∆if and only if (h(q), h(q/prime))∈∆for all q, q/prime∈Q.
LetHbe a set of automorphisms, let idbe the identity function on states,
and let G(H) be the closure of H∪{id}under inverse and composition. It can be
shown that G(H) is a group, and it induces a bisimulation equivalence relation
≈on the set of states as follows:
q≈q/prime⇐⇒ ∃ h∈G(H)(h(q) =q/prime) (2)
We introduce a symmetric data type to let the user explicitly point out the
symmetries in the model. Simple static checks can ensure that the symmetry that
is pointed out is not broken. Our approach to the second problem of coming up
with good representative functions consists of “sorting the state” w.r.t. some
ordering relation on states using the automorphisms. For instance, given a state
qand a set of automorphisms, ﬁnd the smallest state q/primethat can be obtained
by repeatedly applying automorphisms and their inverses to q. It is clear that
such a θsatisﬁes the correctness formula (1), since it is constructed from the
automorphisms only.
3 Adding Scalarsets to Uppaal
The tool Uppaal is a model checker for networks of timed automata extended
with discrete variables (bounded integers, arrays) and blocking, binary synchro-
nization as well as non-blocking broadcast communication (see for instance [21]).
In the remainder of this section we illustrate by an example Uppaal ’s descrip-
tion language extended with a scalarset type constructor allowing symmetric
data types to be syntactically indicated. Our extension is based on the notion of
scalarset ﬁrst introduced by Ip and Dill in the ﬁnite-state model checking tool
Mur ϕ[10, 19]. Also our extension is based on the C-like syntax to be introduced
in the forthcoming version 4.0 of Uppaal .
To illustrate our symmetry extension of Uppaal we consider Fischer’s mutual
exclusion protocol. This protocol consists of nprocess identical up to their unique
process identiﬁers. The purpose of the protocol is to insure mutual exclusion
on the critical sections of the processes. This is accomplished by letting each
process write its identiﬁer ( pid) in a global variable ( id) before entering its
critical section. If after some given lower time bound (say 2) idstill contains the
pidof the process, then it may enter its critical section.
A scalarset of size nmay be considered as the subrange {0,1, . . . , n −1}
of the natural numbers. Thus, the nprocess identiﬁers in the protocol can be
modeled using a scalarset with size n. In addition to the global variable id,
we use the array active to keep track of all active locations of the processes4.
Global declarations are the following:
4This array is actually redundant and not present in the standard formulations of the
protocol. However, it is useful for showing important aspects of our extension.

--- Page 6 ---
typedef scalarset[3] proc_id; // a scalarset type with size 3
proc_id id; // declaration of a proc_id
// variable
bool set; // declaration of a boolean
int active[proc_id]; // declaration of an array
// indexed by proc_id
The ﬁrst line deﬁnes proc idto be a scalarset type of size 3, and the second line
declares idto be a variable over this type. Thus scalarset is in our extension
viewed as a type constructor. In the last line we show a declaration of an array
indexed by elements of the scalarset proc id.
At this point the only thing missing is the declaration of the actual processes
in the system. In the description language of Uppaal , processes are obtained as
instances of parameterized process templates. In general, templates may contain
several diﬀerent parameters (e.g. bounded integers, clocks, and channels). In our
extension we allow in addition the use of scalarsets as parameters. In the case
of Fischer’s protocol the processes of the system are given as instances of the
template depicted in Figure 2. The template has one local clock, x, and no local
process Fischer (const proc id pid)
waitreq
x<=2idle
csset==0
active[pid]:=1,
x:=0
x:=0,
id:=pid,
set:=1,
active[pid]:=2set==0
x:=0,
active[pid]:=1
x>2,id==pid
active[pid]:=3set:=0.
active[pid]:=0
Fig. 2. The template for Fischer’s protocol.
variables. Note that the header of the template deﬁnes a (constant) scalarset
parameter pidof type proc id. Access to the critical section csis governed
by suitable updates and tests of the global scalarset variable idtogether with
upper and lower bound time constraints on when to proceed from requesting
access ( req) respectively proceed from waiting for access ( wait ). Note that all
transitions update the array active to reﬂect the current active location of the
process. The instantiation of this template and declaration of all three process
in the system can be done as follows:
FischerProcs = forall i in proc_id : Fischer(i);
system FischerProcs;

--- Page 7 ---
The forall construct iterates over all elements of a declared scalarset type. In
this case the iteration is over proc idand a set of instances of the template
Fischer is constructed and bound to FischerProcs . In the second line the ﬁnal
system is deﬁned to be precisely this set.
4 Using Scalarsets for Symmetry Reduction
As a preliminary to this section we brieﬂy mention the state representation of
Uppaal . A state is a tuple ( l, v, Z ), where lis the location vector, vis the integer
variable valuation, and Zis a zone, which is a convex set of clock valuations that
can eﬃciently be represented by a diﬀerence bounded matrix (DBM) [5, 9].
4.1 Extraction of Automorphisms
This subsection is a very brief summary of [14], to which we refer for further
details. The new syntax described in the previous section enables us to derive
the following information from a system description:
–A set Ωof scalarset types.
–For each α∈Ω: (i) a set Vαof variables of type α, and (ii) a set Dαof pairs
(a, n) where ais an array and nis a dimension of athat must be indexed
by variables of type αto ensure soundness. We assume that arrays that are
indexed by scalarsets do not contain elements of scalarsets. The reason is
that this would make computation of a canonical representative as hard as
testing for graph isomorphism.
–A partial mapping γ:P×Ω /arrowhookleft→Nthat gives for each process pand scalarset
αthe element of αwith which pis instantiated. This mapping is deﬁned by
quantiﬁcation over scalarsets in the process deﬁnition section.
This information enables us to derive so-called state swaps . Let Qbe the set
of states of some Uppaal model, and let αbe a scalarset type in the model with
sizen. A state swap swapα
i,j:Q→Qcan be deﬁned for all 0 ≤i < j < n , and
consists of two parts:
–The multiple process swap swaps the contributions to the state of all pairs of
processes pandp/primeif they originate from the same template and γ(p, α) =i,
γ(p/prime, α) =jandγ(p, β) =γ(p/prime, β) for all β/negationslash=α∈Ω. Swapping such a pair
of symmetric processes consists of interchanging the active locations and the
values of the local variables and clocks (note that this is not a problem since
the processes originate from the same template).
–The data swap swaps array entries iandjof all dimensions that are indexed
by scalarset α(these are given by the set Dα). Moreover, it swaps the value
iwith the value jfor all variables in Vα.
Consider the instance of Fischer’s mutual exclusion protocol (as described
in the previous section) with three processes. There are three swap functions:

--- Page 8 ---
swapproc id
0,1,swapproc id
0,2and swapproc id
1,2. Now consider the following state of the model
(the active location of the i-th process is given by liand the local clock of this
process is given by xi):
l :l0=idle, l1=wait, l2=cs
v :id= 2,set= 1
Z :x0= 4, x1= 3, x2= 2.5
active ;active [0] = 0,active [1] = 2,active [2] = 3
When we apply swapproc id
0,2to this state, the result is the following state:
l :l0=cs, l1=wait, l2=idle
v :id= 0,set= 1
Z :x0= 2.5, x1= 3, x2= 4
active ;active [0] = 3,active [1] = 2,active [2] = 0
The process swap swaps l0with l2, and x0with x2. The data swap ﬁrst changes
the value of the variable idfrom 2 to 0, since id∈Vproc id, and then swaps the
values of active [0] and active [2]. Applying swapproc id
1,2to this state gives the
following state:
l :l0=cs, l1=idle, l2=wait
v :id= 0,set= 1
Z :x0= 2.5, x1= 4, x2= 3
active ;active [0] = 3,active [1] = 0,active [2] = 2
Note that this swap does not change the value of id, since the scalarset elements
1 and 2 are interchanged and idcontains scalarset element 0.
A number of syntactic checks have been identiﬁed that ensure that the sym-
metry suggested by the scalarsets is not broken. These checks are very similar to
those originally identiﬁed for the Mur ϕveriﬁcation system [19]. For instance,
it is not allowed to use variables of a scalarset type for arithmetical operations
such as addition. The next soundness theorem has been proven in [14]:
Theorem 1 (Soundness). Every state swap is an automorphism.
As a result, the representative function θcan be implemented by minimiza-
tion of the state using the state swaps. Note that every state swap resembles a
transposition of the state. Hence, the equivalence classes induced by the state
swaps originating from a scalarset with size nconsist of at most n! states. The
maximal theoretical gain that can be achieved using this set of automorphisms
is therefore in the order of a factor n!.
4.2 Computation of Representatives
The representative of a state is deﬁned as the minimal element of the symmetry
class of that state w.r.t. a total order ≺on the symmetry class. In general,

--- Page 9 ---
the DBM representation of zones renders an eﬃcient canonical minimization
algorithm impossible, since minimization of a general DBM for any given total
order using state swaps is at least as diﬃcult as testing for graph isomorphism for
strongly regular graphs [14]. If we assume, however, that the timed automaton
that is analyzed resets its clocks to zero only, then the zones (DBMs) that
are generated by the forward state space exploration satisfy the nice diagonal
property . This property informally means that the individual clocks can always
be ordered using the order in which they were reset. To formalize this, three
binary relations on the set of clocks parameterized by a zone Zare deﬁned:
x/precedesorcurlyZy⇐⇒ ∀ ν∈Zν(x)≤ν(y) (3)
x≈Zy⇐⇒ ∀ ν∈Zν(x) =ν(y) (4)
x≺Zy⇐⇒ (x/precedesorcurlyZy∧ ¬(x≈Zy)) (5)
The diagonal property is then deﬁned as follows.
Lemma 1 (Diagonal Property). Consider the state space exploration algo-
rithm described in ﬁgure 6of [21]. Assume that the clocks are reset to the value
0 only. For all states (l, v, Z )stored in the waiting and passed list and for all
clocks xandyholds that either x≺Zy, orx≈Zyory≺Zx.
Using the reset order on clocks and the diagonal property, we can deﬁne a
total order, say ≺, on all states within a symmetry class whose minimal element
can be computed eﬃciently. To this end we ﬁrst assume a ﬁxed indexing of the
set of clocks X: a bijection ρ:X→ {1,2, . . . ,|X|}. Now note that ≈Zis an
equivalence relation that partitions XinP={X1, X2, . . . , X n}. We deﬁne a
relation on the cells of Pas follows:
Xi≤Xj⇐⇒/parenleftbig
∀x∈Xi,y∈Xjx/precedesequalZy/parenrightbig
(6)
Clearly this is a total order on P. Let Xibe a cell of P. The code ofXi,
denoted by C∗(Xi), then is the lexicographically sorted sequence of the indices
of the clocks in Xi(the set {ρ(x)|x∈Xi}). The zone code of the zone which
induced Pis then deﬁned as follows.
Deﬁnition 3 (Zone code). LetZbe a zone and let P={X1, X2, . . . , X n}be
the partitioning of the set of clocks Xunder ≈Zsuch that i≤j⇒Xi≤Xj(we
can assume this since ≤is a total order on P). The zone code ofZ, denoted by
C(Z), is the sequence (C∗(X1),C∗(X2), . . . ,C∗(Xn)).
Note that every zone has exactly one zone code since the indices of equivalent
clocks are sorted. Moreover, zone codes can lexicographically be ordered, since
they are sequences of number sequences. This order is then used in the following
way to deﬁne a total order on the states in a symmetry class (the orders on
the location vectors and variable valuations are just the lexicographical order on
sequences of numbers):

--- Page 10 ---
(l, v, Z )≺(l/prime, v/prime, Z/prime)
⇐⇒
(l<l/prime)∨(l=l/prime∧v < v/prime)∨(l=l/prime∧v=v/prime∧ C(Z)<C(Z/prime))(7)
We minimize the state w.r.t. the order of equation (7) using the state swaps
by applying the bubble-sort algorithm to it, see Figure 3. It is clear that this
representative computation satisﬁes the soundness equation (1), since states are
transformed using the state swaps only, which are automorphisms by Theorem
1. We note that swapα
j−1,j(q) is not computed explicitly for the comparison in
the fourth line of the algorithm; using the statically derived γ,DαandVα(see
section 4.1) we are able to tell whether swapping results in a smaller state.
(1)for all α∈Ωdo
(2) fori= 1to|α|do
(3) forj= 1to|α| −ido
(4) ifswapα
j−1,j(q)≺qthen
(5) q:=swapα
j−1,j(q)
(6) od
(7) od
(8)od
Fig. 3. Minimization of state qusing the bubble-sort algorithm. The size of scalarset
type αis denoted by |α|.
The following theorem states the main technical contribution of our work.
Informally, it means that the detected symmetries are optimally used.
Theorem 2 (Canonical Representative). The algorithm in Figure 3 com-
putes a canonical representative.
Note that we assumed that arrays that are indexed by scalarsets do not con-
tain elements of scalarsets. Otherwise, computation of a canonical representative
is as hard as graph isomorphism, but this is entirely due to the discrete part of
the model, and not to the clock part.
5 Experimental Results
This section presents and discusses experimental data that was obtained by the
Uppaal prototype on a dual Athlon 2000+ machine with 3 GB of RAM. The
measurements were done using the tool memtime , for which a link can be found
at the Uppaal website http://www.uppaal.com/ .
In order to demonstrate the eﬀectiveness of symmetry reduction, the resource
requirements for checking the correctness of Fischer’s mutual exclusion protocol
were measured as a function of the number of processes for both regular Uppaal
and the prototype, see Figure 4. A conservative extrapolation of the data shows

--- Page 11 ---
0.010.1110100100010000
51015202530354045505560657075808590951001101001000Time [s]
Memory [MB]
ProcessesTime
Memory
Time (prototype)
Memory (prototype)Fig. 4. Run-time data for Fischer’s mutual exclusion protocol showing the enormous
gain of symmetry reduction. The step in the graph of the memory usage is probably
due to the the fact that Uppaal allocates memory in chunks of a few megabyte at a
time.
that the veriﬁcation of the protocol for 20 processes without symmetry reduction
would take 115 days and 1000 GB of memory, whereas this veriﬁcation can be
done within approximately one second using less than 10 MB of memory with
symmetry reduction.
Similar results have been obtained for the CSMA/CD protocol ([24, 27]) and
for the timeout task of a distributed agreement algorithm5[4]. To be more pre-
cise, regular Uppaal ’s limit for the CSMA/CD protocol is approximately 10
processes, while the prototype can easily handle 50 processes. Similarly, the pro-
totype can easily handle 30 processes for the model of the timeout task, whereas
regular Uppaal can only handle 6.
Besides the three models discussed above, we also investigated the gain of
symmetry reduction for two more complex models. First, we experimented with
the previously mentioned agreement algorithm, of which we are unable to verify
an interesting instance even with symmetry reduction due to the size of the state
space. Nevertheless, symmetry reduction showed a very signiﬁcant improvement.
Second, we experimented with a model of Bang & Olufsen’s audio/video proto-
col [13]. The mentioned paper describes how Uppaal is used to ﬁnd a bug in the
5Models of the agreement algorithm and its timeout task are available through the
URL http://www.cs.kun.nl/ ∼martijnh/

--- Page 12 ---
protocol, and it describes the veriﬁcation of the corrected protocol for two (sym-
metric) senders. Naturally, we added another sender – veriﬁcation of the model
for three senders was impossible at the time of the ﬁrst veriﬁcation attempt –
and we found another bug, whose source and implications we are investigating
at the time of this writing. Table 1 shows run-time data for these models.
Table 1. Comparing the time and memory consumption of the relations for the agree-
ment algorithm and for Bang & Olufsen’s audio/video protocol with two and three
senders. The exact parameters of the agreement model are the following: n= 2, f= 1,
ones = 0, c1= 1, c2= 2 and dvaried (the value is written between the brackets).
Furthermore, the measurements were done for the veriﬁcation of the agreement invari-
ant only. Three veriﬁcation runs were measured for each model and the best one w.r.t.
time is shown.
Model Time [s] Memory [MB]
Agreement (0)
Agreement (1)
Agreement (2)
Agreement (3)
B&O (2)
B&O (3)No reduction Reduction
1 3
21 16
80 23
231 32
2 1
265 36No reduction Reduction
33 45
294 180
905 245
2126 321
16 10
1109 181
6 Conclusions
The results we obtained with our prototype are clearly quite promising: with
relatively limited changes/extensions of the Uppaal code we obtain a rather
drastic improvement of performance for systems with symmetry that can be
expressed using scalarsets.
An obvious next step is to do experiments concerning proﬁling where compu-
tation time is spent, and in particular how much time is spent on computing rep-
resentatives. In the tool Design/CPN [18, 20, 11] (where symmetry reduction is a
main reduction mechanism) there have been interesting prototype experiments
with an implementation in which the (expensive) computations of representa-
tives were launched as tasks to be solved in parallel with the main exploration
algorithm.
The scalarset approach that we follow in this paper only allows one to express
total symmetries. An obvious direction for future research will be to study how
other types of symmetry (for instance as we see it in a token ring) can be
exploited.
References
1. M. Abadi and L. Lamport. An old-fashioned recipe for real time. ACM Transac-
tions on Programming Languages and Systems , 16(5):1543–1571, September 1994.

--- Page 13 ---
2. R. Alur, C. Courcoubetis, and D.L. Dill. Model checking in dense real time. In-
formation and Computation , 104:2–34, 1993.
3. R. Alur and D.L. Dill. Automata for modeling real-time systems. In 17th Inter-
national Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming , pages 322–335,
1990.
4. H. Attiya, C. Dwork, N. Lynch, and L. Stockmeyer. Bounds on the time to reach
agreement in the presence of timing uncertainty. Journal of the ACM , 41(1):122–
152, 1994.
5. R. Bellman. Dynamic Programming . Princeton University Press, 1957.
6. D. Bosnacki, D. Dams, and L. Holenderski. A heuristic for symmetry reductions
with scalarsets. In J.N. Oliveira and P. Zave, editors, FME 2001 , number 2021 in
LNCS, pages 518–533. Springer–Verlag, 2001.
7. E. M. Clarke, S. Jha, R. Enders, and T. Filkorn. Exploiting symmetry in temporal
logic model checking. Formal Methods in System Design , 9(1/2):77–104, 1996.
8. E.M. Clarke, O. Grumberg, and D.A. Peled. Model Checking . The MIT Press,
2000.
9. D. Dill. Timing assumptions and veriﬁcation of ﬁnite-state concurrent systems. In
J. Sifakis, editor, Proc. of Automatic Veriﬁcation Methods for Finite State Systems ,
number 407 in LNCS, pages 197–212. Springer–Verlag, 1989.
10. D. L. Dill, A. J. Drexler, A. J. Hu, and C. Han Yang. Protocol veriﬁcation as
a hardware design aid. In IEEE International Conference on Computer Design:
VLSI in Computers and Processors , pages 522–525. IEEE Computer Society, 1992.
11. L. Elgaard. The Symmetry Method for Coloured Petri Nets - Theory, Tools,
and Practical Use . PhD thesis, Department of Computing Science, University
of Aarhus, Denmark, July 2002.
12. E.A. Emerson and A.P. Sistla. Symmetry and model checking. In CAV’93 , number
697 in LNCS. Springer–Verlag, 1993.
13. K. Havelund, A. Skou, K.G. Larsen, and K. Lund. Formal modelling and analysis
of an audio/video protocol: An industrial case study using uppaal . In18th IEEE
Real-Time Systems Symposium , pages 2–13, 1997.
14. M. Hendriks. Enhancing uppaal by exploiting symmetry. Technical Report NIII-
R0208, NIII, University of Nijmegen, October 2002.
15. M. Hendriks, G. Behrmann, K. G. Larsen, P. Niebert, and F. W. Vaandrager.
Adding symmetry reduction to uppaal . Technical Report NIII-R03xx, NIII, Uni-
versity of Nijmegen, 2003. To appear.
16. T. A. Henzinger, P. Ho, and H. Wong-Toi. HyTech : A model checker for hybrid
systems. Software Tools for Technology Transfer , 1:110–122, 1997.
17. G. J. Holzmann. The spin model checker. IEEE Transactions on Software Engi-
neering , 23(5):279–295, 1997.
18. P. Huber, A. M. Jensen, L. O. Jepsen, and K. Jensen. Reachability trees for
high-level petri nets. Theoretical Computer Science , 45(3):261–292, 1986.
19. C.N. Ip and D.L. Dill. Better veriﬁcation through symmetry. In D. Agnew, L.
Claesen, and R. Camposano, editors, Computer Hardware Description Languages
and their Applications , pages 87–100, Ottawa, Canada, 1993. Elsevier Science Pub-
lishers B.V., Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Journal version appeared in Formal
Methods in System Design , 9(1/2):41–75, 1996.
20. K. Jensen. Condensed state spaces for symmetrical Coloured Petri Nets. Formal
Methods in System Design , 9(1/2):7–40, 1996.
21. K. G. Larsen, P. Pettersson, and W. Yi. Uppaal in a nutshell. International
Journal on Software Tools for Technology Transfer , pages 134–152, 1998.

--- Page 14 ---
22. K. L. McMillan. Symbolic Model Checking . PhD thesis, Carnegie Mellon University,
Pittsburgh, May 1992.
23. P.H. Starke. Reachability analysis of petri nets using symmetries. Syst. Anal.
Model. Simul./5 , 8(4):293–303, 1991.
24. A. S. Tanenbaum. Computer Networks . Prentice–Hall, 1996.
25. F. Wang. Eﬃcient data structure for fully symbolic veriﬁcation of real-time soft-
ware systems. In S. Graf and M. Schwartzbach, editors, TACAS’00 , number 1785
in LNCS, pages 157–171. Springer–Verlag, 2000.
26. F. Wang and K. Schmidt. Symmetric symbolic safety-analysis of concurrent
software with pointer data structures. In D.A. Peled and M.Y. Vardi, editors,
FORTE’02 , number 2529 in LNCS, pages 50–64. Springer–Verlag, 2002.
27. S. Yovine. Kronos : a veriﬁcation tool for real-time systems. International Journal
on Software Tools for Technology Transfer , 1(2), 1997.
