--- Page 1 ---
Aalborg Universitet
Integrating Tools
Co-simulation in UPPAAL Using FMI-FMU
Nyman, Ulrik; Jensen, Peter Gjøl; Larsen, Kim Guldstrand; Legay, Axel
Published in:
Proceedings - 2017 22nd International Conference on Engineering of Complex Computer Systems, ICECCS
2017
DOI (link to publication from Publisher):
10.1109/ICECCS.2017.33
Creative Commons License
Unspecified
Publication date:
2018
Document Version
Accepted author manuscript, peer reviewed version
Link to publication from Aalborg University
Citation for published version (APA):
Nyman, U., Jensen, P. G., Larsen, K. G., & Legay, A. (2018). Integrating Tools: Co-simulation in UPPAAL Using
FMI-FMU. In Proceedings - 2017 22nd International Conference on Engineering of Complex Computer Systems,
ICECCS 2017 (pp. 11-19). IEEE (Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers).
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICECCS.2017.33
General rights
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright owners
and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
            - Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the public portal for the purpose of private study or research.
            - You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit-making activity or commercial gain
            - You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the public portal -
Take down policy
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us at vbn@aub.aau.dk providing details, and we will remove access to
the work immediately and investigate your claim.
Downloaded from vbn.aau.dk on: March 30, 2026

--- Page 2 ---
Integrating Tools: Co-Simulation in UPPAAL using FMI-FMU
Ulrik Nyman, Peter Gjøl Jensen, Kim Guldstrand Larsen
Computer Science, Aalborg University, Denmark
fnyman,pgj,kgl g@cs.aau.dkAxel Legay
INRIA, Rennes, France
Computer Science, Aalborg University, Denmark
legay@inria.fr
Abstract —While standalone tools for veriﬁcation and modeling have
proven useful, their chosen formalism and description-language can at
times be restrictive. We demonstrate how to use UPPAAL SMC to analyze
controller systems consisting of Function Mockup Units (FMU) modeled
in other tools, such as Matlab and Modelica. Apart from supporting FMI-
FMU modules the newly added Cinterface can call any external function.
The only requirement for sound analysis is statelessness and determinism
of the external function. We demonstrate the expressive power by
implementing the FMI-FMU master algorithm as a timed automata,
interfacing with external, non-native and non-trivial Function Mockup
Units (FMU). We also model two components in UPPAAL SMC exporting
one of them as an FMU while keeping the other as a native component.
Furthermore we demonstrate the ﬁrst simulation environment for the
Function Mockup Units, capable of checking bounded MITL properties.
I. I NTRODUCTION
Model-checking tools often come with support for a speciﬁc for-
malism, imposing restrictions on the behavior of the modeled system.
Such formalisms serve the purpose of giving the system a semantics
such that the behaviour of the system carries a sound and consistent
meaning. In particular without a semantics, investigating the accuracy
or probabilistic behavior of a system is nonsensical. At the same time,
a variety of formalisms have emerged in different domains, each well
suited for a speciﬁc task (eg. digital, mechanical or thermodynamic
modeling), but incapable of co-simulating – that is, to obtain joint
results. To remedy this, the Function Mockup Interface -standard
(FMI) [16] was proposed to enable domain-speciﬁc modeling tools
to be used side by side when encapsulated in a Function Mockup
Unit (FMU). In particular, the FMI-standard deﬁnes a protocol for
how values canbe communicated between FMUs by standardizing
the interface-description and giving a common C-api.
However, while the FMI standard only speciﬁes how values can
be communicated, it purposely does not specify the details of how
they willbe communicated, calling for the development of so-called
Master Algorithms (MA) for coordinating the interaction between
several FMUs.
As previously demonstrated [5], the MA has an impact on the
semantics of the overall system, and is thus of great importance
to the overall meaning of the measures obtained. We demonstrate
that our implementation of the MA will given enough simulations
eventually explore all possible executions. This ensures that we will
also discover cases where the ordering of events has a great impact
on the outcome.
We will be implementing our approach as an extension of the
statistical model checking tool U PPAAL SMC [13], thus ensuring
that we have a formally deﬁned semantics. We show that meaningful
probabilistic measures can be obtained, and in particular that we can
statistically verify MITL (Metric Interval Temporal Logic) properties.
The work presented here extends beyond applications within the FMI-
standard – we propose and implement an extension of U PPAAL that
allows for calling arbitrary C-libraries during the statistical simula-
tion. This effectively opens up U PPAAL SMC to a great number
of applications – and we will argue that under statelessness of theexternal library, that doing so is semantically sound. By statelessness,
we do not mean that the components cannot change their state, but
that all relevant state information should be communicated through
the FMI-FMU interface such that it is controlled by the MA. This
is also required in order to retain the semantics in future settings
such as classical model checking, as demonstrated in [9]. External
FMUs can contain stochastic behavior, but they should not contain
unresolved non-determinism, as such non-determinism would not
have a meaningful interpretation when simulating the system.
Notice that for FMUs we embrace the argument of Broman et.
al. [6] – that it is sane to expect that components only can give a
maximum delay and must accept all smaller delays.
A. Interleaving Semantics
While the work of Bogolomov et. al [5] work showcased U PPAAL
as an FMU alongside SpaceEx with Ptolemy as MA, it also exposed
inconsistencies in the semantics of timed automata when recomposed
via the MA as opposed to internally in U PPAAL . Let us recall
the example provided by Bogolomov et. al; consider the four TAs
presented in Figure 1. If the four TAs communicate in a pipeline
pattern s.t. A1outputs to A2,A2toA3andA3toA4. Given that all
TAs start in their initial location (marked by double-circle) and with
clock-value x1=x2=x3=x4=0 nothing will happen until a single unit
of time has elapsed ( x1 == 1 ,x2 == 1 ,x3 == 1 andx4 == 1 ). After
exactly one time unit (enforced by the invariants x1<= 1,x2<= 1,
x3<= 1andx4<= 1), all the automata are able to output – however,
as TAs synchronize on channels ( a,b,c,d, output marked by !and
input by ?), it becomes important in which order the automatas
synchronize. Notice here that even though all the synchronizations
happen at the same instance of time, it is important to track the
“happened before” relationship. Keeping this in mind, we can observe
that only a single deterministic trace of the system can occur given
the pipeline communication-pattern, namely that an a!always will
be observed followed by c!, implying that on all traces, eventually
the product-state A1.A && A2.AB && A3.C && A4.CD is reached.
However, one can easily verify using U PPAAL that this is not the
case. In fact, all possible permutations with at least one winner is
possible, as U PPAAL implements interleaving semantics – which most
deﬁnitions of NTA (Networks of Timed Automata) require.
We argue that such behavior is also important in real-life models,
for instance due to a too coarse granularity on the observation of time.
In particular in a probabilistic context, such under-approximation of
the behavior of the system leads to erroneous probability estimates.
While we do not address channel-based synchronization between
FMUs in this paper, we note that similar erroneous behavior can
be achieved using only integer-valued variables. For the speciﬁcs of
channel based synchronization between FMUs, we refer the reader
to [5].
Another known problem in modeling and simulation is that of
zero-crossing ; namely that it is impossible in a simulation setting to
detect the exact time when a certain value crosses a zero threshold.

--- Page 3 ---
Fig. 1: Four U PPAAL timed automata exemplifying the different
semantics of different Master Algorithms. An intuitive explanation
of the syntax of U PPAAL timed automata can be found in Section
V-B.
As mentioned in [10] this is also a problem in the context of FMI-
FMU models. This is a problem that we are aware of, but that our
current solution does not try to address.
B. Contributions
We demonstrate the ease with which already existing system mod-
els from Modelica can be exported as FMUs and used for verifying
statistical properties of the model in U PPAAL SMC. In particular,
the ability to specify a MA within a sound semantical framework
facilitating probabilistic and temporal reasoning is a strength of
the methods proposed in this paper. These features are essential to
modeling real-world scenarios where behavior is inherently uncertain
and time-dependent – such scenarios include signal noise, human
interaction and general natural phenomena. As we base our approach
on top of a tool that already supports the notions of time and
probabilities, we automatically gain the analytical capabilities of
this tool. While we only demonstrate the Statistical Modelchecking
features of U PPAAL SMC in this paper, our proposed method of
embedding FMUs as timed automata also enables classical model-
checking, controller synthesis and controller learning on composed
models using the more complex features of U PPAAL , UPPAAL TIGA
and U PPAAL STRATEGO under some reasonable restrictions on the
FMUs.
The contributions of the paper can be summarized as follows:
Implementation of direct call of FMI-FMU modules from inside
a statistical model checking tool that supports time and proba-
bilities.
Discussion on different semantics for FMI-FMU implementa-
tions.
Flexible modeling of the master algorithm as a timed automaton
template.
Statistical model checking of bounded reachability of temporal
logics (MITL).
C. Related Work
FMI-FMU has its origin in the European research project MOD-
ELISAR. It was created speciﬁcally for integrating a wide variety ofmodeling tools. Industry tools that support the FMI-FMU standard
include: MATLAB/Simulink, MapleSim and AUTOSAR Simulation
[16].
In the following we try to cover recent and relevant related work
that take a practical approach to co-simulating industrial systems.
Pazold et. al. [22] compare different approaches for simulating a
HV AC system for a complete building. They conclude that a weak
coupling using a co-simulation strategy using sub-models exported
as FMUs is a reasonable approach. A case-study by Pedersen et. al.
[23] describes how to integrate a special purpose maritime embedded
system into an FMI-FMU co-simulation setting at the company MAN
Diesel & Turbo.
We also ﬁnd that it is relevant to look at related work that considers
the semantics of the complete co-simulation system and Master
Algorithm (MA).
In [18] Guermazi et al. provide a framework for co-simulating the
UML models speciﬁed in Papyrus (the open-source UML/SysML
modeler of the Eclipse foundation) in an FMI-FMU context. The
work is build on top of the formal semantics foundation of UML
(fUML [21])
In [6] Broman et al. argue for an number of sanity conditions
for a MA. In this work we deviate by 1. allowing the order of
FMI/FMU-deﬁnition determine the outcome of the simulation and
2. not requiring an order on the input/output-relation. However, both
properties can be ensured by modifying the proposed timed automa-
ton template for a MA. At the same time, Broman et al. propose the
getMaxStepSize -extension of the FMI-FMU standard to enable
step-size negotiation between FMUs.
In [5] Bogomolov et al. argue for allowing Zero-delay step-sizes in
thedoStep -procedure to enable timed automata style synchroniza-
tions across FMUs – a value which is otherwise strictly disallowed
by the FMI-FMU standard. This paper also discusses using Hybrid-
and timed automata as FMUs and the related semantic difﬁculties
and utilizes the step-negotiation strategy introduced in [6].
In [10] Cremona et al. introduce the concept of step revision,
similar to that presented in [6], as a method for ensuring the accuracy
of modeling a mix of continuous-time and discrete-event systems in
an attempt to address the Zero-crossing problem.
Statistical modelchecking of Priced Timed Automata and Stochas-
tic Hybrid Systems was introduced into the U PPAAL tool-chain by
Bulychev et al. in [7], [11]. In their work they present methods and
algorithms for obtaining various statistical measures over stochastic
systems using expressive logics [13], [8]. While the U PPAAL SMC
tool has been used in a number of case-studies ([17], [12], [20], [3],
[1]) it previously did not facilitate co-simulation as master-algorithm
using the FMI-FMU standard.
The PLASMA statistical model-checking tool [19] supports sta-
tistical analysis over a System of Systems composed of FMUs
[2]. However, their work does not provide a formal semantics of
the composed system or individual components, nor does it allow
C-functions to be embedded directly in the model. Furthermore,
the integration of FMUs in Callows for analysis, synthesis and
learning using the more complex features of classical U PPAAL [4]
and U PPAAL STRATEGO [13] – features that are out of the scope of
this paper.
II. S EMANTICS
We shall here describe the semantics of Timed Automata (TA),
Network Of Timed Automata (NTA), Stochastic Timed Automata
(STA) and Function Mockup Units (FMUs). We will then discuss a
semantical embedding of FMUs into the the STA framework.
2

--- Page 4 ---
A. Stochastic Timed Automata
Formally, a TA is a ﬁnite automaton extended with a set of
real-valued, time-progress-measuring counters ( X) called clocks. In
addition, a TA allows for synchronization with other TAs over a
ﬁnite set of so-called channels ( ). For a set of channels we let
o=fa!ja2gbe the set of output actions over while we let
i=fa?ja2gbe the set of input actions. For a set of clocks X
we call an element c./n wherec2X andn2Nand./2f ,<g
(./2f ,>g) an upper (lower) bound over X. LetB(X)(B(X))
be the set of all upper (lower) bounds over X.
We call a mapping :X!Rfor a valuation over Xand denote
all valuations over XbyV(X).
Deﬁnition 1 (Timed Automaton): A Timed Automaton (TA) is a
tupleA= (L,`0,X, ,!,I,R), where
1)Lis a ﬁnite set of control locations,
2)`02Lis the initial location,
3)Xis a ﬁnite set of clocks,
4)is a ﬁnite set of channels,
5)!LB(X)(o[i)2XLis a set of edges.
We write`g,a,U !`0for an edge where `is the source and `0
the target location, g2B(X)is a guard,a2o[iis a
label, andU2V (X)!V(X)is a partial function giving the
discrete-clock updates,
6)I:L!B(X)is an invariant function, mapping locations to
a set of invariant constraints and
7)R:L!X! Rassign rates to the individual clocks in each
location1.
Let2V(X)be a valuation, R:X ! Rgive clocks rates,
d2Rbe a real-valued number and let U2V (X)!V(X)be an
update-function ; then we let (+dR)be the valuation 0where
0(x) =(x) +dR(x)and we let00=U(). Ifg=c ./ n is
a clock bound over Xand2V(X)thensatisﬁesg(g) iff
(c)./n. This generalizes in a natural way to a set of clock bounds.
The state of TAA= (L,`0,X, ,!,I,R)is a tuple (`,)where
`2Land2V(X). From a state (`,)the TA may
1) do a timed transition (`,)d  !(`,0)if0= (+dR(`))
and0I(`)or
2) do a discrete transitions (`,)a  !(`0,0)if there exists `g,a,U   !
`0such thatg,0=U()and0I(`0).
We deﬁne a partition over the clocks of a TA into time-
independent, real-valued variables ( XV) and time-dependent clocks
(XT) s.t.XV=fx2 X j 8`2Lwe haveR(`)(x) =
0andxis not restricted by I(`)gandXT=XnXV.
We deﬁne the inﬁx-operator valuation-join operatorX,Y

:V(X)
V(Y)!V(X)as
X,Y

0=00where00(x) =(
0(x)ifx2Y
(x)otherwise
We shall simply write 
for this operation and let X,Ybe
implicitly deﬁned by the given valuations.
Following the compositional framework of [15] we require that a
TA for any state sis
1)input-enabled i.e. for any a!2othere exists some s0such
thatsa! !s0and
1Allowing rates other than one is non-standard in TA semantics – in fact
this renders most classical model-checking questions undecidable. However,
as the methods presented are simulation-based, arbitrary rates on clocks are
practically feasible and semantically sane [11].2)action-deterministic i.e. ifsa  !s0andsa  !s00thens0=s00.
Let us now deﬁne a Network of Timed Automata (NTA) with
shared clocks.
a) Network Of Timed Automata: LetA1,A2,:::,Anbe TA
whereAi= (Li,`i
0, (XV
i[XT
i), ,!i,Ii,Ri)with the implicit
indices ordering 1<2<< n. LetXV=S
i21,:::,nXV
ibe the
set of shared clocks, then it holds for all i21,:::,nthatXV=XV
i
and for allj21,:::,nwherei6=jthatXT
j\XT
i=;. Also let
S(Ai) =LiV(XT
i)V(XV); then we deﬁne the states of the
networkA1kA2k:::kAnto be a pairh(s1,s2,:::,sn),iwhere if
(`i,i) =sithen(`i,i
)2S(Ai). A network may transit from
h(s1,s2,:::,sn),iby
a timed transitionh(s1,s2,:::sn),id  !h(s0
1,:::,s0
n),iif for
alli,(`i,i
)d  !(`i,0
i
)where (`i,i) =s1,(`0
i,0
i) =
s2, and
a discrete transition h((`1,1),:::, (`n,n)),ia! !
i
h((`0
1,0
1),:::, (`0
n,0
n)),niif (assuming w.log. that i= 1)
1)(`1,1
)a! !(`0
1,0
1
1), and
2) forj2f2,:::,ngwe have
(`j,j
j 1)a? !(`0
j,0
j
j)
Notice that the discrete transition-rule can be generalized beyond
i= 1 by a temporary reordering of the indices.
B. Stochastic Semantics
David et al. provides the full stochastic semantics of Stochastic
Timed Automata in [14]. Here the semantics is given as a series
of repeated races among components making up the network. In
essence, each sub-component will choose a delay in accordance with
the probability distributions deﬁned locally to that component. The
component with the smallest delay will then win the race and gets
to do a discrete step – again chosen according to a local distribution.
However, this discrete step can synchronize with neighboring com-
ponents, possibly altering their internal state. This procedure is then
repeated over and over.
In the semantics the delays are chosen as follows: if the possible
delays are bounded, the distribution is a uniform distribution between
the minimal delay before some action is possible and the maximal
delay where a delay is still possible.
Formally, we assume there for any state ( s) of any TAAexists
a delay-density A
s:R!Rand a probability mass function A
s:
o!R. Naturally we will require these functions to be “sane”
in the sense that they do not assign probability mass (density) to
impossible actions (delays) i.e. A
s(a!)6= 0 (A
s(a!)6= 0) implies
sa! !s0(sd  !s0).
Let!=a1!a2!:::an!be a ﬁnite sequence of output-actions: then
we deﬁne the probability of a network A1k:::Amgenerating the
sequence from state s= (s1,:::Sn)recursively by Equation 1.
wheresid  !sd
i,sd  !a1!  !
is0,!1=a2!:::an!and base case
Fs() = 1 .
C. Function Mockup Unit
Similar to Broman et. al. [6], we shall here deﬁne the semantics
of a single FMU as a (timed) state machine. For simplicity, we shall
in the deﬁnition ignore the types of the variables, and assume wlog.
that they all are reals.
Deﬁnition 2: An FMU is a tuple F =
(S,init,V,set,get,doStep )where
Sis a set of states,
3

--- Page 5 ---
Fs(!) =mX
i=00
@Z
t>0Aisi(t)Y
j6=iZ
>tAj
sj(t)d
Ai
st
i(a1!Fs0(!1)dt1
A (1)
init2S is the initial state,
Vis a set of variable names,
set:SRV!S is a value-setter function,
get:SV!Ris a value-getter function and
doStep :SR0!S is the time-progression function.
For a given FMUF, the exact semantics is deﬁned by the underlying
implementation, and we shall hence only focus on the interaction with
STAs.
Deﬁnition 3: A stochastic FMU is a tuple Fs=
(S,V,set,get,doStep ,P)s.t.
S,V,set,get,doStep are deﬁned as for a regular FMU and
P:S! [0, 1] is the probability that Fsstarts ins2S and we
have that 1 = s2SP(s).
LetFsbe a stochastic FMU, then we let pick(Fs) =
(S,init,V,set,get,doStep )where init2initsis the initial
state chosen according to P– by agreement for a non-stochastic
FMU we let pick(s) = 1 where inits=fsgandP(s0) = 0 for
all others06=s.
Notice here that our extension of FMUs with stochastic has
the probabilistic choices resolved once; this construction is both
practically and theoretically sound. In practice, such a construction
can be ensured by using seeded pseudo-random number generators.
Here the seed is chosen at random initially, leading to a subsequent
determined execution. In a theoretical setting, similar generative
constructions have been used to deﬁne the semantics of probabilistic
programs – for instance for the semantics of the IBAL language as
proposed by Pfeffer et al. in [24].
It is easy to see that the semantics of an FMU ﬁts well within the
stochastic semantics for NTA as the standard speciﬁes a collection
of (complex) update-functions over a state – which in turn can be
encoded as a real. However, as FMUs have no notion of discrete-
update labels, to correctly embed an FMU into an NTA, we shall in
the next section describe one way of encapsulating an FMU within a
single STA, such as to make it compatible with the NTA framework.
III. E XTENSION OF UPPAAL
To facilitate the import of FMUs in U PPAAL , we have extended
UPPAAL with a construct for loading dynamic Clibraries at run-
time. External Cfunctions in U PPAAL look and act exactly like
regular functions in U PPAAL and only their declaration differ by
the additional import environment – an example of the new syntax
can be seen in Figure 2. We shall here discuss the type-conversions
between the C-like language in U PPAAL and actual C. Furthermore
we introduced the type string for string constants and the type
ptrtfor holding pointers to external data—a type with its binary
deﬁned by, and dependent on, the hardware platform U PPAAL is
executing on and functionally equivalent to size tknown from
regular C. Lastly, to facilitate single-initialization of external li-
braries, we have introduced the void ON CONSTRUCT ()and
void ON DESTRUCT ()– that if existing, will be called upon
model-initialization (and de-initialization respectively), but not for
each proposition given to U PPAAL . These can be deﬁned at a global
scope as well as in the scope of each individual TA.UPPAAL type Ctype By Value Return Array
bool bool
chan const char
clock double
double double
ptrt size_t
int int32_t
string const char
<type>[] <type>
TABLE I: The type-conversion between U PPAAL andC. The com-
plex types chan ,string ,clock and array-types are sent in C-
convention as pointers to raw memory and are thus forced to be sent
as references. All types can be sent by reference, but the immutable
types chan andstring are forced const . Lastly, only single-
dimension arrays are supported, and only of mutable types; arrays of
chan andstring are currently not supported.
A. Type Conversion
To maintain sanity during simulation some restrictions on the types
being transferable between U PPAAL and external functions are in
place. Currently, the types bool ,chan ,clock ,double ,ptrt,intand
string can be used in external functions, omitting complex types
constructed using the struct keyword as well as two, and more, level
arrays. A chart of the type-conversion to Cand other restrictions are
given in Table I. We further emphasize some signiﬁcant differences
from linking directly between Cprograms and working calling
external functions from U PPAAL .
Abool variable in U PPAAL is either zero or one—as such, any
function returning bool will return 0if the C-function called
returned 0, and 1otherwise.
const is enforced, implying that any variable sent as const , even
if sent as an array or by reference, will not have its value changed
in the U PPAAL environment—regardless of the behavior of the
C-function called.
Each import-statement has a private scope, as exempliﬁed by
Figure 2.
Integers in U PPAAL can be given a bounded range. If this range
is violated – either when values are sent by reference or returned
– the model is said to have violated model-sanity, causing a run-
time error.
Utilizing this extension of U PPAAL and the FMI-standard, we will
implement a co-simulation-algorithm directly as a timed automaton.
IV. FMI/FMU INUPPAAL
The FMI/FMU standard, version 2.0 is a standard for conducting
co-simulation between different simulation environments. While the
standard also supports “Model Exchange”, we shall here focus only
on co-simulation.
To conduct co-simulation using the FMI/FMU standard, one
needs only two components: (1) A master algorithm controlling
the overview and coordination of the composed simulation and
(2) one or more FMUs for the master-algorithm to coordinate and
facilitate communication between. This approach shows its strength
by outsourcing the heavy computation of the simulation to specialized
tools while maintaining a global overview and coordination of the
4

--- Page 6 ---
// model.xml
...
import "liby"
{
incleft = void inc_a();
getleft = int get_a();
}
...
import "liby"
{
incright = void inc_a();
getright = int get_a();
getright2 = int get_a();
}
...//libinc.so
int a = 0;
void inc_a()
{
++a;
return a;
}
int get_a()
{
return a;
}//libinc.so
int a = 0;
void inc_a()
{
++a;
return a;
}
int get_a()
{
return a;
}
Fig. 2: Scoping rules of external libraries when loading into U PPAAL . Each import-statement creates a new environment – this implies that
the variable ahas two logical instances, aleftandaright where incleft andgetleft references aleftwhile incright ,getright
andgetright2 references aright .
composed system at any time. An example of such a composed
system, using U PPAAL as a FMU for timed automata, was presented
by Bogolomov et. al [5]. In general the MA is imposed on top of
the system, enforcing a semantics particular to the given MA. In our
work, we instead embed the external FMUs as timed automata. This
allows us to reuse standard, well-deﬁned, timed automata semantics,
allowing us to construct a shallow MA, ensuring only that the
FMI/FMU communication protocol is respected. In particular, from
this approach, we adopt the so-called Interleaving Semantics.
A. Master Algorithm and FMUs as Timed Automata
The TAs used for implementing the MA in U PPAAL and importing
FMUs into U PPAAL are shown in Figure 3a and Figure 3b respec-
tively. Let us walk through the computation of a single simulation
step in the composed model. Initially, observe that
the state of each FMU is encoded in the comp variable,
time is a variable tracking the time progressed since the begin-
ning of the simulation,
xis a variable tracking the time since the last simulation step,
step is an array containing all the proposed step-sizes and
cnt is a variable tracking the number of FMUs that have
completed a given stage of the MA – initially set to zero.
Initially the MA (depicted in Figure 3a) and each FMU (depicted
in Figure 3b) Negotiate and Initial -states. As the MA is waiting
forready signals from the FMUs, all the FMUs will (in random
order), call the initialize-function, abbreviating the setup function
calls speciﬁed in the FMU standard. After initialization, each FMU
will move from the OKlocation to the Ready location – and while
doing so, synchronize with the MA on the ready channel. This forces
the MA to wait until all FMUs have reached the Ready -location. At
this point, the MA is forced to move from Negotiate toFindMin ,
synchronizing with all FMUs at once, s.t. each FMU moves from
Ready toDelay . This makes each FMU propose the step-size (which
could be computed by more complex functions, such as proposed
by Bogolomov et. al [5]), after which it will wait for the MA to
synchronize on either delay ,won[id]orget. The MA will now,
stepping from FindMin toWaiting , choose the minimal proposed
step-size and let time progress by the given amount. Whenevertime has progressed exactly minstep time-units, the MA will with
even probability determine a “winner” in between FMUs proposing
exactly minstep time-units as the delay. If the delay is non-zero,
the MA will synchronize on the delay channel, in which case all
the FMUs will end up in the Delayed location, ready to receive a
synchronization on get. If the delay is zero, only the winning FMU
will progress to the Delayed location while the remaining FMUs will
await further synchronization. From the Delayed location, each FMU,
upon synchronization with the MA on get, will call the appropriate
getter-functions deﬁned in the FMU-standard, synchronizing the data-
arrays in U PPAAL with those in the external FMU. Notice here that if
a zero-delay occurred, some FMU will have won, and all the losing
FMUs will at this point in time move from the Delay to the ZeroDelay
location – implying that data is not fetched from the losing FMUs
as it cannot have changed since the last call to GetValues() . At this
point in a simulation-step the MA has reached the Transfer location
while all the FMUs are in the Got location. Here each FMU will,
in random order according to a uniform distribution, transfer their
local values (synchronized with the external FMU) to other FMUs in
the system. The randomness here plays a key part in implementing
interleaving semantics, as two FMUs can write to the same variable
in a third FMU, effectively yielding a race-condition. Again, if we
are in the special case of a zero-delay, only the winning FMU will
transfer its values. Until all FMUs have moved to the Transferred
location, the MA will wait in the Transfer location. Eventually the
MA will be able to move from Transfer to the Negotiate location,
triggering all the FMUs to move from Transferred toOK, pushing
the updated values to the individual FMUs. This completes the cycle
of a single step in the total simulation.
While our implementation here focuses on a speciﬁc MA, one can
easily extend and test different MA algorithms within this framework.
In [5], the authors restrict their MA to impose an ordering of the
value-transfers between the FMUs – such a restriction could be
implemented by imposing an order on each FMU, and checking if
this order is respected for each FMU when synchronizing on dosync .
In a similar manner, interoperability between different versions of the
FMU/FMI standard can be achieved by adapting the general template
in Figure 3b.
5

--- Page 7 ---
(a) The MA as a TA.
 (b) The template of a single FMU.
Fig. 3: The TAs used for importing and simulating FMUs in U PPAAL .
V. C ASE STUDY
To demonstrate our approach we shall construct a model of three
small houses sharing a single heating unit. Each house is composed
of two rooms which each individually can be heated. Heat can be
transferred between the two rooms, but as the houses are placed
apart, heat is not transferred between the houses. The shared heating
unit is only capable of heating a single room at any point in time –
furthermore, it takes some time for the heating unit to be transferred
from one house to another.
A. How to model one house
Each single house is modeled using O PENMODELICA and entirely
composed of standard components. The entire model of a house
can be seen in Figure 4. Here each of the rooms have a heat-
capacity of 2649600J
Kand the wall between the rooms have a
thermal conductivity of 6.4W
K. At the same time, each of the
rooms are affected by the outside temperature, here separated by
slightly better insulated walls but with a larger surface-area with a
thermal conductivity of 27.20W
Kin total. As it can be seen from
Figure 4, the house receives three inputs; in_room1 ,in_room2 ,
andin_outside for the inﬂuence of the heater in either of the
rooms and the inﬂuence of the (ever changing) outside temperature.
As outputs, the two temperature-converters troom1 andtroom2
give us the variables out_room1 andout_room2 . We will not
consider the inner dynamics of the room, but simply view a room
as a single mass with a heat-capacity. O PENMODELICA supports
the export of models as Co-Simulation FMUs – in the case of our
model from Figure 4, we get an FMU with three real-valued inputs
in_room1 ,in_room2 andin_outside (in Watts, Watts and
degrees Celsius respectively) as well as the two outputs in degrees
Celsius out_room1 andout_room2 .
B. A Controller as a Timed Automaton
The controller is implemented using U PPAAL timed automata and
can be seen in Figure 5. Let us informally introduce the notation
used for U PPAAL timed automata; circles denote locations and arrows
denote edges . The key feature of the timed automata is the clock
construction; variables that all progress at the same rate and track
time. Each location can be labeled with an invariant , colored pur ple
– a predicate that must evaluate true when the TA is in the given
location. Locations can also be marked with UorCforurgency and
committed urgency – forcing immediacy (and prioritized immediacy),
implying that time cannot elapse when the TA is in the given location.
In Figure 5 we can see that the Heating location is marked by a
double-circle, indicating that it is the initial location. Edges can be
Fig. 4: A single house with two rooms modeled using O PENMOD-
ELICA .
labeled with select -statements ( yellow ), guards ( green ), updates
(blue ) and synchronizations ( turquoise ) where
select-labels duplicate the single edge into multiple instances,
one for each value possible in the declared type,
guard-labels must evaluate to true for the edge to be admissible,
update-labels can reset clocks and update variables declared
using the C-language,
synchronization-labels allows two or more TAs in the same
system to move in unison when one is outputting (eg. a!) and
multiple are inputting ( a?) on the channel a.
Notice here that we only use the broadcast synchronization – for a
given channel a, any TA is free to output a!(if allowed by a guard),
and all other TAs which can receive a?must do so.
Aside from standard TA features, U PPAAL supports a C-like
language for complex constructions – including variable-declarations,
function-calls and such.
The controller shown acts in a bang-bang manner; given a target-
temperature for each room (the tgtarray), it randomly assigns the
heating unit (the heat array) to any room with a temperature (the
temp array) lower than or equal the target-temperature (right edge).
If all rooms have reached their target-temperature, we can take the left
edge, heating no room. When taking the right edge, if the controller
6

--- Page 8 ---
Fig. 5: The bang-bang controller implemented in U PPAAL . The
controller samples the values of the system each 60time units and
chooses at random to heat a room in a house where the measured
temperature is lower than the set-temperature of the given room
(right-hand side transition). If no such exist, no room is heated
(left-hand side transition). Whenever a room andhouse is chosen,
if the house differs from previous choice, the controller will wait
TRANSTIME between heating one room and another.
decides to change the house being heated, a delay will incur between
turning of the heater in one house and turning on the heater in
another house. This is controlled by the variable wtwhich forces
our controller to let time progress in the Wait-location (due to the
combination of the invariant t<=wtand the guard t==wt) –
but only if the chosen house differs, determined by the in-line if
wt= (oh==h)?0 : TRANSTIME . Here one can also see the select -
statement in action; an edge is created for each value in the type
house t(h2f1, 2, 3g) and each value in room t(r2f1, 2g) –
allowing for a concise description.
C. Composition of models
With the house and controller modeled, we can now focus on
composing the entire system. Our system, as illustrated by Figure 6,
aside from three houses and the controller includes the weather –
giving the outside temperature. For simulating the weather, we here
assume a simple sinus-curve with a frequency of 24 hours, oscillating
between 4 and 20 degrees Celsius. We can also see from Figure 6
that the houses have no direct interaction with each other, and are
only indirectly communicating via the temperatures they report and
the choices of the controller.
Each of these individual components (even U PPAAL models [5])
can be exported as Co-Simulation FMU’s – and thus composed into
our system from Figure 6 using existing tools. However, as our
initial controller exhibits randomness, we would like to answer the
questions: What is the expected minimal and maximal temperatures
of any room? and: If a room becomes too cold, will it become heated
again within two hours?
These questions both contain probabilistic measures over continu-
ous time – and thus are not answerable by current tools. To remedy
this, we below propose an extension of the Statistical Modelchecker
UPPAAL SMC that allows for dynamically linking and calling ar-
bitrary C-functions from inside the tool – a feature that facilitates
Co-Simulation of FMU’s.
VI. EXPERIMENTS
This section presents the experiments that we perform on our
case study when using the controller presented in Figure 5. In this
example, all the components are exported into FMUs and recomposed
in U PPAAL given the framework presented in Section IV – includingControllerWeather
House 1House 2
House 3
Fig. 6: An informal overview of the composed system. The arrows
indicate the ﬂow of information.
Fig. 7: A single simulation of the system. Each color represents the
temperature of a room. The starting temperature for the ﬁrst room
in each house is 20 degrees Celcius and 4 degrees Celsius for the
second room.
the controller. We shall consider the model presented in Section V and
demonstrating three different features of U PPAAL SMC; Simulation,
Estimation and Statistical Modelchecking.
The composed model, FMUs and extended version of U P-
PAAL SMC for 64-bit Linux-systems can be found at http://people.
cs.aau.dk/pgj/UPPAAL FMIFMU.zip. Notice that the extended ver-
sion of U PPAAL SMC includes functionality to export timed automata
as FMUs as presented by Bogolomov et al. [5]. We also provide a
prototype tool for embedding FMUs into a U PPAAL -importable timed
automata for ease of use.
A. Simulation
In Figure 7 one can observe the results of executing following
query in U PPAAL
simulate 1 [ <=3600247]fh1output[0], h1 output[1],
h2output[0], h2 output[1],
h3output[0], h3 output[1]g
This proposition monitors the temperatures of each house over a
period of seven days for a single simulation. As expected, initially
our controller rapidly heats the coldest rooms in all of the houses.
We can also observe that the temperature of the rooms after the ﬁrst
day is kept within a 19to22degrees window in the current setting.
B. Estimation
However, such a single simulation does not quantify over the prob-
abilistic behavior of our system – one might be interested in knowing
7

--- Page 9 ---
Fig. 8: The super-imposed probability distributions of the expected
minimal and maximal temperatures over all the rooms, over a week,
disregarding the ﬁrst day, based on 100 samples. The x-axis is given
in degrees Celsius. Blue indicates minimal expectation while red
indicates maximal. The mean of the minimal expectation is 18.9 while
the mean of the maximal expectation is 21.3.
the expected maximal and minimal temperatures (disregarding the
ﬁrst day as our rooms are in an abnormal state).
Such a measure can be achieved by the following propositions.
E[<=3600247;100] (min: mintemp())
E[<=3600247;100] (max: maxtemp())
Here mintemp andmaxtemp are functions deﬁned in U PPAAL
Ccomputing the minimum and maximum of the temperatures of
all the rooms. The proposition computes the estimated minimal
(resp. maximal) value of the expression over the course of a weeks
simulation – and it does so on the basis of 100 simulations.
As we can see in Figure 8, the performance of our constructed
controller is fairly stable. Both the minimal and maximal temperature
of any room stays (on average) within 18.9 degrees and 21.3 degrees
Celsius. However, while the average peak temperature is stable at
21.3 degrees with less than a tenth of a degree span on the observed
values, the minimal temperature over a week was observed to vary
by more than a degree across all runs.
C. Statistical Modelcheking
While the estimation and simulation propositions provide some
quantitative measure on different metrics of the system, we can use
the statistical model-checking features of U PPAAL SMC to reason on
the probabilistic behavior of our system.
Let us try to quantify the fairness of our controller; what is the
probability that the temperature difference between the coldest room
and the hottest room is greater than two degrees Celsius after the
ﬁrst day? This we can express as follows.
Pr[<=3600247] (<>time>360024 &&
(maxtemp() mintemp()) >= 2)
As we can observe in Figure 9, there is a fairly high chance (more
than50% ) that the temperature difference between the coldest and
hottest room will grow beyond two degrees within a week.
Fig. 9: The probability distribution of having only a two-degree
difference between the coldest and warmest room with the cumulative
probability superimposed (black line). The measure is obtained using
the statistical parameters = 0.05 and= 0.05 – yielding 398
samples needed by U PPAAL SMC. With a 95% conﬁdence the true
probability lies within [0.50, 0.60] of having a greater than 2-degrees
difference at any point within a week.
Fig. 10: The probability distribution of not recovering from a
threshold violation. The statistical parameters are = 0.05 and
= 0.05 – yielding 738 samples needed by U PPAAL SMC. With
a95% conﬁdence the true probability lies within [0.21, 0.31] of not
recovering.
We can also construct more complex propositions using the tem-
poral MITL-logic. As we already know, the set-temperature cannot
be respected in general in our example – however, we might be able
to accept deviations as long as they are not for extended periods
of time. We therefore construct the following proposition capturing:
after the ﬁrst day, can it ever happen that if the second room of the
ﬁrst house has a temperature below 20 degrees for more than two
hours at a given time .
Pr (<>[86400,604800]( [][0,7200] (h1 output[1]<20)))
We can observe in Figure 10 that this property is not surely
satisﬁable. Already in the second day of the simulation there is more
than 10% chance that the controller will not be able to recover from
a threshold-violation within two hours. We can also observe that this
tendency seems to be repeating every night of our simulation.
VII. C ONCLUSION
In this paper we demonstrated the ease with which FMI-FMU
models exported from other tools can be integrated into the setting of
8

--- Page 10 ---
UPPAAL SMC. We provide the ﬂexibility of modeling different Mas-
ter Algorithms (MAs) in a sound semantical framework facilitating
probabilistic and temporal reasoning.
We believe that the possibility of using already existing domain
models is essential in order to facilitate the use of formal methods
in industrial systems, as the correct re-modeling of entire systems is
a very time consuming exercise. The expressiveness of the modeling
language available in U PPAAL SMC allows for the efﬁcient modeling
of real-world scenarios with inherently uncertain and time-dependent
behaviour – such as signal noise, human interaction and general
natural phenomena. Thus this paper aims to make recent advances
in statistical model checking and statistical validation of systems
available for use in an industrial setting.
VIII. F UTURE WORK
Adding the possibility of calling arbitrary C-libraries during statis-
tical simulation opens up for a number of new applications. This is
true both for U PPAAL SMC and the related tool U PPAAL STRATEGO .
We consider the option of utilizing U PPAAL STRATEGO to perform
controller synthesis for heterogeneous FMI-FMU systems as the most
promising direction. This would make it much easier to generate
optimized controllers using machine learning for systems being
developed using other modeling tools. With the current approach all
components in the system must be re-modeled in U PPAAL STRAT -
EGO.
Calling external C-libraries can also be applied within the domain
of classical model-checking in U PPAAL . Here there is the added
restriction that the external calls can only be used to update the
discrete variables and not the clock variables. On top of statelessness
we also require that the external FMUs are strictly deterministic for
the model checking to be semantically sound. For application of this
in a non FMI-FMU setting see [9].
REFERENCES
[1] W. Ahmad, M. Jongerden, M. Stoelinga, and J. v. d. Pol. Model checking
and evaluating QoS of batteries in MPSoC dataﬂow applications via
hybrid automata. In 2016 16th International Conference on Application
of Concurrency to System Design (ACSD) , pages 114–123, June 2016.
[2] A. Arnold, M. Baleani, A. Ferrari, M. Marazza, V . Senni, A. Legay,
J. Quilbeuf, and C. Etzien. An application of SMC to continuous
validation of heterogeneous systems. In Proceedings of the 9th EAI
International Conference on Simulation Tools and Techniques , SIMU-
TOOLS’16, pages 76–85, ICST, Brussels, Belgium, Belgium, 2016.
ICST (Institute for Computer Sciences, Social-Informatics and Telecom-
munications Engineering).
[3] D. Basile, F. Di Giandomenico, and S. Gnesi. Statistical model checking
of an energy-saving cyber-physical system in the railway domain. In
Proceedings of the Symposium on Applied Computing , SAC ’17, pages
1356–1363, New York, NY , USA, 2017. ACM.
[4] G. Behrmann, A. David, K. G. Larsen, J. Hakansson, P. Petterson, W. Yi,
and M. Hendriks. UPPAAL 4.0. In Quantitative Evaluation of Systems,
2006. QEST 2006. Third International Conference on , pages 125–126.
IEEE, 2006.
[5] S. Bogomolov, M. Greitschus, P. G. Jensen, K. G. Larsen,
M. Miku ˇcionis, T. Strump, and S. Tripakis. Co-simulation of hybrid
systems with SpaceEx and Uppaal. In Proceedings of the 11th Interna-
tional Modelica Conference, Versailles, France, September 21-23, 2015 ,
number 118, pages 159–169. Link ¨oping University Electronic Press,
2015.
[6] D. Broman, C. Brooks, L. Greenberg, E. A. Lee, M. Masin, S. Tripakis,
and M. Wetter. Determinate composition of FMUs for co-simulation.
InProceedings of the Eleventh ACM International Conference on
Embedded Software , EMSOFT ’13, pages 2:1–2:12, Piscataway, NJ,
USA, 2013. IEEE Press.
[7] P. Bulychev, A. David, K. G. Larsen, M. Miku ˇcionis, D. B. Poulsen,
A. Legay, and Z. Wang. UPPAAL-SMC: Statistical model checking for
priced timed automata. arXiv preprint arXiv:1207.1272 , 2012.[8] P. E. Bulychev, A. David, K. G. Larsen, A. Legay, G. Li, and D. B.
Poulsen. Rewrite-based statistical model checking of WMTL. RV,
7687:260–275, 2012.
[9] F. Cassez, P. G. de Aledo, and P. G. Jensen. WUPPAAL: Computation of
Worst-Case Execution-Time for Binary Programs with UPPAAL , pages
560–577. Springer International Publishing, Cham, 2017.
[10] F. Cremona, M. Lohstroh, D. Broman, M. D. Natale, E. A. Lee, and
S. Tripakis. Step revision in hybrid co-simulation with FMI. In 2016
ACM/IEEE International Conference on Formal Methods and Models
for System Design, MEMOCODE 2016, Kanpur, India, November 18-
20, 2016 , pages 173–183. IEEE, 2016.
[11] A. David, D. Du, K. G. Larsen, A. Legay, M. Miku ˇcionis, D. B.
Poulsen, and S. Sedwards. Statistical model checking for stochastic
hybrid systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:1208.3856 , 2012.
[12] A. David, K. Larsen, A. Legay, M. Miku ˇcionis, D. Poulsen, and
S. Sedwards. Runtime veriﬁcation of biological systems. Leveraging
Applications of Formal Methods, Veriﬁcation and Validation. Technolo-
gies for Mastering Change , pages 388–404, 2012.
[13] A. David, K. G. Larsen, A. Legay, M. Mikucionis, and D. B. Poulsen.
Uppaal SMC tutorial. International Journal on Software Tools for
Technology Transfer , 17(4):397, 2015.
[14] A. David, K. G. Larsen, A. Legay, M. Miku ˇcionis, D. B. Poulsen, J. van
Vliet, and Z. Wang. Statistical model checking for networks of priced
timed automata. In FORMATS , volume 6919 of LNCS , pages 80–96,
2011.
[15] A. David, K. G. Larsen, A. Legay, U. Nyman, and A. Wasowski. Timed
I/O automata: a complete speciﬁcation theory for real-time systems.
InProceedings of the 13th ACM International Conference on Hybrid
Systems: Computation and Control, HSCC 2010, Stockholm, Sweden,
April 12-15, 2010 , pages 91–100, 2010.
[16] FMI Standard Orginization. FMI support in tools. http://fmi-
standard.org/tools/.
[17] O. Gadyatskaya, R. R. Hansen, K. G. Larsen, A. Legay, M. C. Olesen,
and D. B. Poulsen. Modelling attack-defense trees using timed automata.
InInternational Conference on Formal Modeling and Analysis of Timed
Systems , pages 35–50. Springer International Publishing, 2016.
[18] S. Guermazi, S. Dhouib, A. Cuccuru, C. Letavernier, and S. G ´erard.
Integration of UML models in FMI-based co-simulation. In Proceedings
of the Symposium on Theory of Modeling & Simulation , TMS-DEVS
’16, pages 7:1–7:8, San Diego, CA, USA, 2016. Society for Computer
Simulation International.
[19] C. Jegourel, A. Legay, and S. Sedwards. A platform for high perfor-
mance statistical model checking–PLASMA. Tools and Algorithms for
the Construction and Analysis of Systems , pages 498–503, 2012.
[20] J. H. Kim, A. Boudjadar, U. Nyman, M. Mikucionis, K. G. Larsen, and
I. Lee. Quantitative schedulability analysis of continuous probability
tasks in a hierarchical context. In Component-Based Software Engineer-
ing (CBSE), 2015 18th International ACM SIGSOFT Symposium on ,
pages 91–100. IEEE, 2015.
[21] Object Management Group. fUML. http://www.omg.org/spec/FUML/.
[22] M. Pazold, S. Burhenne, J. Radon, S. Herkel, and F. Antretter. Integration
of Modelica models into an existing simulation software using FMI
for co-simulation. In Proceedings of the 9th International MODELICA
Conference; September 3-5; 2012; Munich; Germany , number 76, pages
949–954. Linkping University Electronic Press; Linkpings universitet,
2012.
[23] N. Pedersen, T. Bojsen, J. Madsen, and M. Vejlgaard-Laursen. FMI
for co-simulation of embedded control software. In The First Japanese
Modelica Conferences, May 23-24, Tokyo, Japan , number 124, pages 70–
77. Linkping University Electronic Press, Linkpings universitet, 2016.
[24] A. Pfeffer. IBAL: A probabilistic rational programming language. In In
Proc. 17th IJCAI , pages 733–740. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, 2001.
9
