--- Page 1 ---
Model Checking and Evaluating QoS of Batteries in
MPSoC Dataﬂow Applications via Hybrid Automata
Waheed Ahmad, Marijn Jongerden, Mari ¨elle Stoelinga, Jaco van de Pol
University of Twente, The Netherlands
Email:fw.ahmad, m.r.jongerden, m.i.a.stoelinga, j.c.vandepol g@utwente.nl
Abstract —System lifetime is a major design constraint for
battery-powered mobile embedded systems. The increasing gap
between the energy demand of portable devices and their
battery capacities is further limiting durability of mobile devices.
Thus, the guarantees over Quality of Service (QoS) of battery-
constrained devices under strict battery capacities are of primary
interest for mobile embedded systems’ manufacturers and stake-
holders.
This paper presents a novel approach for deriving QoS of
applications modelled as synchronous dataﬂow (SDF) graphs.
We map these applications on heterogeneous multiprocessor plat-
forms that are partitioned into Voltage and Frequency Islands,
together with multiple kinetic battery models (KiBaMs). By
modelling the whole system as hybrid automata, and applying
model-checking, we evaluate, (1) system lifetime; and (2) mini-
mum required initial battery capacities to achieve the desired
application performance. We demonstrate that our approach
shows a signiﬁcant improvement in terms of scalability, as
compared to a priced timed automata based KiBaM model. This
approach also allows early detection of design errors via model
checking.
I. I NTRODUCTION
Mobile computing has experienced a major upswing over
the last two decades. As a result, applications with increasing
functionality and complexity are continuously implemented
on mobile embedded devices such as smart phones, allowing
these systems to operate independently. However, this trend
has increased the energy consumption of mobile devices
manifold. On the other hand, battery energy densities have
not grown at the same rate over the years, thus leading to
system lifetime as a major design constraint. In this paper, we
deﬁne the lifetime as the time one can use the battery before
it is empty.
Mobile embedded systems are often powered only by batter-
ies that may or may not be recharged regularly by an external
power source. For example, in a military Software Deﬁned
Radio that is being operated in a desert or on a mountain
where energy supplies are unreliable, the primary Quality of
Service (QoS) concern is to determine the system lifetime.
Similarly, a geostationary satellite with solar panels to charge
on-board batteries, is recharged at a regular intervals of 12
hours when facing the sun. However, the satellites have strict
limitations regarding mass and volume. In this case, the main
QoS interest is to assess the battery sizes and weight that
yield the performance criteria. In these cases, the evaluation of
the QoS of battery-constrained mobile embedded systems has
emerged as one of the most critical, challenging and essentialconcern for manufacturers, investors and users.
One can identify three QoS factors, and their relation with
three different design choices, as given in Table I. First, the
throughput of a system, deﬁned as a measure of how many
units of information a system can process in a given amount
of time, has a direct impact on energy consumption which in
turn inﬂuences the system lifetime. Secondly, the number of
processors affects both the system lifetime, and manufacturing
cost of the overall system. Lastly, the number of batteries
relates not only to system lifetime and cost, but also to the
mass and volume of a system. Therefore, this paper takes in
account aforementioned design alternatives, with respect to
system lifetime and minimum battery capacities.
This paper considers a very intuitive battery model termed
Kinetic Battery Model (KiBaM) [16] as a representation of
dynamic behaviour of a conventional rechargeable battery,
see Figure 1. A KiBaM models the total charge in a battery
as two separate tanks. One tank holds the charge which is
immediately available to be consumed by the load. The other
tank holds the charge which is chemically bound. It is because
a chemical kinetics process is used as its basis, that the model
is termed kinetic. Experimental studies show that the KiBaM
provides a good approximation of the system lifetime across
various battery types [13].
To reduce the power consumption, different system-level
power management methods like Dynamic Power Manage-
ment (switching to low power state) (DPM) [7] and Dy-
namic V oltage and Frequency Scaling (throttling processor
frequency) (DVFS) [19] has gained signiﬁcant value and
success. The concept of voltage-frequency islands (VFIs) [11]
further allows us to cluster a group of processors in such a
way that each VFI runs on a common clock frequency/voltage.
This achieves ﬁne-grained system-level power management. In
CMOS based processors, voltage/frequency scaling by a factor
ofscauses the battery current to scale by s3[8]. Thus, the
system lifetime depends hugely on the battery capacity and
the level of the load current applied to it.
If we have multiple batteries in the system, another
important factor contributing to overall lifetime is the usage
pattern of the batteries, i.e., how batteries are scheduled. This
leads to an important research problem of devising a battery-
aware scheduling mechanism, where given a set of tasks, a
set of resources to execute the tasks, and a given number of
batteries, we are able to derive a battery-optimal schedule of
tasks.

--- Page 2 ---
Design
ChoicesQoS
Factors System
LifetimeCostVolume
and Mass
Required Throughput 3
Number of Processors 3 3
Number of Batteries 3 3 3
TABLE I: Relation between Design Choices and QoS factors
The charge stored in a battery is represented by a ﬁnite set
of continuous variables in the KiBaM, making the behaviour
of KiBaM hybrid. Synthesising optimal battery schedules
for multiple batteries using existing analysis techniques for
hybrid systems, is very expensive. Therefore, the state-of-the-
art method in [14] discretises the KiBaM, and models it as
priced timed automata (PTA) [6]. Furthermore, for a ﬁxed
load, this approach deploys the model-checker U PPAAL Cora
to search the whole state-space, and generating the optimal
battery schedule. However, this method also does not solve the
scalability problem. As increasing the initial battery capacities
leads to searching the bigger state-space, this approach only
allows to model limited battery capacities. Furthermore, this
approach discretises the temporal dimension, which limits its
accuracy.
We propose an alternative, novel approach based on Hybrid
Automata (HA) [10]. These extend timed automata [4] (for
the modelling of time-critical systems and time constraints)
by continuous variables. HA can be analysed using U PPAAL
[5], that supports both model-checking and highly scalable
Monte Carlo simulations. In contrast to discretisation, as done
in [14], we take into account the continuous variables of
the KiBaM by modelling it as a hybrid automaton, which
obviously makes it a more accurate model than PTA-based
KiBaM. This approach enables us to utilise U PPAAL to employ
highly scalable technique of Monte Carlo simulations to assess
various QoS parameters, such as, system lifetime and adequate
battery capacities. In this paper, we show that our approach
scales better than the one presented in [14]. Furthermore, we
also utilise U PPAAL for applying model checking to verify
various user-deﬁned properties. Thus, as opposed to other
simulation based tools for hybrid systems, modelling as HA
and using U PPAAL provides an additional beneﬁt of model
checking against state-based properties.
We use Synchronous Dataﬂow (SDF) [15] as a computa-
tional model. SDF provides a natural representation of real-
time streaming and digital signal processing applications.
In this paper, SDF graphs are used to represent software
applications which are partitioned into tasks, with inter-task
dependencies and their synchronisation properties.
Our approach takes four ingredients: (1) a platform model
that describes the speciﬁcs of the hardware, such as, VFI
partitions, frequency levels and power usage per processor;
(2) an SDF graph scheduler that maps the application tasks
on the platform model in a static-order manner; (3) given
number of batteries; and (4) a battery scheduler that deﬁnes the
scheduling scheme of batteries. For given battery capacitiesand timing constraints, we compute system lifetime (SDF
graph iterations). Similarly, for given application performance
criteria, we determine the adequate battery capacities. This
method facilitates system designers to evaluate aforementioned
QoS factors for different design choices, such as, varying
number of VFIs, processors, and batteries. Furthermore, this
method also allows system designers to detect subtle battery
design errors in early phases via model checking.
In particular, our main contributions are as follows. (1)
We utilise hybrid automata to model check and assess QoS
of multiple KiBaMs for different design alternatives, without
discretising time. (2) We consider realistic hardware platforms
equipped with the novel energy management techniques, com-
pared to the state-of-the-art [20]; (3) We analyse SDF graphs
as input which are more versatile and allow more realistic
data-dependencies than acyclic applications [9] [14] [20]; (4)
We show that our approach allows better scalability than PTA-
based discretised KiBaM [14]; (5) Our approach allows early
detection of design errors via model checking.
Paper organisation. Section II reviews related work. Sec-
tion III formalises the problem, and translation to HA using
UPPAAL is illustrated in Section IV. Section V experimen-
tally evaluates the QoS analysis. Finally, Section VII draws
conclusions and outlines possible future research.
II. R ELATED WORK
An extensive survey paper [13] outlines the broad research
work on various battery models. The work in [3] applies the
combination of DVFS and DPM, on VFI-partitioned heteroge-
neous processors. However, this paper assumes energy source
to be ideal. We solve this limitation by considering a realistic
model of batteries.
The state-of-the-art methods in the realm of battery-aware
scheduling for multiple batteries, are presented in [14] and [9].
The approach in [14], in comparison to ours, discretises time.
This approach helps to ﬁnd optimal battery schedules, but do
not scale well because of the discretisation. The technique in
[9] models KiBaMs as hybrid like us, and discretises time
to search the state-space, leading to the better results than
the work in [14]. But, due to the fact that the state-space
grows larger with the number of batteries, the scalability of this
approach also suffers. We, on the other hand, run Monte Carlo
simulations, that allows us to avoid the state-space explosion.
The analysis shows that the scalability of our approach is better
than the technique in [14].
A more advanced technique that also utilises hybrid au-
tomata like us and [9], is presented in [20]. In this paper,
the KiBaM provides energy to an uniprocessor. Unlike our
method, this approach discusses a single battery case only.
Another novel work in [12] extends KiBaMs with random
initial SoC and load, without discretising time. In this way,
probabilistic guarantees about the system lifetime can be
provided. In comparison to our work, this technique is also
conﬁned to a single KiBaM only. Table II summarises different
aforementioned KiBaM analysis methods.
To the best of our knowledge, there are no papers that

--- Page 3 ---
MethodWithout
DiscretisationMultiple
KiBaMs
[9] [14] 7 3
[20] 3 7
[12] 3 7
Our Method 3 3
TABLE II: Comparison among different battery analysis methods
b(t) a(t)
ki(t)hb ha1 c c
Fig. 1: Model of a KiBaM
analyse multiple KiBaMs without discretising time.
III. S YSTEM MODEL DEFINITION
We formalise battery model, SDF graphs, and hardware plat-
form model in subsection III-A, III-B and III-C respectively.
A. Kinetic Battery Model
The kinetic battery model (KiBaM) [16] is a mathematical
characterisation of state of charge of a battery. Key feature
is that not all energy stored in a battery can be utilised
at all times. To model this phenomenon, the total charge
stored in a battery is divided into two “tanks”, the available
charge and the bound charge , see Figure 1. Only the available
charge can be consumed immediately by a load at the time-
dependent rate i, and thereby behaves similar to an ideal
energy source. The bound charge is converted to available
charge at a rate proportional to the height difference with the
proportionality factor being the rate constant k, and is available
to be consumed. Thus, bound charge replenishes available
charge , and this effect is termed recovery eect .
If the widths of the available and bound charge tanks are
cand1 crespectively, then the tanks are ﬁlled to heights
haandhb, and the charges in both tanks are a=chaandb=
(1 c)hbrespectively. Formally, the KiBaM is characterised
by the following system of differential equations.
_a(t) = i(t) +k(hb ha) (1)
_b(t) = k(hb ha) (2)
The system starts in equilibrium, i.e. ha=hb. With an initial
capacity of C, the initial conditions are a(0) = cCandb(0) =
(1 c)C. The battery is considered empty when a=ha= 0,
as it cannot supply charge any more at the given moment even
though it may still contain bound charge. The system lifetime
ends when all batteries are emptied.Deﬁnition 1. AKiBaM systemKS= (B;Cap)consists of a
ﬁnite set of KiBaMs B=fbat1;:::; batmg, and a function
Cap:B!R0denoting the initial capacity of each bat2B.
In our case-studies, we consider batteries having the ca-
pacity of 1300 mAh, as used in the Samsung Galaxy Fame
smartphones [1].
B. SDF Graphs
Typically, real-time streaming applications execute a set of
periodic tasks, which consume and produce a ﬁxed amount
of data. Such applications are naturally modelled as SDF
graphs [15]: a directed, connected graph in which tasks are
represented by actors . Actors communicate with each other via
streams of data elements, represented by tokens . The tokens
are transported between the actors via edges . The execution
of an actor is known as an ( actor )ring .
Deﬁnition 2. AnSDF graph is a tupleG= (A;D; Tok 0;)
where:Ais a ﬁnite set of actors, DA2N2is a ﬁnite
set of dependency edges, Tok 0:D!Ndenotes distribution
of initial tokens in each edge, and the execution time of each
actor is given by :A!N1.
Deﬁnition 3. Given an SDF graph G= (A;D; Tok 0;), the
sets of input andoutput edges of an actora2Aare deﬁned
respectively as In(a) =f(a0;a;p;q )2Dja02A;p;q2Ng
andOut(a) =f(a;b;p;q )2Djb2A;p;q2Ng:The con-
sumption andproduction rate of an edgee= (a;b;p;q )2D
are deﬁned respectively as CR(e) =qandPR(e) =p:
Informally, actor acan ﬁre if each input edge (a0;a;p;q )2
In(a)ofacontains at least qtokens; ﬁring actor aremoves
qtokens from the input edge (a0;a;p;q ). Firing lasts for (a)
time units and ends by producing p0tokens on each output
edges (a;b;p0;q0)2Out(a).
Example 1. Figure 2 shows the SDF graph of an MPEG-
4 decoder [18]. The SDF graph contains ﬁve actors
A=fFD, VLD, IDC, RC, MC g, representing the tasks per-
formed in MPEG-4 decoding. For example, the frame detector
(FD) determines the number of macro blocks to decode. To
decode a single frame, FD must process between 0 and 99
macroblocks, i.e., x2f0;1;:::; 99gin Figure 2.
Arrows between the actors depict the edges which hold
tokens (dots) representing macroblocks. The execution time
(ms) of the actors is represented by a number inside the actor
nodes. The numbers near the source and destination of each
edge are the production and consumption rates respectively.
To avoid unbounded accumulation of tokens in a certain
edge, we require SDF graphs to be consistent .
Deﬁnition 4. Arepetition vector of an SDF graph G=
(A;D; Tok 0;)is a function :A!N0such that for
every edge (a;b;p;q )2Dfroma2Atob2A, the
relationp:(a) =q:(b)exists. An SDF graph is consistent
iff(a)>0for alla2A.
Deﬁnition 5. Let us consider an SDF graph G=
(A;D; Tok 0;)with a repetition vector . An iteration ofG
is deﬁned as a set of actor ﬁrings such that for each a2A, the
set contains exactly (a)ﬁrings of actor a. Thus, each actor
ﬁres according to in an iteration.

--- Page 4 ---
FD,2 MC,1
RC,1VLD,1 IDC,1
1
1
1 111 1x11 1
1
x1
x1
1111x1
Fig. 2: SDF Graph of an MPEG-4 Decoder
C. Platform Application Model
A Platform Application Model (PAM) models a multi-
processor platform where the application, modelled as SDF
graph, is mapped on. Our PAM models supports several
features, including (1) heterogeneity , i.e., actors can run on
certain type of processors only; (2) a partitioning of the proces-
sors in voltage and frequency islands ; (3) different frequency
levels each processor can run on; (4) power consumed by a
processor in a certain frequency, both when in use and when
idle; (5) power and time-overhead required to switch between
frequency levels.
Deﬁnition 6. Aplatform application model (PAM) is a tuple
P= (;;F; Iocc;Iidle;Itr;Ttr;act)consisting of
a ﬁnite set of processors  assuming that
 =f1;:::;ngis partitioned into disjoint blocks
1;:::; kof voltage/frequency islands (VFIs),
a function: !2Aindicating which processors can
handle which actors,
a ﬁnite set of discrete frequency levels available to all
processors denoted by F=ff1;:::;fmg,
a function Iocc: F!Ndenoting the operating load
current , if the processor 2is running at a certain
frequency level f2Fin the working state,
a function Iidle: F!Ndenoting the idle load
current , if the processor 2is running at a certain
frequency level f2Fin the idle state,
a function Itr: F2!Nexpressing the transition
load current , if processor 2switches the running
frequency from f2Fto another frequency f2F,
a function Ttr: F2!Nexpressing the time
overhead of switching from one frequency level f2F
to anotherf2Ffor each processor 2, and
the valuation act:AF!N1deﬁning the execution
timeactof each actor a2Amapped on a processor at
a certain frequency level f2F.
Example 2. Exynos 4210 is a state-of-the-art processor used
in high-end platforms such as Samsung Galaxy Note, SII etc,
and has 5 DVFS levels [17]. Later in Section V, we consider
Exynos 4210 as an use-case for experimental evaluation.
Deﬁnition 7. Given an SDF graph G= (A;D; Tok 0;), a
static-order (SO) schedule is a function : R!(A
F)[(?F)that assigns to each processor 2over time,
an ordered list of actors or idle slots to be executed at some
frequency, where?represents the idle slots.Deﬁnition 8. The throughput for a static-order schedule of
an SDF graph G= (A;D; Tok 0;)is the average number of
graph iterations that are executed per time unit, measured over
a sufﬁciently long period.
As discussed earlier, in case of more than one battery in the
system, the batteries are chosen according to some schedule
or scheduling policy. In most systems, the batteries are used
sequentially, i.e., only when one battery is empty, the other is
used [14]. However, as shown in [14], a speciﬁc scheduling
scheme termed best-of-allachieves better system lifetime
than other schemes. For the same reason, we consider best-
of-all in this paper. In this scheduling scheme, after an SDF
graph iteration ﬁnishes, (i.e., not during the execution of the
iteration) the battery having the highest available charge is
selected to provide energy for the next iteration.
IV. T RANSLATION TO HYBRID AUTOMATA
A. Hybrid Automata
Timed automata are a popular and powerful formalism
to model and analyse real-time systems [4]. TA are state-
transition diagrams augmented with real-valued clocks, which
can be used in enabling conditions for transitions and in state
invariants that enforce deadlines.
Hybrid automata extend timed automata by continuous
variables, which we use to model hybrid behaviour of the
batteries. Let Xbe a ﬁnite set of continuous variables. A
variable valuation over Xis a mapping :X!R, where R
is the set of reals. We write RXfor the set of valuations over
X. Valuations over Xevolve over time according to delay
functionsF:R0RX!RX, where for a delay dand
valuation,F(d;)provides the new valuation after a delay
ofd.
Deﬁnition 9. Ahybrid automaton His a tuple
(L;Act;X;E;F; Inv;l0), whereLis a ﬁnite set of locations ;
Actis a ﬁnite set of actions, co-actions and internal -actions;
Xis a ﬁnite set of continuous variables; Eis a ﬁnite set of
edges of the form (l;g;a;';l0), wherelandl0are locations,
gis a predicate on RX, action label a2Actand'is a binary
relation on RX;Inv assigns an invariant predicate Inv(l)
to any location l; for each location l2L,F(l)is a delay
function; and l02Lis the initial location .
In particular, HA can be analysed by the tool U PPAAL ,
where each component of the system is described by an
automaton whose clocks can evolve with various rates. These
rates can be speciﬁed with, e.g., ODEs. We utilise U PPAAL
engine to perform Monte Carlo simulations to estimate QoS,
and to perform model checking.
B. Translation to Hybrid Automata
Our framework consists of separate models of KiBaMs, a
KiBaM scheduler, an SDF graph scheduler, and the processor
application model. In this way, we divide the problem of
evaluating the QoS in terms of power source, tasks and
resources. In this section, we describe the translation of an
SDF graph scheduler along with a processor application model
and KiBaMs to HA using U PPAAL .

--- Page 5 ---
Gschedj
Processor jGobs KschedKy
KobsstartNextIter !
ringFinished !
re! end!startNextIter !
emptied !
allEmptied !
Fig. 3: Interactions between HA of different components
Given an SDF graph G= (A;D; Tok 0;)mapped on a
processor application model (;;F; Ttr;act)powered by a
KiBaM systemKS= (B;Cap;Iocc;Iidle;Itr), we generate a
parallel composition of HA:
KschedkK1k;:::;kKmkKobskGsched 1k;:::;kGsched nk
Processor 1k;:::;kProcessor nkGobs
Here, the automaton Ksched models the scheduling scheme
of batteries. This paper considers the best-of-all scheduling
scheme, i.e, after every iteration, the battery with the highest
available charge is chosen to serve for the next iteration. The
HAK1;:::;Kmmodel the batteries B=fbat1;:::; batmg.
The automatonKobskeeps account of the end of system life-
time by counting the empty batteries. Similarly, the automaton
Gsched implements the static-order ﬁring of SDF actors on
the processors. The HA Processor 1;:::; Processor nmodel
the processors  =f1;:::;ngThe SDF graph observer
Gobscounts if each processor has ﬁred all its mapped actors,
according to its static-order schedule. Hence, this automaton
determines when an iteration is ﬁnished. Note that the resulting
hybrid automata is trivially extensible in the number of proces-
sors and batteries. Thus, the translation is, at least, composable
with regards to the KiBaM system and PAM.
Figure 3 shows the interactions between the HA of different
components. The interested readers can see some of the
UPPAAL models in Appendix. Due to lack of space, we refer
to [2] for more details on translation and U PPAAL models.
V. E XPERIMENTAL EVALUATION VIA MPEG-4 D ECODER
We evaluate QoS factors by means of an example of the
MPEG-4 decoder in Figure 2. We assume that MPEG-4
decoder is mapped on Exynos 4210 processors. The processors
are provided energy by Samsung batteries. In our experiments,
we usec= 1=6andk= 2:232410 4s 1, as in [14].
The processors are available with two frequency levels (MHz)
f2= 1400 andf1= 1032:7[17]. Table III shows the idle and
operating load currents of all processors at both frequencies.
We evaluate the system lifetime in terms of completed number
of video frames, with respect to various design choices dis-
cussed earlier, i.e., varying (1) frames per second (throughput);
(2) number of processors; and (3) batteries. For these choices,
we assess adequate battery capacities. Due to space limitation,
we present adequate battery capacities only for one battery.
The SO schedules considered in this section are given in [2].
A. Varying Frames per Second
Let us consider that we have 6 Exynos 4120 processors
 =f1;:::; 6gserved by two batteries B=fbat1;bat2g.
We consider different SO schedules with varying frames perVoltage(V) Frequency(MHz) I idle(mA) I occ(mA)
1:2 1400 20 500
1:00 1032 :7 8 190
1:2 1400 20 500
1:00 1032 :7 8 190
1:2 1400 20 500
1:00 1032 :7 8 190
1:2 1400 20 500
1:00 1032 :7 8 190
TABLE III: Description of Exynos 4210 Processors
100 120 140 160 180 2001;6001;8002;000
Frames per SecondNumber of Video Frames
Fig. 4: System lifetime against varying fps100 120 140 160 180 200700800
Frames per SecondBattery Capacity (mAh)
Fig. 5: Min. required capacity for bat1
second (fps) constraints. For those SO schedules, Figure 4
shows the total number of video frames per second completed.
As we can see from Figure 4, at tighter performance con-
straints (throughput) when the idle time of processors is not
sufﬁcient to move to low power state, the batteries are drained
more rapidly. Thus, we achieve fewer iterations. If we require
fewer frames per second from an MPEG-4 decoder, then more
iterations are acquired.
For the same SO schedules considered earlier, we com-
pute the minimum battery capacities to complete 1000 video
frames. The minimum required initial capacity Cap(bat1)for
the battery bat12Bis shown in Figure 5. It can be seen from
Figure 5 that if we relax the frames per second constraint, the
minimum required capacity also decreases.
Nevertheless, if the video quality is enhanced from 125
to 200 fps, then the increase in required battery capacity is
relatively small, equal to 84 mAh. However, the improvement
in the video quality is considerable. Thus, higher performance
can also be achieved at the expense of a small increase in the
battery capacities, leading to high-performance systems with
less mass and volume. Hence, this method allows us to obtain
a Pareto front by sweeping throughput constraints, for a ﬁxed
number of processors and batteries.
B. Varying Number of Processors
In this case, we consider two batteries, and different SO
schedules all of which yield 71 fps. Figure 6 shows the
total number of video frames completed for varying number
of processors. As we can see from Figure 6, for the same
battery capacities, more processors achieve more or equal
number of frames. The reason is that, if we reduce the number
of processors, the same amount of work is done on fewer
processors to attain same throughput, resulting in running on
higher frequencies most of the time. Therefore, battery charge
is consumed more rapidly, if the number of processors are

--- Page 6 ---
2 4 61;4001;6001;8002;000
Number of ProcessorsNumber of Video Frames
Fig. 6: System lifetime against varying
processors2 4 67008009001;000
Number of ProcessorsBattery Capacity (mAh)
Fig. 7: Minimum required capacity for
bat1
1 2 3 41;0002;0003;0004;000
Number of BatteriesNumber of Video Frames
Fig. 8: System lifetime against varying
batteries1 2 3 44006008001;0001;200
Number of BatteriesBattery Capacity (mAh)
Fig. 9: Minimum required capacity for
bat1
reduced.
For the same SO schedules, Figure 7 shows the minimum
required capacity Cap(bat1)to complete 1000 video frames.
The results reiterate the earlier conclusions in Figure 6 that,
to achieve the same throughput, fewer processors carrying out
the work of same magnitude requires larger battery capacities.
Hence, using this method, a system designer can estimate
QoS for different design alternatives. For instance, in our
running example, one can clearly see that we can achieve
same throughput for 4 processors, as 5, without requiring extra
capacities for batteries. Therefore, we may not need more
processors in our platform, and reach a certain throughput
with fewer number of processors, and same battery capacities,
contributing to low-cost embedded systems with reduced mass
and volume.
C. Varying Number of Batteries
Let us assume that we have 6 Exynos 4120 processors. We
further consider a SO schedule producing 71 fps. For varying
batteries, Figure 8 and 9 shows the total number of video
frames completed, and minimum required initial capacity for
bat12Bto complete 1000 video frames respectively. As it
can be seen from Figure 8, increasing the number of batteries
improves the attainable number of frames linearly.
However, if we analyse the Figure 9, we can see that
increasing the number of batteries does not reduce the battery
capacities at a linear rate. Therefore, we can conclude that,
having fewer batteries with larger capacities is more beneﬁcial
than higher number of batteries with smaller capacities. This
achieves low-cost and high-performance systems.Cap (bat1)Cap (bat2) S1 (computation time) S2 (computation time) S3 (computation time)
PTA-KiBaM HA-KiBaM PTA-KiBaM HA-KiBaM PTA-KiBaM HA-KiBaM
1.2510 41.2510 40 (520) 0 (28) 0 (200) 0 (46) 0 (2130) 0 (51.4)
2.510 42.510 40 (510) 0 (55) 1 (41060) 0 (48) Out of Memory 0 (52.7)
3.7510 43.7510 4Out of Memory 2 (62) 1 (14810) 0 (49) Out of Memory 2 (52.8)
510 4510 4Out of Memory 4 (64) Out of Memory 2 (49) Out of Memory 4 (54.1)
TABLE IV: Comparison of two approaches wrt varying battery capacities.
Batteries HA-KiBaM PTA-KiBaM
1 1 N/A
2 4 Out of Memory
3 6 Out of Memory
4 8 Out of Memory
5 9 Out of Memory
6 12 Out of Memory
7 14 Out of Memory
8 16 Out of Memory
9 17 Out of Memory
10 20 Out of Memory
TABLE V: Comparison of two approaches wrt number of batteries.
D. Comparison with PTA-KiBaM
In this subsection, we compare the approach presented
in this paper (HA-KiBaM) with the PTA-based approach
(PTA-KiBaM) [14]. Let us take the example of an MPEG-
4 decoder in Figure 2. We assume that there are two batteries
B=fbat1;bat2gin the system. We consider three arbitrary
SO schedules. i.e., S1, S2 and S3. It is worth mentioning
that the work in [14] evaluates the completed number of
tasks, instead of iterations. However, as iterations are a key
metric in SDF graphs, we compare both techniques in terms
of completed number of iterations (video frames per second).
Columns 3-8 in Table IV show the completed number
of iterations and computation time (ms), calculated using
both methods, against different battery capacities (mAh) in
Columns 1-2. The experiments were run on a dual-core 2.8
GHz machine with 8 GB RAM. Table IV shows that HA-
KiBaM achieves the same results as PTA-KiBaM except S2.
The reason of not producing the same results in S2 is that
PTA-KiBaM allows to change the active battery during the
iteration. Whereas, we consider a speciﬁc scheduling scheme,
where we change the battery after an iteration is ﬁnished.
However, the biggest advantage of HA-KiBaM is the scale
of capacities it can handle. As Table IV shows, PTA-KiBaM
can only handle very small battery capacities that are able
to ﬁnish not more than one video frame. This makes PTA-
KiBaM impracticable for modern-day systems, as opposed to
our method that scales to much larger capacities (see Section
V). Furthermore, PTA-KiBaM requires considerably longer
computation time than HA-KiBaM. Please note that zero in
Table IV means that the battery capacities are not enough,
even to ﬁnish one iteration (frame per second).
In addition to the battery capacities, our method also scales
better to the number of batteries. Table V compares the
iterations completed for varying number of batteries for both
methods. For this experiment, we consider SO schedule S3,
andCap(bat)= 510 4mAh for all bat2B.
VI. M ODEL CHECKING VIA MPEG-4 D ECODER
In this section, we demonstrate the analysis of functional
and temporal properties, using the U PPAAL model checker and

--- Page 7 ---
its query language. We consider the case-study of an MPEG-4
decoder mapped on Exynos 4210 processors, and powered by
a KiBaM system.
Deadlock
Checking deadlock freedom is achieved via the U PPAAL
query (A[] not deadlock). This query allows us to check if a
certain static-order schedule is deadlock free or not.
Parallel ﬁrings of actors
We can check whether any actors can ﬁre in paral-
lel. For example, actors pandqmapped on the pro-
cessors0and1respectively, can ﬁre in parallel if
the query E<>SDFScheduler 0:activeActor ==p and
SDFScheduler 1:activeActor ==qevaluates to true. In our
experiment, p=MC andq=RC. As these two actors cannot
ﬁre in parallel, the answer to this query turns out to be false.
Same running frequency in a VFI
We can also check safety properties such as, at a
given time, all processors belonging to the same VFI
should not run at the different frequency. For this pur-
pose, we create a variable named “curr freq”available to
all processors, that keeps account of current running fre-
quency of each processor. If we have two processors
0and1in a same VFI, then we check the query
A[]Processor 0:curr freq ==Processor 1:curr freq to
verify this property.
In the same way, functional correctness of properties related
to KiBaMs can also be veriﬁed. However, to verify hybrid
properties, U PPAAL offers statistical model checking instead
of classical model checking, even though we do not have
stochastic properties in our system. In the following, we
demonstrate model checking of functional requirements of
KiBaMs.
Fair Scheduling
We can also verify if only the best battery out
of all batteries is selected after each iteration. Let us
assume that we have two batteries, and an integer
empty count to count empty number of batteries. We run
the query Pr[<=1500 ](<>bound 1 bound 0>n and
empty count<2)that determines if difference between the
bound charge of two batteries does not exceed more than a
certain amount, and each battery gets a fair chance to recover
its bound charge. U PPAAL answers that the probability for this
query to hold is [0,0.0973938] with 0.95 conﬁdence, which
means that this property is not satisﬁed. In our experiments,
nis 4.
Active Number of Batteries
Similarly, we can also check that no more than one bat-
tery should be active at any given time. Let us assume
that we have two batteries, and boolean variables b0active
and b1active is assigned to each battery respectively, to
check if that battery is active. To verify this property, we
use the query Pr[<=1500 ](<>b0active ==true andb1active ==true ). The probability for this property to
hold is [0,0.0973938] with 0.95 conﬁdence, which means that
this property is not satisﬁed.
VII. C ONCLUSIONS
With the growing gap between the energy demand and bat-
tery densities, yet compact methods for guaranteeing QoS of
multiple KiBaMs are needed. We have presented a novel tech-
nique to predict system lifetime for SDF-modelled streaming
applications, mapped on the processors equipped with energy
reduction techniques and powered by multiple batteries. This
provides us with a best trade-off between the throughput, the
number of processors and batteries. The batteries are modelled
as a hybrid system, which has the advantage of being accurate.
Future research direction is to explore the possibilities of
battery-aware scheduling. We also plan to analyse preemptive
scheduling, by having an observer automaton to record the
elapsed execution time during the execution of an actor.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This research is supported by the EU FP7 project SENSA-
TION (318490). The authors would like to thank reviewers
for their valuable comments.
REFERENCES
[1] Samsung Galaxy Fame Description. http://www.samsung.com/uk/
consumer/mobile-devices/smartphones/others/GT-S6810PWNBTU.
[2] W. Ahmad, M. Jongerden, M. Stoelinga, and J. van de Pol. Model check-
ing and evaluating QoS of batteries in MPSoC dataﬂow applications via
hybrid automata (extended version). Technical Report TR-CTIT-16-03,
University of Twente, 2016.
[3] W. Ahmad, P.K.F. H ¨olzenspies, M.I.A. Stoelinga, and J. van de Pol.
Green computing: Power optimisation of VFI-based real-time multipro-
cessor dataﬂow applications. In DSD’15 , pages 271–275, Aug 2015.
[4] R. Alur and D. L. Dill. A theory of timed automata. Theoretical
Computer Science , 126:183–235, 1994.
[5] G. Behrmann, A. David, and K. G. Larsen. A tutorial on UPPAAL . In
Formal Methods for the Design of Real-Time Systems: 4th International
School on SFM-RT ’04 , LNCS, pages 200–236. Springer, 2004.
[6] G. Behrmann, K. G. Larsen, and J. I. Rasmussen. Optimal scheduling
using priced timed automata. SIGMETRICS Perform. Eval. Rev. ,
32(4):34–40, Mar. 2005.
[7] L. Benini, A. Bogliolo, and G. De Micheli. A survey of design tech-
niques for system-level dynamic power management. IEEE Transactions
on VLSI Systems , 8(3):299–316, June 2000.
[8] P. Chowdhury and C. Chakrabarti. Battery aware task scheduling for a
system-on-a-chip using voltage/clock scaling. In SIPS’02 , pages 201–
206, Oct 2002.
[9] M. Fox, D. Long, and D. Magazzeni. Automatic construction of efﬁcient
multiple battery usage policies. In IJCAI’11 , pages 2620–2625, 2011.
[10] T. Henzinger. The theory of hybrid automata. In Logic in Computer Sci-
ence, 1996. LICS ’96. Proceedings., Eleventh Annual IEEE Symposium
on, pages 278–292, Jul 1996.
[11] S. Herbert and D. Marculescu. Analysis of dynamic voltage/frequency
scaling in chip-multiprocessors. In ISLPED’07 , pages 38–43, Aug 2007.
[12] H. Hermanns, J. Krc ´al, and G. Nies. Recharging probably keeps batteries
alive. CoRR , abs/1502.07120, 2015.
[13] M. Jongerden and B. Haverkort. Which battery model to use? Software,
IET, 3(6):445–457, December 2009.
[14] M. Jongerden, B. Haverkort, H. Bohnenkamp, and J. Katoen. Maximiz-
ing system lifetime by battery scheduling. In DSN’09 , June 2009.
[15] E. A. Lee and D. G. Messerschmitt. Synchronous data ﬂow: Describing
signal processing algorithm for parallel computation. In COMPCON
’87, pages 310–315, 1987.
[16] J. F. Manwell and J. G. McGowan. Lead acid battery storage model for
hybrid energy systems. Solar Energy , 50(5):399 – 405, 1993.

--- Page 8 ---
[17] S. Park, J. Park, D. Shin, Y . Wang, Q. Xie, M. Pedram, and N. Chang.
Accurate modeling of the delay and energy overhead of dynamic voltage
and frequency scaling in modern microprocessors. TCAD , May 2013.
[18] B. Theelen, M. C. W. Geilen, T. Basten, J. P. M. V oeten, S. V .
Gheorghita, and S. Stuijk. A scenario-aware data ﬂow model for
combined long-run average and worst-case performance analysis. In
MEMOCODE’06 , pages 185–194, July 2006.
[19] M. Weiser, B. Welch, A. Demers, and S. Shenker. Scheduling for
reduced CPU energy. In OSDI’94 . USENIX Association, 1994.
[20] E. R. Wognsen, R. R. Hansen, and K. G. Larsen. Battery-aware
scheduling of mixed criticality systems. In ISoLA , pages 208–222, 2014.
APPENDIX
Here we show the HA models with respect to the MPEG-4
decoder example in Figure 2 that is mapped on Exynos 4210
processors and powered by KiBaMs, in Figure 10.
a) Hybrid Automaton Ksched .:The hybrid automaton
Ksched models the best-of-all scheduling scheme for KiBaMs,
as shown in Figure 10a.
The automaton Ksched is deﬁned as, Ksched =
(L;Act;X;E;F; Inv;l0). For each battery baty2B, we
include a location L=favail batygto indicate which the
battery is currently active. For B=fbat1;bat2;:::; batmg,
the initial location is, l0=avail bat1, indicating that the bat-
terybat1serves ﬁrst. We do not have any clocks and invariants
inKsched . The HAKsched has one urgent broadcast action,
i.e.,Act=fstartNextIter ?gto synchronise with Gobswhen
the current iteration ﬁnishes, so that Ksched can choose the
best battery for the next iteration. There is no delay function in
Ksched . The HAKsched contains one continuous variable X=
favail ygto denote the available in each baty2B, respec-
tively.Ksched has a variable: active KiBaM idthat determines
the currently active battery. For B=fbat1;bat2;:::; batmg,
the initial value of active KiBaM id=1, indicating that the
battery bat1is the ﬁrst to serve. For each battery bati2B
andbatk2B, the transition set Ehave following transitions.
avail batiavail k>=avail i;startNextIter ?;
active KiBaM id:=k                  ! avail batk
avail batiavail i>avail k;startNextIter ?;?                       ! avail bati
avail batkabati>=abatk;startNextIter ?;
active KiBaM id:=i                  ! avail bati
avail batkavail k>avail i;startNextIter ?;?                       ! avail batk
After each iteration ﬁnishes, the action StartNextIter syn-
chronises with Gobsto start the new iteration. But, before
the new iteration starts, the battery baty2Bwith the highest
available charge is determined using the guard conditions. This
symbolises that only the battery having highest charge is going
to serve for the next iteration, and all other batteries are going
to stay idle. For the battery bati2Band batk2B, the
guard condition availk>=availion the ﬁrst transition is
checking if the available charge of batk2Bis greater than
or equal to bati2B. If the guard condition turns out to be
true, then batk2Bprovides energy for the next iteration.
Otherwise, the guard condition on the second transition, i.e.,
availi > availkis satisﬁed, and bati2Bstays as the
active battery.
b) Hybrid Automata Ky.:The HAK1;:::;Kmmodel
the batteries B=fbat1;:::; batmg, according to the de-
scription in Section III-A. The model of baty2Bis shownin Figure 10b. This automaton informs Kobs, when the battery
batygets empty.
For each baty2B, the HAKyis deﬁned as,
Ky= (Ly;Acty;Xy;Ey;Fy;Invy;l0
y)whereLy=
fInitial;Emptiedg, andl0
y=fInitialg. The automatonKycon-
tains two continuous variables X=favail baty;bound batyg
to denote the available and bound charge in baty2B,
respectively. There is an urgent broadcast action in Ky, i.e,
Acty=femptied !gto synchronise with Kobs. The automaton
Kycontains number of variables: a boolean variable onyto
determine if the battery has available charge left or whether
it has run out of it; and a variable iyto annotate the load
current being consumed from baty2B. Initially, we have
ony=true andiy= 0. The transition set Eyhas only
transition, given as follows.
Initialony^avail y==0;emptied !;ony:=false                        ! Emptied
The above transition synchronises with Kobsover the urgent
channel emptied !, and is taken if the available charge avail y
reaches or falls below zero, emphasising that the battery
baty2Bis empty. As a result of this action, the value of
onychanges to false.
The initial location l0
yuses equations (1) and (2) as a delay
function. This represents that, as long as baty2Bis non-
empty, the available and bound charge of Kyevolves according
to equations (1) and (2) respectively.
c) Hybrid Automata Gschedj.:The HA Gschedj
implement the static-order ﬁring of SDF actors on the pro-
cessors. For this purpose, after Gobsinforms Gschedjthat
an iterations has started, Gschedjmap actors on Processor j
according to the SO schedule of that processor. When all
actors are ﬁred according to the SO schedule on Processor j,
GschedjinformGobsback, indicating the end of current
iteration. For a j2, Figure 10c presents the automaton
Gsched j, with respect to our running example.
For each j2 ,Gschedjis deﬁned as,
Gschedj = (Lj;Actj;Xj;Ej;Invj;l0
j). where
Lj=fStart;FireActor;EndFiring;totalFirings;Og, and
l0
j=fStartg. The HAGschedjcontain three broadcast
actions, i.e., Actj=fre!;end?;startNextIter ?g. The actions
reand end are parametrised with processor and action ids,
and are used to synchronise with Processor j. The action
StartNextIter synchronises with Gobs. The actions reand
StartNextIter are the urgent actions. There are no clocks and
invariants in Gschedj. There are no delay functions and
continuous variables in Gschedj. The HAGschedjhave
a number of local variables: activeActor jthat determines
the active actor currently mapped on the processor j; and
sjthat determines the index of the active actor in the
static-ordered list. Initially, activeActor j= 0, and sj= 0.
The HAGschedjalso contain a parametrised variable
totalFirePerProc j, that deﬁnes the total number of tasks in
the SO schedule of the processor j. Since these variables
are local, we can abbreviate them by activeActor ,sand
totalFirePerProc respectively. The transition set Ejhas
following transitions.

--- Page 9 ---
(a)Ksched modelling battery scheduler
 (b)Kymodelling baty
 (c)Gsched jmodelling scheduler for processor j
(d)Processor jshowing processor model wrt FD
 (e)Gobsmodelling battery observer
Fig. 10: HA models for KiBaM, KiBaM Scheduler, SDF Scheduler, Processor, and KiBaM Observer
The following transition fetches the active actor
according to the SO schedule for each processor j,
using the function getReadyActor (j). As a result of this
transition, the value of sis incremented by 1, which
means that the next actor in the SO schedule is fetched
next time.
Start?;?;activeActor :=getReadyActor (j)^s++                            ! reActor
The following transition maps the fetched (active) actor,
on the processor automaton Processor j, using the
urgent channel re!.
reActor?;re[j][activeActor ]!;?                 ! endFiring
In the following transition, the urgent action end?
synchronises with the processor automaton Processor j.
As a result, the processor automaton Processor jinforms
the automaton Gschedjthat the ﬁring of the active
actor has ﬁnished.
endFiring?;end[j][activeActor ]?;?                 ! totalFirings
The following transition checks if the SO schedule of
a processor jis not fully executed, using the guard
conditions < totalFirePerProc . If this is the case,
the following transition is taken, leading to the Start
location where the next actor in the SO schedule isfetched.
totalFiringss<totalFirePerProc ;?;?                 ! Start
If all actors in the SO schedule of a processor j
are executed as checked by the guard condition
s==totalfirePerProc on the following transition,
the urgent channel FiringFinished !synchronises with the
observer automaton Gobs. In this way, Gschedjinforms
Gobsthat the processor jhas executed all of the mapped
actors in the current iteration. The variable sis also reset.
totalFiringss==totalrePerProc ;
ringFinished !;s:=0            ! allFired
The following transition synchronises with the observer
automatonGobson the urgent channel StartNextIter ?
to start executing the static-order schedule of the next
iteration.
allFired?;startNextIter ?;?              ! Start
d) Hybrid Automata Processor j.:Likewise, the HA
Processor 1;:::; Processor nmodel the processors  =
f1;:::;ng, as shown in Figure 10d. For better visibility,
Figure 10d shows the HA of Processor j, with respect to one
actor only, i.e., FD2A.
For eachj2, we deﬁne HA Processor j=

--- Page 10 ---
(Lj;Actj;Xj;Ej;Fj;Invj;l0
j). The initial location is deﬁned
asl0
j=fInitialg. For each frequency level fi2F, we include
both an idle state and an active state running on that frequency
level. For each a2(j)andF=ff1;:::;fmgsuch that
f1< f 2< ::: < f l, letLmapping =fIdle f1;:::; Idle ;
InUse af1;:::; InUse agindicating that the processor
j2is currently used by the actor a2Ain the
frequency level fi2F, either in idle or running state.
Furthermore, for F=ff1;:::;fmgsuch thatf1< f 2<
::: < fl< fm, we have an location which deﬁnes the
overhead of switching between the frequencies, such that
Loverhead =fTrf1f2;Trf2f1;:::; Trfm;Trfmg.
Thus,Lj=Lmapping[Loverhead . Moreover, for each actor
a2()and frequency level fi2F,Invj(Idle )1,
and Invj(InUse a)act(a;fi)enforcing the system to
stay in InUse afor at most the execution time act(a;fi).
A processor is in the occupied state only for the time period,
when an actor is mapped on it. However, the idle time spent by
a processorj2is not a ﬁxed time interval, and a processor
j2can stay idle for any ﬁnite period of time. Therefore,
we divide the idle time spent by a processor j2into slots
of one time unit, by annotating Invj(Idle )1, Similarly,
forF=ff1;f2;:::;fmgsuch thatf1<f2<:::<f m, and
Invj(Trf2f1)Ttr(;f1;f2). Please note that Processor j
contains exactly one clock xj; since clocks in U PPAAL are
local, we can abbreviate xjbyx. A separate clock variable
global observes the overall time progress.
The action set Actj=fre?;end!gcontains two broadcast
actions ﬁre? ,end! . The actions ﬁre? andend! inActjare
parametrised with the processor and action ids, and synchro-
nise withGsched .
For each2,a2()andfi2F, the transition set
Ejcontains two transitions such that:
Initial?;re[][a]?;fx:=0g^selectBatteryInUseFire ()                                  !
InUse a, and
InUse ax=act(a;fi);end[][a]!;
selectBatteryInUseEnd ()               ! Initial .
The action re[][a]is enabled in the initial state Initial and
leads to the location InUse a. Thus, the action re[][a]is
taken, if the actor a2Ais supposed to “claim” the processor
2at frequency level fi2Fin the static-order sched-
ule. The function selectBatteryInUseFire ()consumes the
charge from the active battery, i.e., Iocc(;fi). As each
location InUse ahas an invariant Invj(InUse a)
act(a;fi), the automaton can stay in InUse afor at most
the execution time of actor a2Aat frequency level fi2F,
i.e.,act(a;fi). Ifx=act(a;fi), the system has to leave
InUse aat exactly the execution time of actor a2Aat
frequency level fi2F, by taking the end[][a]action. For
each2, andfi2F, the transition set Econtains two
transitions for handling broadcast such that:
Initial?;re[][idle fi]?;fx:=0g^selectBatteryIdleFire ()                                    !
Idle , and
Idle x=1;end[][idle fi]!;selectBatteryIdleEnd ()                               !
Initial .The action re[][idle ]is enabled in the initial state Initial
and leads to the location Idle . Thus, re[][idle ]causes
the processor 2to go to Idle at frequency level
fi2F, whenever the processor 2is supposed to
stay idle at fi2Fin the static-order schedule. As the
idle slots are divided into time slots of one time unit, each
location InUse ahas an invariant Invj(InUse a)1,
the automaton can stay in InUse afor at most 1 time unit.
The function selectBatteryIdleFire ()consumes the charge
from the active battery, i.e., Iidle(;fi). Ifx= 1, the system
has to leave Idle at exactly one time unit, by taking the
end[][idle ]action.
ForF=ff1;:::;fl;fmgsuch thatf1<f2<:::<f l<
fm, andj2, the transition set Ejhas following transitions
such that:
Initial?;re[][f1f2]?;fx:=0g^selectBatteryTrFire f1f2()                                     !
Trf1f2,
Trf1f2x=Ttr(;f1;f2);end[][f1f2]!;
selectBatteryTrEnd f1f2()                 ! Initial ,
Initial?;re[][f2f1]?;fx:=0g^selectBatteryTrFire f2f1()                                     !
Trf2f1,
Trf2f1x=Ttr(;f2;f1);end[][f2f1]!;
selectBatteryTrEnd f2f1()                 ! Initial ,
...
Initial?;re[][fm]?;fx:=0g^selectBatteryTrFire fm()                                     !
Trfm,
Trfmx=Ttr(;fl;fm);end[][fm]!;
selectBatteryTrEnd fm()                 ! Initial ,
Initial?;re[][fm]?;fx:=0g^selectBatteryTrFire fm()                                     !
Trfm,
Trfmx=Ttr(;fm;fl);end[][fm]!;
selectBatteryTrEnd fm()                 ! Initial
The action re[][fm]causes the processor 2
to incur the transition overhead, whenever the processor
2is supposed to change the frequency fl2Fto
fm2Fin the static-order schedule, using the function
selectBatteryTrFire fm(), and so on.
e) Hybrid Automaton Gobs.:The automaton of SDF
graph observer Gobscounts if each processor has ﬁred its
all mapped actors in an static-order schedule, observing the
number of iterations ﬁnished. Figure 10e shows the HA
model ofGobs. The automaton Gobshas an integer variable
Tot Iterto count the number of ﬁnished iterations. Initially,
Tot Iter= 0.
After modelling the whole system, we run the following
query, where bound is the time bound on running the simula-
tion, and Tot Iter is the variable representing the completed
number of iterations. As a result, we get a plot, by which
we determine the total number of iterations completed within
bound time units. We use the same models and query to
determine the adequate batteries’ capacities.
simulate 1 [<=bound ]fTot Iterg
