--- Page 1 ---
 Available online at www.ijpe -online.com  
 
 
V ol. 13, No. 6, October 2017, pp. 897 -912 
DOI: 10.23940/ijpe.17.06.p11 .897912  
 
* Corresponding Author . 
  E-mail address : xhchen@sei.ecnu.e du.cn . Predicting Accidents in Int erlocking Systems: An SHA Model -Based 
Approach  
Yan Wang, Wen Zhong, Xiaohong Chen*, Jing Liu  
 Shanghai Key Laboratory of Trustworthy Computing , East China Normal University, Shanghai, China  
    
Abstract  
In recent days , rail tran sit accidents happen from time to time, but the causes are difficult to be found. According to the stochastic and 
real-time characteristics of equipment faults, three layer models based on stochastic hybrid automata  (SHA) are proposed for interlocking 
systems. The three layer models consist of a system model, a monitoring model and a fault prediction model. The accidents caused by the 
equipment faults are predicted by simulating these models together on UPPAAL -SMC platform. The main contributions of this pa per 
include: (1) extracting model patterns for interlocking systems (2) presenting a pattern -based system model generation process and an 
automatic generation method of monitoring model based on time constraints and (3) defining the accidents prediction mo del of collision 
accidents to predict the accidents and monitoring accident causes through model simulation.  
 
Keywords : interlocking systems; model monitoring ; UPPAAL -SMC ; stochastic hybrid automata (SHA) ; accident prediction  
 
(Submitted on July 25, 2017;  Revised on August 30, 2017; Accepted on September 15, 2017)  
 
(This paper was presented at the Third International Symposium on System and Software Reliability. ) 
 
© 2017 Totem Publisher, Inc. All rights reserved.  
 
 
1. Introduction  
 
Rail transit systems are sa fety critical systems. Its safety is of great importance. However, in recent years, China's railway 
accidents happen frequently. For example, July 23, 2011 Yong Wen line  "7.23" major railway traffic accident. This is a 
serious accident caused by the seriou s design flaws of the equipment in the control center, inadequate checks on the road, 
and ineffective emergency response after equipment failure caused by lightning. The accident led to two trains rear -ends 
collision, and caused 40 deaths, 172 injuries, an d the direct economic losses of 19371.65 million  [1]. 
 
There are many reasons for various accidents. The reason may be a failure caused by one equipment fault, or a failure 
caused by multiple faults, or multiple failures occurred at the same time. So it is  a hot topic to find the causes of the accident 
from the already happened accidents.  
 
There are many ways to analyze the causes of accidents, which are mainly divided into analytical methods and model 
checking based  methods. The analytical  methods mainly i nclude reliability block diagram method  [2,6], failure mode 
consequence analysis method FMEA  [5], fault tree analysis method FTA  [8,19] and so on. The model checking  based 
approaches mainly use counterexamples  in model checking  [14,15].  
 
However, of these  two methods, the analytical method belongs to the static analysis without paying attention to time 
constraint ; it is not applicable to the dynamic fault analysis and fault prediction of the system. And model checking 
approaches are confronted with state e xplosion problem. In the  railway transit transportation  field, the equipment fault is an 
important cause of accidents.  For example, the communication between the circuit and the train control center caused by the 
lightning in Yong Wen line is out of order, and the signal of the track section signal is abnormal. The occurrence of these 

--- Page 2 ---
898 Yan Wang , Wen Zhong , Xihaohong Chen , and Jing Liu  
faults is unpredictable, with a strong stochastic. In addition, due to the strong real -time characteristics of the rail transit 
system, the time constraints must be taken into account when modeling.  
 
SHA  [3] is an important model of modeling stochastic and  time, and has been widely used in various fields such as 
electromechanical systems, computer simulation, automata and so on  [2]. Therefore, this paper proposes to model the 
equipment faults of the rail transit system using SHA, and construct three layer m odels including rail transit system model, 
the monitoring model and the accident prediction model using NSHA. At the model level, the accidents caused by faults are 
simulated by UPPAAL -SMC  [4]. In order to facilitate the construction of rail transit system  model, we extract the pattern of 
the system model for the interlocking system. Using the pattern, you only need to fill in the appropriate parameters to 
customize the specific system model. In addition, we also give the controller automatic generation alg orithm according to its 
time constraints, and define the prediction model according to the common collisions in the accident of the rail transit 
system. Through simulation, we predict the possible consequences,  analyze its causes and issue appropriate aler ts according 
to different circumstances.  
 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the notations of SHA, NSHA, and the interlocking 
systems. Section 3 presents how to extract system model patterns. Section 4 describes how to get  the three models . Section 5 
gives an example of how to construct models and make predictions. After the introduction of related works in Section 6, 
Section 7 concludes the paper.  
 
2. Preliminaries  
 
2.1. Introduction to SHA and NSHA  
 
SHA is a timed automata whose clock rates can be different at different locations (i.e., states). Figure 1 shows a graphical 
representation of an NSHA consisting of two SHA, i.e., A and B. The SHA A has four states A 0, A 1, A 2 and A 3, and has a 
clock variable x. In A 0, x'==0 means that the value of x has no change. The label ''1'' near location A0 indicates that the delay 
of SHA A at location A0 follows an exponential distribution with λ=1. SHA supports the nondeterministic execution. For 
example, when SHA A exits the location A0, it has  two choices of the target location, i.e., A 1 and A 2. 
 
SHA uses the dashed arrow line labeled with the weight information to denote the possibility of the entering a target 
location. For example, the probability of going to locationA 1from A 0 is 3/(3+2), wh ile the probability of going to location A 2 
from A 0 is 2/(3+2). To conduct synchronization between SHA in an NSHA, SHA communicates with each other via 
broadcast channels and shared variables. As an example shown in Figure 1, the two SHA communicate with e ach other 
using the channel a. After the synchronization using the send and receive operation  [9], both SHA will go to their next 
locations (i.e, A 3 and B 1 in this example) simultaneously.  
 
 
Figure 1. An NSHA, (A||B)  
 
2.2. Interlockin g systems  
 
The purpose of railway interlocking system is to control points and signal lights to prevent trains from collisions and 
derailments  [11], while at the same time , allowing its movement. To be more specific, the functions of railway interlocking 
system are monitoring the occupancy status of the individual track section by track circuits, controlling the positions of 
points, and sending signals to inform drivers whether they are allowed to enter the route or not. The processing flow of the 
interlock ing system is in https://github.com/wymgal/IS.git. Generally, the physical domain of an interlocking system 
consists of the following entities:  
 
Tracks : The railway tracks are divided into sections, and each section is associated with a track circuit for d etecting 
whether it is occupied by a train or not.  
 

--- Page 3 ---
 Predicting Acci dents in Interlocking Systems: A n SHA Model -Based Approach  899 
Points : Track sections are joined by points that can guide trains into different directions depending on the positions of 
the points. A point can be in position normal or reverse, as well as unlocked to s how that the tracks are unconnected at the 
crossing. A train can pass by a point that has been locked and the point will be occupied.  
 
Signal Lights : Signal Lights are placed between track sections. They can be in color red or green to indicate proceed or 
stop respectively.  
 
Routes : Routes are defined by interlocking tables , which are created when a railway yard is designed. Each route 
consists of sequentially -connected track sections according to layout topology. Only if the route has been established, a t rain 
will be authorized to enter the route.  
 
Figure 2 displays the track layout diagram of a sample railway yard. The track layout diagram outlines the geographical 
arrangement of the tracks and track -side equipment. From the diagram, we can see that the s tation has two switches (named 
SW1 and SW2), seven signals (named S1 -7) and six track sections (named T1 -6). 
 
 
Figure 2. An example of track layout diagram  
 
Apart from the track layout diagram shown in Fig ure 2, a railway yard still needs interlocking ta bles to specify the train 
routes of the station. It describes how these components are topologically configured, including the conditions for locking 
and releasing the train route and for when the entry signals of the route is set to show proceed or stop.  
 
3. System Model Patterns  
 
According to the processing flow of interlocking systems, we get its context diagram, as shown in Figure 3. The system 
contains the environment and the controller . The environment consists of five entities, namely, Train , Signal lig ht, Point , 
Track and Interlocking Table . The controller and the environment entities  interact with each other. The interactions are the 
shared message between the controller and the environment entities. From Figure 3, there are 18 interactions. For exampl e, 
the train entity sends "trainEnter", "trainLeave", and "request" messages to the controller.  
 
Train
Signal LightTrack
Interlocking Table
PointControllertrainEnter
trainLeave
requestcheckoccupied
occupied
unoccupied
checktable
result
dolock
dounlock
turnLock
turnUnlockdogreen
dored
turnGrenn
turnRedturnGrenn
turnRed
 
Figure 3. Context diagram of the interlocking system  
 
3.1. Environment entity patterns  
 
Firstly, we give a 4 -step process to obtain th e SHA of each environment entity. The four steps are extracting the processing 
flow of the entity, constructing automata, modeling faults, and adding the time constraints.  
 
Step 1: Extracting the processing flow of the entity  
 
The process description relat ed to the entity is found in the system processing flow, including all the behaviors related 
to the entity. The process can be written in the form of activity diagram.  

--- Page 4 ---
900 Yan Wang , Wen Zhong , Xihaohong Chen , and Jing Liu  
Step 2: Constructing automata  
This step is to transform the activity diagram to an autom ata. Each time the activity diagram sends or receives a 
message (action), the entity's automata moves from one state to another state. Therefore, an action is transformed into a sta te 
and a transition in an automata. The transition is action. The specific transformation process is shown in Algorithm 1. 
 
Algorithm 1 : activity diagram to automata transformation algorithm  
Input:An activity diagram Ad=<P0,P,T>  
Output:An automata Am=<L,E>  
Procedure  
1.      Read activity diagram Ad;  
2.      S=P0  
3.      While(S){  
4. Find t he node of T.source=S;  
5.        if (S.type==activity){  
6.                 Define a location l in an automaton,  L=L ∪{l}; 
7.                 Define a edge e  in an automaton, E=E ∪{e}; 
8.                 if (S.action==send)  
9.                           e.message = S.message+"!";  
10.                 else  
11.                         e.message==S.message+"?";  
12.      } 
13.      else if (S.type==decision){  
14.               Define a l in an automaton,  L=L ∪{l}; 
15.               Search T where T.source=S  
16.               for(int i=0;i<T.size;i++){  
17.                 if (S.action==send)  
18.                         e.message = S.message+"!";  
19.                 else  
20.                         e.message==S.message+"?";  
21.               } 
22.      } 
23.        else if(S.type==merge){  
24.                 Find the last unhandled node connecting the merge node;  
25.                 The tra nsition  points to the state of the next node of the merge l;  
26.      } 
27.      else{     
28.                 Define a location l in an automaton,  L=L ∪{l}; 
29.      } 
30.        S=T.target;  
31.   } 
 
Step 3: Modeling faults  
 
In environmental entities, it is possible that the occurrence of an abnormal event can lead to a fault, and an abnormal 
event can be rep resented by the probability. Therefore, we find all the abnormal events, and use stochastic probability events 
to express them. Different events are simulated with different probabilities. Based on step -2 automata, stochastic probability 
events are added t o model faults.  
 
Step 4: Adding time constraints  
 
This step is to add time constraints on the results of step 3. Firstly, extract the time constraints of entities. This is 
domain knowledge. Then , define the corresponding clock variables.  The representatio n of the clock constraint in the 
automata is the time between one message and another message ; that is, in the automata, the initial value of clock variable 
on the "update" of previous message transition is 0, and the inequality of the clock variable is de fined in the "guard" of the 
transition of the subsequent message.  
 
Next, we will present the detailed process for each entity.  

--- Page 5 ---
 Predicting Acci dents in Interlocking Systems: A n SHA Model -Based Approach  901 
 Train:  
 
1) Extracting the processing flow of the entity  
 
According to the system processing flow, we obtain the processing flow o f the train entity, and represent them in an g h 
activity diagram, as shown in Figure 4.  
 
 
Figure 4. Context diagram of the interlocking system  
 
2) Constructing automata  
 
According to the algorithm 1, the automata of the train entity is obtained, which conta ins 7 states and 6 transitions, 
where state 1  and state 7  are the initial state and the final state respectively. The messages on the transition are: "send?", 
"request!""notallgreen?", "allgreen?", "trainEnter!", and "trainLeave!".  
 
3) Modeling faults  
 
A fau lt may occur during the train running, that is, between sending "trainEnter" message and sending "trainLeave" 
message. Add an error state to the automata. Message sent from "trainEnter" is transferred to the error state with the 
probability of m% and trans ferred to the starting point of "trainLeave" message with the probability of n%. In the 
probabilities, m + n = 100, m and n are real numbers, and are decided by domain experts.  
 
4) Adding the time constraints  
 
The time constraints obtained from domain experts  are as follows: The not -all-lights -green signal "notallgreen" is 
received within specified time. The all -lights -green "allgreen" is received within specified time. The clock variable x is 
defined to indicate the waiting time for the signal light, that is,  the time from sending "request" message to receiving 
"notallgreen" message or "allgreen" message. Therefore, the "update" initial value of x for the "request" transition is 0, an d 
the inequality "x<z" ( z is a constant) is used as the "guard" for transitio n "notallgreen" or "allgreen". The SHA of the train is 
thus obtained, as shown in Figure 5(a).  
 
Signal Light:  
We divide the activities involved in Signal Light  into two parts. One is SSignalLight , which is responsible for setting  the 
status of the signal l ight. The other part is RSignalLight , which is responsible for inquiring the status of the signal light.  
 
Signal Light  = SSignalLight  || RSignalLight  
 
(1) SSignalLight  
The modeling process of SSignalLight is as follows:  
 
1) Extracting the processing flow of the e ntity 
According to the system processing flow, we get the processing flow of the SSignalLight , and represent them in an 
activity diagram as shown in https://github.com/wymgal/IS.git .  
 
2) Constructing automata  
According to the algorithm 1, the automata of the SSignalLight  is obtained as shown in 
https://github.com/wymgal/IS.git, which contains 4 states and 4 transitions, where state 1  is the initial state. The transitions 
are: "dogreen?", "turnGreen!", "dored?" and "turnRed!".  

--- Page 6 ---
902 Yan Wang , Wen Zhong , Xihaohong Chen , and Jing Liu  
 
3) Modeling faults  
A fault may occur during the change of the signal lights’ states, that is, between receiving "dogreen" message and 
sending "turnGreen" message or between receiving "dored" message and sending "turnRed" message. Add an erro r state to 
the automata. Message sent from "dogreen" is transferred to the error state with the probability of m% and transferred to the  
starting point of "turnGreen" message with the probability of n%. Similarly, we can model faults in the situation where  the 
signal light chang es from green to red.  
 
4) Adding time constraints  
The time constraints obtained are as follows: There is a certain delay in the change of Signal Light  condition. According 
to the time constraints, the local clock a is given to indicate  the delay time of signal light changing from red to green, and 
the local clock b indicates the delay time of signal changing from green to red.  
 
The clock a represents the time from receiving "dogreen" message to the next state GREEN . Therefore, the "upda te" 
initial value of for the "dogreen" transition is 0, and the inequality "a>1" is used as the "guard" for the transition. Using  the 
same method, we can define the clock b in this automata. The SHA of the train is thus obtained, as shown in Fi gure 5 (b).  
(e) Interlocking Table(a) Train
 (c) Point
(b) SSignalLight
 (d) STrack
 
Figure 5. SHA models of environment entitie s 
 
(2) RSignalLight  
 
In order to get a set of single light states, we start with a single light. According to the system processing flow, we can 
get the processing flow of the RSignalLigh t. According to it, we build an automata model for one signal light as shown in 
Figure 6. There are 5 locations in the automata. They are start location, normal location p1, normal location p2, normal 
location p3 and normal location p4. 
 
There are 10 trans itions in the automata. From the start location to the end location, draw a transition whose message is 
"turnGreen?" and make the green identifier "isLightGreen" be true. Similarly, draw a transition whose message is 
"turnRed?" and make the red identifier "isLightRed" true. From start location to p2, draw a transition and determine the 
value of "isLightGreen" on its "guard". If the "isLightGreen" is true, the message of this transition is "allgreen!". From p2 to 

--- Page 7 ---
 Predicting Acci dents in Interlocking Systems: A n SHA Model -Based Approach  903 
start location, draw a transition without mes sage so that the automata can repeatedly determine the value of "isLightGreen". 
Similarly, we can get the rest of the transitions.  
 
Figure 6. Automata of RSignalLight  
 
For a group of lights, the modeling process is based on the  situation of one signal light. Add the corresponding different 
signal lights' green identifier isLightGreen  and the red light identifier isLightRed . For N signal lights, there should be n 
isLightGreen[0,1,...,n -1] and isLightRed[0,1,...,n -1]. Add n transi tions with the message of "turnGreen[n -1]?" from the 
initial state to the itself. Make isLightRed[n -1]=1. The judgement condition of transition "allgreen!" is: 
isLightGreen[0]==1&&isLightGreen[1]==1&&...&&isLightGreen[n -1]==1. Similarly, we change the judg ement condition 
of transition "notallGreen!", transition "allred!" and transition "notallred".  The automata for a group of signal lights is in 
https://github.com/wymgal/IS.git .  
 
In this paper, the error of RSignalLight is not considered, as well as the time constraints of the RSignalLight .  
 
 Point:  
 
1) Extracting the processing flow of the entity  
According to the system processing flow, we can get the processing flow of the point e ntity, and represent them in an 
activity diagram, as shown in  https://github.com/wymgal/IS.git . 
 
2) Constructing automata  
According to the algorithm 1, the automaton of the point is obtained as shown in https://github.com/wymgal/IS.git, 
which contains 8 states and 9 transitions, where state 1  is the initial state. The messages on the transition are: "dolock?", 
"turnLock!", "front?", "reverse?", "atfront?", "atreverse?", "dounlock?", "dounlock?", and "turnUnlock!".  
 
3) Modeling faults  
A fault may occur during the point changing from the locked state to the unlocked state or from the unlocked state to the 
locked state, that is, between receiving "dolock" message and sending "turnLock" message or between receiving 
"dounlock?" message and sending "turnUnlock" message. Add an error state to the automata. Message sent from "dolock" is 
transferred to the error state with the probability of m% and transferred to the starting point of "turnLock" message with th e 
probability of n%.  Similarly, we can mod el faults in the situation where the point changing from unlocked state to the 
locked state.  
 
4) Adding  time constraints  
The time constraints for point entity is that there is a certain delay in the change of point condition. The local clock a is 
defined to i ndicate that the delay time of the point changing from unlocked state to locked state, and the local clock b 
indicates the delay time of the point changing from locked state to unlocked state. That is, clock a is the time from receiving 
"dolock" message to  the next state lock. Therefore, the "update" initial value for the "dolock?" transition is 0, and the 
inequality "a>1" is used as the "guard" for the transition. Similarly, we can define the clock b. The SHA of the point is thus  
obtained, as shown in Figu re 5(c). 
 
Track:  
We divide the activi ties involved in Track into two parts. One is STrack , which is responsible for setting the status of 
the Track. The other part is RTrack , which is responsible for inquiring the status of the Track .  So we get:   
 
Track  = STrack  || RTrack  

--- Page 8 ---
904 Yan Wang , Wen Zhong , Xihaohong Chen , and Jing Liu  
(1) STrack  
 
1) Extracting the processing flow of the entity  
According to the system processing flow, the processing flow of the STrack entity is extracted and represented b y 
activity diagrams as shown in  https://github.com/wymgal/IS.git . 
 
2) Constructing automata  
According to the algorithm 1, the automata of the STrack is obtained as shown in https://github.com/wymgal/IS.git, 
which contains 5 states and 6 transitions. The messages on the transition a re: "checkoccupied?", "occupied!", "unoccupied?", 
"trainEnter?", "trainLeave?", and "trainLeave?".  
 
3) Modeling faults & Adding time constraints  
A fault may occur during the process of setting the track state, that is, between receiving "trainEnter" message a nd 
receiving "trainLeave" message. Add an error state to the automata. Message sent from "trainEnter" is transferred to the 
error state with the probability of m% and transferred to the starting point of "trainLeave" message with the probability of 
n%. The  method of adding transition with a probability is consistent with the case of the train entity.    
 
Without taking into account the time constraints of track entity, we do not do time constraints extraction.  
 
(2) RTrack  
 
RTrack is divided into two steps. One is for a track. We build an SHA  model for a track, as shown in 
https://github.com/wymgal/IS.git . There are 3 locations in the automata and 6 transitions. The value of "isTrackun" is true.  
From start location to p1, draw a transition and determine the valu e of "isTrackoc" on its "guard". If the "isTrackoc" is true, 
the message of this transition is "trackoccupied!". From p1 to start location, draw a transition without message to make the 
automata can repeatly determine the value of "isTrackoc". Similarly, w e can get the rest of the transitions.   
 
The other one is for a group of tracks. The processing is similar with RSignalLight . We only need to change the 
judgment conditions and transitional messages.  
 
Interlocking Table  
 
1) Extracting the processing flow of the entity  
According to the system processing flow, the processing flow of the Interlocking Table entity is obtained and 
repres ented by an activity diagram in  https://github.com/wymgal/IS.git . 
 
2) Constructing automata  
According to the algorithm 1, the automata of the interlocking table is obtained as shown in   
https://github.com/wymgal/IS.git, which contains 2 states and 2 transitions, where state 1  is the initial state. The messages 
on the transition are: "ch ecktable?" and "result!". If there are n query results, there are n transitions with the "result!" 
message, and all the transitions point to the start location.         
 
This paper does not consider the error situation and time constraints of the interlock ing table entity, so we do not do 
fault modeling.   
 
3.2. Controller Pattern  
 
The controller is divided into two parts. One is the center which is responsible for controlling all the tracks, points, sign al 
lights, trains and interlocking tables.  The other part called submodels  is in charge of controlling each track, point, signal light 
and train respectively. So we define:  
 
Controller  = Center  || Submodules  
Submodules  = CTrack  || CPoint  || CSignalLight  || Dispatcher  
 
The CTrack is responsible for sending "checkoccupied" message to each track, and checking the occupancy situation of 
each track. After receiving the instruction of Center , the CPoint sends "dolock" and "dounlock" message to each point. After 

--- Page 9 ---
 Predicting Acci dents in Interlocking Systems: A n SHA Model -Based Approach  905 
receiving instruction from Ce nter, the CSignalLight sends "dogreen" and "dored" message to each signal light. The 
Dispatcher is responsible for sending dispatching instructions to control different trains entering the track at different time.  
 
1) Extracting controller related processing scenarios  
According to the system processing flow, the processing scenarios of the Center , the CTrack , the CPoint , the 
CSignalLight , and the Dispatcher are extracted as expressed in https://github.com/wymgal/ IS.git .  
 
2) Constructing automata  
a. Constructing Center  automata:  
According to the algorithm 1, the automata of the Center is obtained as shown in Figure 7, which contains 15 states and 
16 transitions, where state 1  is the initial state. The message on the tr ansition are:"request?", "checktable!", "result?", 
"checktrack!", "trackoccupied?", "allunoccupied?", "lockpoint!", "finishmove?", "dolightgreen!", "allgreen?", "trainEnter?", 
"trainLeave?", "lockpoint!", "allunlock?", "dolightred!", and "allred?".  
 
In the  global declaration, we define 9 functions required by Center to interact with each entity. They are send_ routeID , 
getRouteID , send_trackID , getTrackID , send_pointInfo , getPointInfo , send_lightID , and getLightID . Their functions are the 
meaning of their na me. Due to limited space, the exact definition is shown in https://github.com/wymgal/IS.git.  
 
 
Figure 7. The Center  pattern  
 
b. Constructing CTrack : 
Building CTrack is divided into  controlling one track and a group of tracks. For controlling one track, starting with an 
initial state, draw a transition with the message of "checktrack?", which points to the next state. Draw a state and a transi tion 
from the current state to the next s tate with the message of "checkoccupied!". The last "checkoccupied!" transition points to 
the initial state.  
 
 For a group of tracks, give n transitions for N tracks, i.e., n "checkoccupied[0,1,...,n -1]" from the current state to the 
next state. The last " checkoccupied" points to the initial state.  
 
c. Constructing CPoint : 
According to the processing flow of CPoint , we build an automata model for CPoint .  
 
Draw a transition from the initial state to the next state with the message of "lockpoint?". Draw a state  and a transition 
with message of "dolock!" from current state to the next state. Draw a state and a transition with message of "turnLock?" 
from current state to current state. On this transition, the point lock identifier "isPointlock" assigned to 1. Draw  another 
transition on the last state, and define the judgment condition for the point lock identifier "isPointlock == 1" on the trans ition.  
 
The processing of moving points is similar with locking points. We just need to change the messages. There is a 
transition from the last state to the initial state.  
 
For a group of points, the processing method is the same with CTrack . We only need to change the judgement 
conditions and messages.  

--- Page 10 ---
906 Yan Wang , Wen Zhong , Xihaohong Chen , and Jing Liu  
 
d. Constructing CSignalLight : 
The processing process of CSignalLight is the same with CTrack . We only need to change the messages. For example, 
message "checktrack?" changes to "dolightgreen?". Message "checkoccupied!" changes to "dogreen!".  
 
e. Constructing Dispatcher : 
Draw a transition from initial state to the next state with t he message of "send[0]!". Draw a state and a transition from 
current state to the next state with the message of "trainEnter[0]?". Draw a state and a transition from current state to the  
next state with message of "send[1]!". If there are n trains, we add n transitions with message of "send[1,2,..., n -1]!" and add 
n transitions with the message of "trainEnter[0,1,2,...,n -1]?".  
 
4. Three Models Construction Process  
 
4.1. System model construction  
 
This system model is constructed in 3 major steps:  
 
1) Defining the Syst em 
This step consists of 4 sub -steps:  
 
a. Declare system models in model declarations:  
This sub -step is to declare all the models in the system. Through analysis, we define that the system is composed by 13 
models, so we make the following declaration:  
 
syste m Train, Track, Li ght, Point, Center, Dispatcher,  CSignalLight, CPoint, CTrack, RSignalLight, RTrack,  
InterlockTable, Mon itor ; 
 
b. Instantiate different entities in global declaration:  
This sub -step is to get model instantiations. Firstly, we get the number  of trains, signals, tracks and points from the 
interlocking table. Suppose Nt, Nl, Nr and Np are the number of trains, signals, tracks and points respectively. The models 
could be instantiated by the following declarations:  
 
const int TRAINS= Nt; typedef i nt[0,TRAINS -1] train_t;  
const int LIGHTS = Nl; typedef int[0,LIGHTS -1] light_l;  
const int TRACKS = Nr; typedef int[0,TRACKS -1] track_t;  
const int POINTS= Np; typedef int[0,POINTS -1] point_p;  
 
c. Building templates for the various environmental entity models  
Reuse patterns of T rain, Signal, Point, Track and Interlocking Table in Section 3. The parameters in each template can 
be modified according to specific situations. According to the number of entities, the RSignalLight and RTrack model can be 
modified.  
 
d. Reus ing controller template  
Reuse the Center pattern in Section 3, create the SHA model of the center, and modify the SHA models of the controller 
submodules .    
 
2) Defining system interactions  
The interactions of the system are achieved by the communication be tween the entities in the context diagram. So 
defining the system interactions is to define all the messages in the communication between entities. Define all messages in 
the global declaration. For example, Chan green[Nt*Nl]. According to the interlocking  table, we can know that one train 
needs Nl signal lights, that is, needs Nl green signals. So for Nt trains, there should be Nt*Nl  green signals. The other 
messages are declared in https://github.com/wymgal/ IS.git . 
 
3) Declaring system variables  
The global variables required by the system are actually shared information between models. They should include the 
track occupancy identifier , and the number of instantiations of each entity in the global declaration. In addition, the variables 
used by the functions of Center should be declared too. The exact declaration is as follows.  

--- Page 11 ---
 Predicting Acci dents in Interlocking Systems: A n SHA Model -Based Approach  907 
int y[Nt*Nr] ={0,0,...,0}// the track occupancy identifier  
const int l_num= Nl, p_num= Np, tr_num= Nr; // the number of instantiations of each entity  
int route_id, trackID[Nr], PointInfo[Np][Np], lightID[Nl];   // the variables used by th e functions  
 
4.2. Monitor model  
 
We construct the monitor model in two steps:  
 
1) Extracting time constraints in the center model  
Referring to the related data of the interlocking system,  the time constraints of interactive behaviors in the interlocking 
system ar e extracted. These constraints can be expressed as <message, message, constraint expression>, such as <checktrack, 
trackoccupied, <= 4s>, indicating that the time difference between message "checktrack" and "trackoccupied" is less than 4s.  
 
2) Generating Moni tor 
This step is to generate the Monitor using an algorithm. The basic idea is to monitor the time constraints related events 
in the Center. Suppose there are n time constraints, and the m events they involved is Events={event 1, event 2,... , event m}. (1) 
From the start node V 0 of the Center model, access the event event i which connects to the point. (2) If the eventi belongs to 
the Events , define a state and a transition from current state to the next state with the message of “ event i?”. If the event i does 
not belong to Events, continue to access the next node. (3) Repeat step 2 until all nodes and edges are accessed. The detaile d 
process is shown in Algorithm 2.  
 
Algorithm2: Monitor generation algorithm  
Input:An Center Model Ca=<P 0,CL,CE>, Constraints[]={st artEvent,endEvent,constraintInfo}  
Output:An Monitor Model<L,E>  
Procedure  
1.      Read Center Model Automata Ca;  
2.      Define a e 0 in an aut omaton , E=E ∪{e0}; 
3.      Define a clock variable x in an automaton ;  
4.      S=P 0 
5.      While(S){  
6.         Find the node of CE.source=S;  
7.         if (CE.message in Constraints[]){  
8.                  Define a l in an automaton,  L=L ∪{l}; 
9.                  Define a e in an automaton, E=E ∪{e}; 
10.                Assign x to 0 on e;  
11.                e.message = S.message+"?";  
12.                if(CE.message.type==start)  {  
13.                       Define a e in an automaton, E=E ∪{e}; 
14.                       e.source=next S;  
15.                       e.target=e 0; 
16. Define the expression of x "x>constraintInfo.number" on e;  
17.                   }  
18.       } 
19.      S=CE.target;               
20.    }    
 
4.3. Prediction model  
 
The primary risks of the rail transit system for accidents include derailment an d collision  [13]. This paper only considers the 
situation of collision. The basic idea is to use the time interval between the two trains entering same track to judge whethe r 
they will collide or break down, which leads to low efficiency. So we consider tw o situations.  
 
Situation 1 : Two trains enter the same track at different time, if the time interval is less than the specified time, a 
collision accident may occur.  
 
Situation 2 : The first train has entered the track and the next train is waiting. In order  to avoid the collision accident, 
how long it will take for the next train entering the track.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

--- Page 12 ---
908 Yan Wang , Wen Zhong , Xihaohong Chen , and Jing Liu  
We need to calculate the minimum waiting time Tmin in the first situation and the maximum waiting time Tmax in the 
second situation.  Assume that the distance between the two trains is S:  
 
Situation 1 : the two trains have the s ame speed V at the beginning, but the previous train is slowing down and the next 
train is speeding up. Their acceleration are -a and a and the number of a is the maximum acceleration of the train.  
 
By the acceleration formula  [12] (1), we can get Tmin=S
a. 
 
 
) a21*(- a21*2
m in m in2
m in m in T TV T TVS    (1) 
 
Situation 2 : the previous train is speeding up with an acceleration a, and the initial speed is 0. It will run with a 
constant speed after the speed reaches V, and the number of a is the maximum acce leration of the train.  
 
By the acceleration formula  (2), we can get  Tmax=V
a+S-V2
2a
V. To avoid collision, the next train waits  Tmax minutes at most.  
 
 
22
1 * a21tVt S ，
aV0t1  (2) 
 
Based on this, we define a prediction model as follows:  
 
Suppose there are two trains, train1 and train2. We choose the time duration between them to predict their 
relations.Duration=Train2.entertime -Train1.entertime  
• If Duration <=T min, there may be a collision, it should issue an early warning.  
• If Duration >T max, there may be a failure waiting.  
 
5. Case Study  
 
In this paper, we still use the case whose track layout diagram is shown in Figure 2. Table 1 shows its interlocking  table. 
There are two routes, Route1 and Route2, 5 signal lights S1, S2, S4, S5, and S7 on the Route1, and 5 lights S1, S2, S3, S6, 
and S7 on the Route2. Two points SW1 and SW2, and five tracks T1, T2, T3, T4, and T5 are included.  
 
5.1. System model constructio n 
 
1) Defining the system  
 
Firstly declare the same 13 models as listed in Section IV. From Table 1, we get the numbers of the trains, signal lights,  
tracks  and point s, which are 2, 5, 5, 2 respectively. It means Nt=2,  Nl=5, Nr=5,  Np=2. Put them into the mode l declaration 
to declare the models of the system. Then instantiate different entities in global declaration:  
 
const int TRAINS=2;    const int LIGHTS =5;  const int TRACKS = 5;  const int POINTS=2;  
 
Table 1. Interlocking table of Figure 1  
Route  Signals  Points  Track  
ID From  To Green  Red Open  Close   
Up Down   
R1 S1 S7 S1,S2,S4,S5,S7 S3,S6 SW1 ,SW2    T1,T2,T3,T5,T6 
R2 S1 S7 S1,S2,S3,S6,S7 S4,S5  SW1 ,SW2   T1,T2,T4,T5,T6 
 
We reuse the patterns of Train , Signal Light , Point , Track  and Interlocking Tabl e in the Section 3, and modify 
RSignalLight  and RTrack  according to their numbers 5 and 5. We modify the number of transitions and judging conditions, 
and get these two models. RSignalLight  model is shown in Figure 8 while RTrack  model is listed in 
https://github.com/wymgal/IS.git . Finally construct the controller model. We reuse the Center pattern in Section V, and 

--- Page 13 ---
 Predicting Acci dents in Interlocking Systems: A n SHA Model -Based Approach  909 
build CTrack , CPoint , CSignalLight  according to 5 tracks, 2 points and 5 signal lights. Reuse the Dispatche r of Section V. 
We add two clock variables to Dispatcher, clock variable m starts timing when the train0 enter the track, and the clock 
variable n starts timing when the train1 enter the track.  
 
The CTrack  is shown in Figure 9 (a) while the others are listed in https://github.com/wymgal/IS.git . 
 
 
Figure 8. SHA  of SSignal Light  in the example  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a)CTrack  (b) Monitor  
Figure 9. SHA  of CTrack  andMonitor  
 
2) Defining system interactions and declaring system variables  
 
Put Nt=2,Nl=5, Nr=5,Np=2 into the global declaration ： 
int y[10] ={0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0};   // The track occupancy identifier is occupied  
const int l_num=5, p_num=2,tr_num=5; // The numbers of each entity  
int route_id,  trackID[5],  PointInfo[2][2],  lightID[5];    // Declare the nu mber of instantiations of each entity:  

--- Page 14 ---
910 Yan Wang , Wen Zhong , Xihaohong Chen , and Jing Liu  
 
5.2. Monitor model construction  
 
1) Extracting time constraints in center  model  
According to domain knowledge, we get the following time constraints:   
<checktrack,trackoccupied,<=4s>,  checkreack,allunoccupied,<=4s>,  
<lock point,finishmove,<=4s>, <dolightgreen,allgreen,<=4s>,  
<allgreen,trainEnter,<=10s>, <trainEnter,trainLeave,<=200s>,  
<unlockpoint,allunlocked,<=4s>, <dolightred,allred,<=4s>.  
 
From these 8 constraints and related14 events,  we record  them  as: Events ={checktr ack, trackoccupied, allunoccupied, 
lockpoint, finishmove, dolightgreen, allgreen, trainEnter, trainLeave, unlockpoint, allunlocked, dolightred, dolightred, allr ed} 
 
2) Generating Monitor model  
According to the monitor generation algorithm 2, a monitor model c ould be obtained automatically as shown Figure 
9(b). It has 12 states  and 20 transitions including 7 transitions of warning state. So we add warning messages to the 7 
transitions.  
 
5.3. Prediction model construction & prediction  
 
From domain knowledge  [16,18] , we get the acceleration of the train is always between 1 and 2 m/s2. The speed is always 
between 80~350km/h that is 22~97m/s, and the length of a track is between 500 and 1000m. So in this case, we specified 
the distance between the two trains to be 1000m,  the acceleration to be 1m/s2, and the speed to be 50m/s.  
 
Input these data into the two situations predefined in the prediction model, we can get  Tmin≈31.6s, which means the time 
for two trains to enter the same track is at least 31.6s, and Tmax=45s, which means the next train’s waiting time is 45s at most 
after the previous train entering the track.  
 
Table 2. Failure condition table of experimental res ults 
 
After getting these 3 models, we simulate them in UPPAAL -SMC. After 5,000 simulations, we get 9 kinds of  situations 
listed in Table 2. The monitor gives 6 alarms. In these results, 4 kinds of situations may lead to collision accidents. The 
causes should be seriously paid attention to.  
 
6. Related Work  
 
There are many ways to analyze the causes of accidents, whic h are mainly divided into analytical method and model -
checking based method.  
 
The analytic method mainly includes failure mode and effects analysis (FMEA)  and fault tree analysis method (FTA) 
[7]. FMEA firstly models the possible faults and types of the co mponents and elements in the system, then identifies the 
effects of various types of faults on adjacent parts or elements and the eventual impact on the system, and finally proposes I
D Train1.e
ntertime  Train2.enter
time x Monitor 
warning  Result  Cause  
 
1 13.736  280.866  5.809  trackError!  low efficiency  Don’t meet the time constraints 
<checkreack,allunoccupied,<=4s>.  
2 328.029  2872．028 18.382  trackError!  collision accident  Don’t meet the time constraints 
<checktrack,trackoccupied,<=4s>.  
3 96.616  99862.396  16.428  pointError!  low efficiency  Don’t meet the time constraints <lockpoint,finishmove,<=4s>.  
4 273.927  97497.397  159.368  lightError!  low efficiency  Don’t meet the constrain t <dolightgreen,allgreen,<=4s>.  
5 17.806  3183.947  3142.304  trainError!  low efficiency  Don’t meet the constraint <allgreen,trainEnter,<=10s>.  
6 330.489  3986.472  3510.631  trainError!  low efficiency  Don’t meet the constraint <trainEnter,trainLeave,<=200s>.   
7 230.983  4694.566  3511.963  pointError!  collision accident  Don’t meet the constraint <unlockpoint,allunlocked,<=4s>.  
8 362.215  1468.994  1175.120  lightError!  collision accident  Don’t meet the constraint  <dolightred,allred,<=4s>.  
9 398.783  420.381  \ error! collision accident  The time difference between the two trains enter the same track 
is less than Tmin, so the two trains are likely to collide.  

--- Page 15 ---
 Predicting Acci dents in Interlocking Systems: A n SHA Model -Based Approach  911 
measures to avoid or minimize these effects  [16,17] . Similarly, FTA firstl y models the system fault through the analysis of 
various factors [10]. The fault tree is constructed to determine the possible combinations and probability of the system faults. 
These methods both belong to static analysis without paying attention to time . However, the faults in the railway transit 
systems may  relate to real -time property,  their occurrences  may have temporal relations,  and the occurrences of accidents in 
the railway transit systems rely on speed, distance and time. So the  traditional  analy tic methods are  not very  suitable for  
railway transit systems . Instead, our approach dynamically monitors  the interactions between system components and their 
time constraints,  and can  therefore  catch the faults caused by other faults.  
 
The model checking based method firstly models a system  model, and checks it against given properties in CTL or LTL 
by exhaustive search  [14,15]. The causes can be found by the counter -examples. But th at approach cannot be used in large 
scale project due to the state space e xplosion problem. Our approach  using the Statistical Model Checking (SMC)  is a 
simulation based approach. So the  size of the project will not affect the effect  of this method. In contrast to the whole 
system model in the traditional model checking methods,  our three -layer model is more easy to find the reason . 
 
7. Conclusion s 
 
Accidents cause is of great important for the safety of railway transit. This paper proposes a model monitoring method  that 
is based on SHA to detect the fault and predict accident in th e interlocking system. Major contributions include: (1) the 
template pattern in the interlocking system model is extracted and non -professionals can reuse the pattern according to the 
system parameters of the different systems to quickly customize the spec ific system model  and (2) a three -layer model 
framework is proposed, which includes system model, control model and monitoring model. The system model can be 
reused to construct a detailed model of different systems. The monitoring model can monitor differ ent entities in the system 
model and it  can be automatically generated according to the corresponding algorithm b y introduc ing the corresponding 
time constrain t. 
 
Acknowledgement s 
 
This paper is partially supported by the projects funded by the NSFC Key Pr oject 61332008, NSFC 61572195 and 
61472140, and SHEITC160306.  
 
References  
 
1. "7.23" Yong Wen line special major railway traffic accident investigation report [EB/0L].(2011 -12-25) [2013 -02-10]. 
http://www/gov.cn/gzdt/2011 -12/29/content_2032986.html . 
2. A. Bemporad and S. D. Cairano, “Optimal Control of Discrete Hybrid Stochastic Automata. Hybrid Systems: Computation and 
Control ,” Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2005  
3. L. Bortolussi and A. Policriti, “Stochastic Programs and Hybrid Automata for (Biological) Modeling ,” Conference on 
Computability in Europe: Mathematical Theory and Computational Practice , Vol.5635, pp.37 -48, Springer -Verlag, 2009  
4. P. Bulychev, A. David, K. G. Larsen, M. Mik učionis, D. B. Poulsen, and A. Legay, et al. “Uppaal -smc: Statistical Model 
Checking for Priced Timed Automata ,” Electronic Proceedings in Theoretical Computer Science , 85, 2012  
5. G. Carmignani, “An Integrated Structural Framework to Cost -based Fmeca: the Pr iority -cost Fmeca ,” Reliability Engineering & 
System Safety,  94(4), 861 -871, 2009  
6. G. Chen, Z. Yang, J. Zhao, and Z. Fei, “Dynamic Bayesian Networks Method of Safety Analysis Based on Reliability Block 
Diagram ,” in Proceedings of  IEEE  International Conferen ce on Reliability, Maintainability and Safety  pp.1047 -1051 , 2015  
7. M. L. Chiozza and C. Ponzetti, “Fmea: a Model for Reducing Medical Errors ,” Clinica chimica acta; international journal of 
clinical chemistry , 404(1), 75, 2009  
8. S. K. Chen, B. H. Mao, H. E. Ti an, J. F. Liu, and H. D. Liu, “Reliability Evaluation of Railway Traction Power Systems by 
Fault Tree Analysis ,” Journal of the China Railway Society , 28(6), 123 -129, 2006  
9. G. B. A. David and K. G. Larsen, “A Tutorial on Uppaal 4.0 ,” Department of Computer Science , 4(12), 200 —236, 2006  
10. X. Feng and X. F.  Wang, “Analysis on Reliability and Performance of Computer -based Interlocking System with the Dynamic 
Fault Tree Method ,” Journal of the China Railway Society , 33(12), 78 -82, 2011  
11. V. Hartonas -Garmhausen, A. C imatti, E. Clarke, and F. Giunchiglia, “Verification of a Safety -critical Railway Interlocking 
System with Real -time Constraints ,” Science of Computer Programming , 36(1), 53 -64, 2000  
12. U. H. D. Ing, R. W. D. Ing, and J. H. D. Ing, “Acceleration and Braking C ontrol for Train with Logic Control for Even force 
and Minimum Braking Distance ,” DE2522958, 1976  
13. H. Jin, Zhang, and Wu. “Urban Rail Transit Risk Management System Establishiment ,” Urban Rapid Rail Transit , 2010  
14. Y. Jiang , B. Cukic, and Y.  Ma, “Techniques f or Evaluating Fault Prediction Models ,” Empirical Software Engineering , 13(5), 
561-595, 2008  
15. T. M.  Khoshgoftaar, and N.  Seliya, “Tree-based Software Quality Estimation Models for Fault Prediction ,” in Proceedings of 
the 8th IEEE Symposium on Software Metri cs, pp.203 -214, 2002 . 

--- Page 16 ---
912 Yan Wang , Wen Zhong , Xihaohong Chen , and Jing Liu  
16. X. Y. Lei , H. Huang , M. T. Sun , and Q. J. Liu . “Dynamic Property Real -time Monitoring System of Railway Turnout ,” CN 
104787085 A, 2015  
17. Q. Z.  Pang, Y . F. Li, F. Lei, and L. U.  Shun Qing, “Discussion on the Safety Assessment for the Manufacture of Oxygen 
Enterprise ,” Journal of Safety Science & Technology , 2007  
18. C. Woo -Jin, K. Dong -Whe, and S. C. Yang, “Verification of the Validity for the Speed -limit Regulation on the Turnout 
System ,” 8(1), 2005  
19. D. R. Zeng, H. E. Zheng -You, and Y. U. Min , “Reliability Analysis of Metro's Traction Substation ,” Journal of the China 
Railway Society , 30(4), 22 -27, 2008  
