--- Page 1 ---
 
 
 
Formal specification and analysis of zeroconf using uppaal
Berendsen, J.; Gebremichael, B.; Vaandrager, F.W.; Zhang, M.
2011, Article / Letter to editor (ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, 10, 3, (2011),
pp. 34)
Doi link to publisher: https://doi.org/10.1145/1952522.1952527
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Version of the following full text: Publisher’s version
Published under the terms of article 25fa of the Dutch copyright act. Please follow this link for the
Terms of Use: https://repository.ubn.ru.nl/page/termsofuse
Downloaded from: https://hdl.handle.net/2066/91832
Download date: 2026-04-01
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Note:
To cite this publication please use the final published version (if applicable).

--- Page 2 ---
34Formal Speciﬁcation and Analysis of Zeroconf Using Uppaal
JASPER BERENDSEN, BINIAM GEBREMICHAEL, and FRITS W. VAANDRAGER ,
Radboud University Nijmegen
MIAOMIAO ZHANG , Tongji University
The model checker Uppaal is used to formally model and analyze parts of Zeroconf, a protocol for dynamic
conﬁguration of IPv4 link-local addresses that has been deﬁned in RFC 3927 of the IETF. Our goal hasbeen to construct a model that (a) is easy to understand by engineers, (b) comes as close as possible to theinformal text (for each transition in the model there should be a corresponding piece of text in the RFC),and (c) may serve as a basis for formal veriﬁcation. Our modeling efforts revealed several errors (or at leastambiguities) in the RFC that no one else spotted before. We present two proofs of the mutual exclusionproperty for Zeroconf (for an arbitrary number of hosts and IP addresses): a manual, operational proof, and aproof that combines model checking with the application of a new abstraction relation that is compositionalwith respect to committed locations. The model checking problem has been solved using Uppaal and theabstractions have been checked by hand.
Categories and Subject Descriptors: D.2.7 [ Software Engineering ]: Distribution, Maintenance, and En-
hancement— Documentation ; C.2.2 [ Computer-Communication Networks ]: Network Protocols— Proto-
col veriﬁcation ; D.2.4 [ Software Engineering ]: Software/Program Veriﬁcation— Formal methods ;model
checking ;validation ; F.3.1 [ Logics and Meanings of Programs ]: Specifying and Verifying and Reason-
ing about Programs— Logics of programs ;mechanical veriﬁcation ;speciﬁcation techniques ; D.2.1 [ Software
Engineering ]: Requirements/Speciﬁcations; F.1.1 [ Computation by Abstract Devices ]: Models of Com-
putation— Automata (e.g., ﬁnite, push-down, resource-bounded) ;relations between models
General Terms: Algorithms, Standardization, Veriﬁcation
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Compositional reasoning, compositional abstraction, modelling, indus-
trial case study, simulation relation, timed automata, uppaal, zeroconf protocol
ACM Reference Format:
Berendsen, J., Gebremichael, B., Vaandrager, F. W., and Zhang, M. 2011. Formal speciﬁcation and analysisof zeroconf using uppaal. ACM Trans. Embedd. Comput. Syst. 10, 3, Article 34 (April 2011), 32 pages.DOI=10.1145/1952522.1952527 http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1952522.1952527
Research supported by PROGRESS project TES4199, Veriﬁcation of Hard and Softly Timed Sys-
tems (HaaST), the European Community Project IST-2001-35304 Advanced Methods for Timed Sys-tems (AMETIST), the DFG/NWO bilateral cooperation project Validation of Stochastic Systems (VOSS2),
NWO/GBE project 612.000.103 Fault-tolerant Real-time Algorithms Analyzed Incrementally (FRAAI), and
the European Community’s Seventh Framework Programme under grant agreement No. 214755 (QUASI-MODO). M. Zhang supported by NSFC project 61073022.A preliminary version of this article appeared as Gebremichael et al. [2006].
All the Uppaal models described in this article are available online at http://www.cs.ru.nl/ita/
publications/papers/fvaan/zeroconf/full.html .
Authors’ addresses: J. Berendsen, B. Gebremichael, and F. W. Vaandrager (corresponding author), Insti-
tute for Computing and Information Sciences, Radboud University Nijmegen, Heijendaalseweg 135, 6500
GL Nijmegen, The Netherlands; email: jasperberendsen@hotmail.com, {biniam,f.vaandrager }@cs.ru.nl ;
M. Zhang, College of Software Engineering, Tongji University, 1239 Spring Road Shanghai, China 201408;email: miaomiao@mail.tongji.edu.cn .
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted
without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and thatcopies show this notice on the ﬁrst page or initial screen of a display along with the full citation. Copyrights forcomponents of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted.
To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on servers, to redistribute to lists, or to use any component of this
work in other works requires prior speciﬁc permission and/or a fee. Permissions may be requested fromPublications Dept., ACM, Inc., 2 Penn Plaza, Suite 701, New York, NY 10121-0701 USA, fax +1 (212)
869-0481, or permissions@acm.org.
c/circlecopyrt2011 ACM 1539-9087/2011/04-ART34 $10.00
DOI 10.1145/1952522.1952527 http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1952522.1952527
ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, Vol. 10, No. 3, Article 34, Publication date: April 2011.

--- Page 3 ---
34:2 J. Berendsen et al.
1. INTRODUCTION
Our society increasingly depends on the correct functioning of modern communication
technology. Most prominent are (mobile) phones and the Internet, but there are also
networks in modern cars, trains, and airplanes, and the new generation of consumer
electronics allows all sorts of devices to communicate with each other. The most im-portant and most often used protocols that describe the operation of these networks
are standardized. Examples of this are the Internet protocol (TCP/IP), FireWire/iLink
(IEEE 1394), HAVi, WAP, CAN, and BlueTooth. Due to a combination of factors, thecomplexity of these protocol standards is often very high: rapid changes in the ca-
pabilities of the underlying hardware, the fact that often many (industrial) parties
are involved in standardization, each with its own interests, and market demands toextend the functionality of the protocols. Since these standards serve as a guide to
implementers from many different companies, with different backgrounds, it is vital
that standards only allow for one clear interpretation, are complete, and ensure therequired functionality for each implementation. For most protocol standards, this is
clearly not the case. In fact, it is surprising that protocols which are of such immense
importance to our society are typically written in informal language, with frequentambiguities, omissions, and inconsistencies. They also fail to state what properties are
expected of a network running a protocol, and what it means for an implementation to
conform to a standard.
By now there is ample evidence that formal (mathematical) techniques and tools
may help to improve the quality of protocol standards. Numerous publications describe
the formal modeling and analysis of critical parts of protocols, and via these case
studies many previously undetected bugs have been detected (see, e.g., Clarke et al.
[1993], Bruns and Staskauskas [1998], Devillers et al. [2000], Langevelde et al. [2003],Stoelinga [2003], Holzmann [2004], Chkliaev et al. [2003], and Vaandrager and Groot
[2006]). In most cases, these studies were carried out after the completion of the stan-
dards, and involved guessing to ﬁll in holes and resolve ambiguities. An exception isthe work by Romijn [2004], who aimed at applying formal methods already during the
standard development process. That effort has resulted, for instance, in the discovery
and correction of many errors, omissions, and inconsistencies, as well as the additionof correctness properties, in the IEEE 1394.1 FireWire Net Update standard.
In order to avoid holes and ambiguities in standards, the obvious way to go is to de-
scribe critical parts using formal speciﬁcation languages, similar to the way in whichdiagrams are used to specify the electrical circuits and mechanical parts. There have
been joint attempts of academia and industry to arrive at formal description lan-
guages for protocols. The most notable attempts at this have been the LOTOS andSDL standardization efforts. However—to the best of our knowledge—these languages
have thus far not been used in the authoritative part of protocol standards. Some
protocol standards have extended ﬁnite-state machines (EFSMs) inside, but these aremostly illustrative, not completely formal, and sometimes contain mistakes.
1Bruns
and Staskauskas [1998] used (a well-deﬁned subset of) C to describe the SONET Au-
tomatic Protection Switching (APS) protocol and reported that developers found theirC description easy to understand and superior to that which appeared in the APS
standard. However, the lack of abstraction mechanisms is an obvious drawback of C.
The relationships between an (abstract) formal model of a protocol and the corre-
sponding informal standard are typically obscure. As pointed out in Brinksma and
Mader [2004], page 1:
1See, for instance, http://www.inrialpes.fr/vasy/Press/firewire.html .
ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, Vol. 10, No. 3, Article 34, Publication date: April 2011.

--- Page 4 ---
Formal Speciﬁcation and Analysis of Zeroconf Using Uppaal 34:3
“Current research seems to take the construction of veriﬁcation models more
or less for granted, although their development typically requires a coordi-
nated integration of the experience, intuition and creativity of veriﬁcationand domain experts. There is a great need for systematic methods for the
construction of veriﬁcation models to move on, and leave the current stage
that can be characterized as that of model hacking. The ad-hoc constructionof veriﬁcation models obscures the relationship between models and the sys-
tems that they represent, and undermines the reliability and relevance of
the veriﬁcation results that are obtained.”
As a step toward the development of a systematic method, we report in this article
on the systematic construction of a veriﬁcation model of a recent protocol standard.
More speciﬁcally, we describe the use of Uppaal to model and analyze critical parts of
Zeroconf, a protocol for dynamic conﬁguration of IPv4 link-local addresses. Our goalhas been to construct a model that (a) is easy to understand by engineers, (b) comes
as close as possible to the informal text (for each transition in the model there is a
corresponding piece of text in the standard), and (c) may serve as a basis for formalveriﬁcation.
Uppaal [Behrmann et al. 2004, 2006] is an integrated tool environment for speciﬁ-
cation, validation, and veriﬁcation of real-time systems modeled as networks of timed
automata [Alur and Dill 1994] .The tool is available for free for nonproﬁt applica-
tions online.
2The language for the new version Uppaal 4.0 features a subset of the C
programming language, a graphical user interface for specifying networks of EFSMs,
and timed automata syntax for specifying timing constraints. Due to these extensions,Uppaal is able to support modeling and analysis of critical parts of protocol speciﬁca-
tions.
(1) The graphical syntax for EFSMs and the C-like syntax are easy to understand for
protocol designers and implementers, and very close to notations they use anyway.
(2) Uppaal allows one to specify timing constraints between events, which is quite
important in many protocol speciﬁcations.
(3) The Uppaal language does have formal semantics and the transitions provide a
simple abstraction mechanism for the C-like syntax: the semantics of a program is
deﬁned in terms of its effect on the observable state variables.
(4) The Uppaal toolset supports simulation and model checking.
Zeroconf [Cheshire and Steinberg 2005] is a protocol for dynamic conﬁguration of
IPv4 link-local addresses that has been deﬁned by the IETF Network Working Group
in RFC 3927 [Cheshire et al. 2005] .There are many situations in which one would
like to use the Internet Protocol for local communication, for instance, in the settingof in-home digital networks or to establish communication between laptops. For these
type of applications, it is desirable to have a plug-and-play network in which new
hosts automatically conﬁgure an IPv4 address, without using external conﬁgurationservers, like DHCP and DNS, or requiring users to set up each computer by hand. The
Zeroconf protocol has been proposed to achieve exactly this. It describes how a host may
automatically conﬁgure an interface with an IPv4 address within the 169.254/16 preﬁxthat is valid for communication with other devices connected to the same physical (or
logical) link. The most widely adopted Zeroconf implementation is Bonjour from Apple
Computer,
3but several other implementations are available.4
2www.uppaal.com.
3http://developer.apple.com/networking/bonjour/ .
4http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zeroconf .
ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, Vol. 10, No. 3, Article 34, Publication date: April 2011.

--- Page 5 ---
34:4 J. Berendsen et al.
Contribution. The contribution of this article is, ﬁrst of all, a formal model of (a
critical part of) Zeroconf—a protocol with clear practical relevance—that is easy to
understand, faithful to the RFC, and with an extensive discussion of the relationship
between the model and the RFC. Our modeling efforts revealed several errors (or atleast ambiguities) in the RFC that no one else spotted before. We present two proofs
of the mutual exclusion property for Zeroconf for an arbitrary number of hosts and
IP addresses: a manual, operational proof, and a proof that combines model checkingwith the application of a new abstraction relation that is compositional with respect to
committed locations. The model checking problem has been solved using Uppaal and
the abstractions have been checked by hand.
Related work. Zeroconf involves a number of probabilistic aspects that are not incor-
porated in our Uppaal model: hosts select IP addresses randomly, using a pseudoran-
dom number generator, and at some point during the protocol they wait for a randomamount of time selected uniformly from an interval. The probabilistic behavior of
Zeroconf has been studied in Bohnenkamp et al. [2003] and Kwiatkowska et al. [2003].
The primary goal of Bohnenkamp et al. [2003] was to investigate the tradeoff betweenreliability and effectiveness of the protocol using a stochastic cost model. The model of
Bohnenkamp et al. [2003], which only involves a single host, is quite appropriate in
capturing the probabilistic behavior of IP address conﬁguration and conﬂict handling,
but the analysis takes place at a level that is much more abstract than the RFC. Based
on an earlier version of the present article, a more detailed model has been presented inKwiatkowska et al. [2003] using the probabilistic model checker PRISM [Kwiatkowska
et al. 2004]. The model checking results reported in Kwiatkowska et al. [2003] are quite
interesting, but the precise relationship between the model and the RFC is unclear (forinstance, in the model of Kwiatkowska et al. [2003] address defense only occurs before
a host is using an IP address). Our motivation for using Uppaal instead of PRISM
was that the input language of PRISM is too primitive for our purposes (just a fewdatatypes, no support of C-like syntax, ...). A toolset that combines the functionality
of Uppaal and PRISM would be ideal for dealing with the Zeroconf protocol. The com-
positional step simulation relations between timed transition systems that we use toestablish the correctness of our abstractions are inspired by the timed ready simula-
tions from Jensen et al. [2000], and use the framework described by Berendsen and
Vaandrager [2008].
Outline. The organization of the article is as follows. In Section 2, we explain the
protocol and our Uppaal model. Section 3 presents a manual correctness proof of the
protocol. Section 4 shows how arbitrary instances of our model can be analyzed fully
automatically after applying a series of abstractions. Finally, Section 5 presents some
conclusions and directions for future research.
2. MODELING THE ZEROCONF PROTOCOL
In this section, we describe our Uppaal model of the Zeroconf protocol, and the rela-tionship between this model and RFC 3927 [Cheshire et al. 2005], the ofﬁcial protocol
standard.
A Zeroconf network is composed of a set of hosts on the same link. Hosts in the
network can be devices that are present at home, in an ofﬁce, in embedded systems
“plugged together” as in an automobile, or in the laptops of some colleagues who are
writing a joint article and want to share a ﬁle. The goal of Zeroconf is to enable network-ing in the absence of conﬁguration and administration services. The core of Zeroconf is
the dynamic conﬁguration of IPv4 link-local addresses, and this is the part on which
we focus in this article.
ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, Vol. 10, No. 3, Article 34, Publication date: April 2011.

--- Page 6 ---
Formal Speciﬁcation and Analysis of Zeroconf Using Uppaal 34:5
The basic idea of Zeroconf is trivial and easy to explain. A host that wants to con-
ﬁgure a new IP link-local address randomly selects an address from a speciﬁed range
and then broadcasts a few identical messages to the other hosts, separated by somedelay, asking whether someone is already using the address. If one of the other hosts
indicates that it is using the other address, the host starts all over again. Otherwise,
it will start using the address after waiting a certain amount of time. One may viewZeroconf as a distributed mutual exclusion algorithm in which the resources are IP
addresses. A goal of Zeroconf is to prevent two hosts from using the same IP address.
The question whether (or under which circumstances) this goal is actually achievedcalls for veriﬁcation and cannot be resolved by direct inspection and easy arguments.
The underlying algorithm used in Zeroconf is similar to Fisher’s mutual exclusion al-
gorithm [Abadi and Lamport 1994; Lynch 1996] and makes essential use of timing.However, whereas Fischer’s algorithm uses a shared variable for communication be-
tween processes, Zeroconf uses broadcast communication. Within Zeroconf, hosts do
not aim at acquiring access to a speciﬁc critical section (IP address); it is enough to
obtain access to one of the 65,024 available critical sections.
2.1. Fixing the Set of Hosts
RFC 3927 assumes a set of hosts. This set is not ﬁxed and a host may join and leavewhile the protocol is running. Since Uppaal does not support dynamic process creation,we assume a ﬁxed positive number of hosts. It may take an arbitrarily long time before
a host becomes active in the protocol and one may argue that in this way the creation
of new hosts is being captured. A phenomenon that may occur in practice, but whichwe have not modeled here, is that distinct Zeroconf networks are joined. We also do not
model host failure or termination (although it would be easy to add this).
The behavior of a single host is modeled by three timed automata that run concur-
rently: Config ,InputHandler ,a n d Regular . Automaton Config describes the conﬁgu-
ration of a new IP address, InputHandler takes care of the incoming messages, and
Regular abstractly models the activity of all the other processes running on the host.
The three automata are parameterized by the unique hardware address (HA) of the
host they belong to. We introduce a scalar type to represent the set of all lhardware
addresses of hosts in the system:
typedef scalar[l] HAtype;
In Uppaal, the type scalar[l] denotes the set {0,..., l−1}. On scalar types, only a
few operations are permitted: assignment of the value of one variable to another, and
identity testing. As a consequence, scalar types are unordered and fully symmetric:the behavior of a model is invariant under arbitrary permutations of the elements of a
scalar type [Ip and Dill 1993; Hendriks et al. 2004]. By using a scalar type rather than
a subrange type, we specify that within our model all the HAs (and therefore all thehosts) play a fully symmetric role. This enables the use of symmetry reduction during
exploration of the state space.
2.2. The Underlying Network
We assume the presence of an underlying network via which nodes may communicate.
RFC 3927 states the following assumption about this network [Section 1.3, page 4]:
“This speciﬁcation applies to all IEEE 802 Local Area Networks (LANs)
[802], including Ethernet [802.3], Token-Ring [802.5] and IEEE 802.11 wire-less LANs [802.11], as well as to other link-layer technologies that operate
at data rates of at least 1 Mbps, have a round-trip latency of at most one
second, and support ARP [RFC826].”
ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, Vol. 10, No. 3, Article 34, Publication date: April 2011.

--- Page 7 ---
34:6 J. Berendsen et al.
The Address Resolution Protocol (ARP) [Plummer 1982] is a widely used method for
converting protocol addresses (e.g., IP addresses) to local network (“hardware”) ad-
dresses (e.g., Ethernet addresses). It takes care of the dynamic distribution of the in-
formation needed to build tables to translate protocol addresses to hardware addresses.Within Zeroconf, all messages are ARP packets.
The goal of Zeroconf is to conﬁgure a link-local IP address. Altogether there are
2
16−2×256=65024 link-local addresses (RFC; page 9):
“The IPv4 preﬁx 169.254/16 is registered with the IANA for this purpose.
The ﬁrst 256 and last 256 addresses in the 169.254/16 preﬁx are reservedfor future use and MUST NOT be selected by a host using this dynamic
conﬁguration mechanism.”
The total number of link-local addresses occurs as a parameter min our model. The only
IP addresses used by Zeroconf are link-local addresses and the all-zeroes IP address
0.0.0.0, which serves as a special “unknown” or “undeﬁned” value in the protocol. We
represent the set of used IP addresses by a scalar type:
typedef scalar[m+1] IPtype;
Actually, because the IP address 0.0.0.0 plays a special r ˆole, the set of IP addresses
is not fully symmetric. We use a trick to denote the all-zeroes IP address: we in-
troduce a special state variable zero of type IPtype , whose value is never changed,
and deﬁne this value to be the all zeroes IP address. In this way, we do not referdirectly to an element of the scalar type. But since variable zero is never changed,
it acts as a constant and thus, effectively, it refers to a ﬁxed element of the scalar
type.
For our model, the relevant
5information in an ARP packet consists of (1) a sender
hardware address, (2) a sender IP address, (3) a target IP address, and (4) the packet
type, which can be either “request” or “reply.” Hence, an ARP packet can be deﬁned in
Uppaal as follows:
typedef struct {
HAtype senderHA; // sender hardware address
IPtype senderIP; // sender IP addressIPtype targetIP; // target IP address
bool request; // is the packet a Request or a Reply
} ARP_packet;
Here we use the convention that the request ﬁeld is true for ARP requests and false
for ARP replies.
In Zeroconf, all ARP packets are broadcast (RFC 3927, page 13, Section 2.5):
“All ARP packets (*replies* as well as requests) that contain a Link- Local
‘sender IP address’ MUST be sent using link-layer broadcast instead of link-
layer unicast. This aids timely detection of duplicate addresses.”
A host that is looking for the hardware address of a host with IP address x, broadcasts
an ARP request packet with the target IP address set to x. A host with IP address x
will then return an ARP reply packet with the sender hardware address set to its local
network address.
5ARP packets also contain a target hardware address, but this can be ignored in our model since Zeroconf
uses broadcast for all messages.
ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, Vol. 10, No. 3, Article 34, Publication date: April 2011.

--- Page 8 ---
Formal Speciﬁcation and Analysis of Zeroconf Using Uppaal 34:7
Fig. 1 . Interaction between Network automaton and hosts.
We model the network as a set of nidentical Network automata. Each of these au-
tomata takes care of handling a single ARP request at a time, and is parameterized by
an element of the scalar type:
typedef scalar[n] Networktype;
The main reason for having nautomata, rather than just one, is that this allows us
to model round-trip latencies in Uppaal: each network automaton has its own clock
to keep track of timing. Figure 1 schematically illustrates the operation of a Network
automaton. After a request from a host comes in ( send req), this is broadcast to all hosts
(receive msg). In case there is an answer (this may be a reply or a request packet), this
is transferred from the host to the network automaton using a send answer action, and
broadcast to all the hosts via subsequent receive msg actions. All these interactions
take place within 1 s. After completing this task, a Network automaton returns to its
initial location, ready to handle a new request.
To simplify our model, we assume that hosts handle incoming ARP requests in zero
time, that is, we adopt the synchrony hypothesis that is well known from synchronous
programming [Berry and Gonthier 1992]. A desktop computer can realistically answer
an ARP in 100 μs. A device like a SitePlayer could take up to 10 ms. Neither have a
signiﬁcant impact on achieving a round-trip delay under 1 s. By taking the conceptual
view that the 1 s which Network may use to do its work includes the time needed by a
host to generate a reply, we avoid cumbersome modeling of input buffers at each host.
Before explaining our model of the Network automaton in detail, in Section 2.5,
we now turn our attention to the core part of RFC 3927, which concerns addressconﬁguration.
2.3. Address Conﬁguration
For each host, we introduce a state variable IPto store the IP address of that host:
IPtype IP[HAtype];
Figure 2 displays the automaton Config(h) , which speciﬁes how host hconﬁgures a
new IP address. The host starts in location INIT , where it stays until it has selected an
IP address. According to RFC 3927 (page 9, Section 2.1):
“When a host wishes to conﬁgure an IPv4 Link-Local address, it selects an
address using a pseudo-random number generator with a uniform distribu-
tion in the range from 169.254.1.0 to 169.254.254.255 inclusive.”
ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, Vol. 10, No. 3, Article 34, Publication date: April 2011.

--- Page 9 ---
34:8 J. Berendsen et al.
Fig. 2 . Automaton Config(h) .
A transition from location INIT to location WAIT takes place when an address has been
selected. Via a so-called select statement guess:IPtype , we nondeterministically bind
identiﬁer guess to a value of type IPtype . This means that there is an instance of the
transition for each element of the type. The transition is enabled if a value differentfrom zero has been selected, that is, a link-local address. In this way we express that a
link-local IP address is chosen nondeterministically. The selected address is stored in
state variable IP[h]. To mark the time at which the address has been selected, we reset
a local clock x.
RFC 3927 continues (page 11, Section 2.2.1):
“When ready to begin probing, the host should then wait for a random time
interval selected uniformly in the range zero to PROBE
WAIT seconds, and
should then send PROBE NUM probe packets, each of these probe packets
spaced randomly, PROBE MIN to PROBE MAX seconds apart.”
The use of the word should in the above sentence is somewhat ambiguous. In our
model, we assume that it has the same meaning as the keyword MUST as deﬁned
in RFC 2119, that is, the deﬁnition is an absolute requirement of the speciﬁcation.
In Section 3, we will discuss the alternative interpretation in which should has the
same meaning as SHOULD in the sense of RFC 2119. This keyword means that there
may exist valid reasons in particular circumstances to ignore a particular item, but
the full implications must be understood and carefully weighed before choosing a dif-ferent course. We will see that the protocol may fail in case no probes are sent at
all.
The initial waiting period is modeled by by bounding the time that the host may
stay in WAIT via an invariant x <= PROBE
WAIT . At any point the host may move to
location PROBE , where it starts sending probes. Probes are deﬁned as follows (RFC 3927;
Section 2.2.1: page 11).
ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, Vol. 10, No. 3, Article 34, Publication date: April 2011.

--- Page 10 ---
Formal Speciﬁcation and Analysis of Zeroconf Using Uppaal 34:9
“A host probes to see if an address is already in use by broadcasting an
ARP Request for the desired address. The client MUST ﬁll in the ‘sender
hardware address’ ﬁeld of the ARP Request with the hardware address ofthe interface through which it is sending the packet. The ‘sender IP address’
ﬁeld MUST be set to all zeroes, to avoid polluting ARP caches in other hosts
on the same link in the case where the address turns out to be already in useby another host. The ‘target hardware address’ ﬁeld is ignored and SHOULD
be set to all zeroes. The ‘target IP address’ ﬁeld MUST be set to the address
being probed. An ARP Request constructed this way with an all-zero ‘senderIP address’ is referred to as an “ARP Probe”.”
Sending ARP Probes is modeled via an action send
req! that synchronizes with a
matching action send req? of the network. The packet is communicated via a global
shared variable packet of type ARPpacket . In Uppaal, assignments in an output (!)
transition are executed before assignments in a synchronizing input (?) transition, and
this allows us to assign a value to packet in a send req! transition, which is then
picked up by a matching send req? transition of the network. Lower and upper bounds
on timing are expressed with a guard x >= PROBE MINon the sending transition and an
invariant x <= PROBE MAXon location PROBE , respectively. By setting xtoPROBE MAXin
the transition from WAIT toPROBE , we express that the ﬁrst probe is sent immediately
when location PROBE is entered. A local variable counter is used to record the number
of probes that have been sent. After the probing phase is completed, the automatonimmediately jumps to location PRE
CLAIM . The urgent broadcast channel urg ensures
that this transition is taken as soon as it is enabled, that is, immediately after sending
the last probe. As the reader can check, the translation from the RFC description ofthe probing phase to our model is straightforward.
According to RFC 3927 (Section 2.2.1; page 11):
“If, by ANNOUNCE
WAIT seconds after the transmission of the last ARP
Probe no conﬂicting ARP Reply or ARP Probe has been received, then thehost has successfully claimed the desired IPv4 Link-Local address.”
Clock xis used to ensure that exactly ANNOUNCE
WAIT time units are spent in location
PRECLAIM . A transition from location PRECLAIM to location CLAIMED indicates that the
host has successfully claimed an address.
In our model, automaton InputHandler(h) (which will be discussed in Section 2.4)
takes care of handling incoming messages. If InputHandler(h) decides that, due to
some conﬂict, a new address must be conﬁgured, it performs an action reset[h]! . This
triggers a reset[h]? transition in Config(h) . As part of this transition, IP[h]i ss e tt o
zero and clock xis reset. According to RFC 3927 (Section 2.1.1; page 11).
“A host should maintain a counter of the number of address conﬂicts it has
experienced in the process of trying to acquire an address, and if the number
of conﬂicts exceeds MAX CONFLICTS then the host MUST limit the rate
at which it probes for new addresses to no more than one new address perRATE
LIMIT INTERVAL. This is to prevent catastrophic ARP storms in
pathological failure cases, such as a rogue host that answers all ARP Probes,
causing legitimate hosts to go into an inﬁnite loop attempting to select ausable address.”
Counter ConflictNum is used in our model to record the number of conﬂicts that have
occurred during the process of acquiring an IP address. Depending on the value of
ConflictNum , the automaton returns to location INIT immediately or ﬁrst waits for
ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, Vol. 10, No. 3, Article 34, Publication date: April 2011.

--- Page 11 ---
34:10 J. Berendsen et al.
Fig. 3 .A u t o m a t i o n Regular(h) .
RATE LIMIT INTERVAL time units. Again, the correspondence between the RFC text and
our model is straightforward.
In location CLAIMED , the host announces the new address that it has just claimed
(RFC 3927, Section 2.4, page 12).
“Having probed to determine a unique address to use, the host MUST then
announce its claimed address by broadcasting ANNOUNCE NUM ARP an-
nouncements, spaced ANNOUNCE INTERVAL seconds apart. An ARP an-
nouncement is identical to the ARP Probe described above, except that now
the sender and target IP addresses are both set to the host’s newly selected
IPv4 address. The purpose of these ARP announcements is to make sure that
other hosts on the link do not have stale ARP cache entries left over fromsome other host that may previously have been using the same address.”
The RFC does not specify upper and lower bounds on the time that may elapse be-
tween sending the last ARP Probe and sending the ﬁrst ARP Announcement. However,
according to the protocol designers, upper and lower bounds both equal ANNOUNCE
WAIT
[Cheshire 2006]. Also, the RFC does not specify whether a host may immediately startusing a newly claimed address (in parallel with sending the ARP Announcements), or
whether it should ﬁrst send out all announcements. According to the designers, a host
should send the ﬁrst ARP Announcement, and then it can immediately start usingthe address [Cheshire 2006]. So the second announcement goes out ANNOUNCE
INTERVAL
seconds later, but other trafﬁc does not need to be held up waiting for that. Finally,
the RFC does not specify the tolerance that is permitted on the timing of ARP An-nouncements. Since no physical device can consistently send messages spaced exactly
ANNOUNCE
INTERVAL seconds apart, strictly speaking it is impossible for an implemen-
tation to conform to the RFC. According to the designers, the RFC does not specifyaccuracy requirements, partly because the protocol is robust to a wide range of vari-
ations, so it does not matter [Cheshire 2006]. We decided to follow the RFC and not
specify accuracy requirements, but in order to use our model for automatic generation
of tests, for instance, using the U
PPAAL -TRON toolset [Larsen et al. 2005], one would
have to modify our model at this point.
With this additional information, the modeling of the announcement phase is
straightforward and analogous to that of the probing phase. After sending the ﬁrst
announcement, a Boolean variable UseIP[h] is set to true . This enables automaton
Regular(h) , displayed in Figure 3, to start sending regular ARP requests packets with
thesenderIP ﬁeld set to IP[h] and the targetIP ﬁeld set to an arbitrary link-local
address. Even when a host is using an IP address, a conﬂict may arise at any time.When this happens, automaton Config(h) returns to its initial location and UseIP[h]
is set to false again.
2.4. The Input Handler
For each host h, automaton InputHandler(h) receives incoming ARP packets and de-
cides what to do with them. Input handling is described at various places in RFC
3927, which makes it nontrivial to determine the reaction to an arbitrary ARP packet,
also because Zeroconf runs on top of the ARP protocol, which it sometimes follows but
ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, Vol. 10, No. 3, Article 34, Publication date: April 2011.

--- Page 12 ---
Formal Speciﬁcation and Analysis of Zeroconf Using Uppaal 34:11
Fig. 4 . Automaton InputHandler(h) .
sometimes overrules. Conceptually, we think it is natural to describe input handling in
terms of a single component or function. Implementations of the protocol will typicallyalso do this.
Automaton InputHandler(h) is displayed in Figure 4. The automaton starts with
a transition to initialize its local variables: clock yis set to a large value, and packet
variable answer is set to the undeﬁned value. When a new packet arrives, that is, when a
receive
msg[w][h]? transition occurs, the automaton calls a function ihandler ,w h i c h
does the real work.
The deﬁnition of ihandler is listed in Figure 5. The Boolean parameter defend
indicates whether the host will defend its IP address in case of a conﬂicting ARP
request. The host may only defend its address if there has been no other conﬂict duringthe last DEFEND
INTERVAL time units. Clock ymeasures the time since the last conﬂict.
The input handler must distinguish between nine scenarios.
—Scenario A. If a packet comes in when a host has not yet selected an IP address then
it should be ignored. This scenario is not listed explicitly in the RFC but it is obvious.
—Scenario B. Incoming packets sent by the host itself can be ignored. Also this scenario
is implicit in the RFC.
—Scenario C. A conﬂict may arise when another host sends a packet with the senderIP
ﬁeld set to IP[h] . This scenario is described in RFC 3927 as follows. (Section 2.2.1,
page 11):
“If during this period, from the beginning of the probing process until
ANNOUNCE WAIT seconds after the last probe packet is sent, the host
receives any ARP packet (Request *or* Reply) on the interface where the
probe is being performed where the packet’s ‘sender IP address’ is theaddress being probed for, then the host MUST treat this address as being
in use by some other host, and MUST select a new pseudo-random address
and repeat the process.”
—Scenarios D and E. In the previous scenario, UseIP[h]==false . The case with
UseIP[h]==true is also described in RFC 3927 (Section 2.5, page 12):
“Address conﬂict detection is not limited to the address selection phase,
when a host is sending ARP Probes. Address conﬂict detection is an ongo-ing process that is in effect for as long as a host is using an IPv4 Link-Local
address. At any time, if a host receives an ARP packet (request *or* reply)
on an interface where the ‘sender IP address’ is the IP address the hosthas conﬁgured for that interface, but the ‘sender hardware address’ does
not match the hardware address of that interface, then this is a conﬂicting
ARP packet, indicating an address conﬂict.
ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, Vol. 10, No. 3, Article 34, Publication date: April 2011.

--- Page 13 ---
34:12 J. Berendsen et al.
Fig. 5 . Function ihandler .
A host MUST respond to a conﬂicting ARP packet as described in either
(a) or (b) below:
(a) Upon receiving a conﬂicting ARP packet, a host MAY elect to immedi-
ately conﬁgure a new IPv4 Link-Local address as described above, or(b) If a host currently has active TCP connections or other reasons to prefer
to keep the same IPv4 address, and it has not seen any other conﬂicting
ARP packets within the last DEFEND
INTERVAL seconds, then it MAY
elect to attempt to defend its address by recording the time that the con-
ﬂicting ARP packet was received, and then broadcasting one single ARPAnnouncement, giving its own IP and hardware addresses as the sender
addresses of the ARP. Having done this, the host can then continue to
use the address normally without any further special action. However,if this is not the ﬁrst conﬂicting ARP packet the host has seen, and the
time recorded for the previous conﬂicting ARP packet is recent, within
DEFEND
INTERVAL seconds, then the host MUST immediately cease
using this address and conﬁgure a new IPv4 Link-Local address as de-
scribed above. This is necessary to ensure that two hosts do not get stuck
in an endless loop with both hosts trying to defend the same address.
ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, Vol. 10, No. 3, Article 34, Publication date: April 2011.

--- Page 14 ---
Formal Speciﬁcation and Analysis of Zeroconf Using Uppaal 34:13
A host MUST respond to conﬂicting ARP packets as described in either (a)
or (b) above. A host MUST NOT ignore conﬂicting ARP packets.”
Case (a) corresponds to our scenario E. This scenario may occur when the top-
most receive msg transition in the automaton has been taken, which sets defend
tofalse , Case (b) corresponds to scenario D. This scenario may occur when the lower
receive msgtransition in the automaton has been taken, which sets defend totrue .
The interpretation of the sentence “and it has not seen any other conﬂicting ARP
packets within the last DEFEND INTERVAL seconds” in the above quotation is
not entirely clear. Is a host allowed to defend its address if there has been a recent
conﬂict concerning a different address (but no previous conﬂict concerning the current
address)? Strictly speaking, the host has seen a conﬂicting packet and it may not
defend. However, the conﬂict concerned a different address, and the motivation for
recording the time since the last conﬂict has been to rule out a scenario in whichtwo hosts get stuck in an endless loop trying to defend the same address. Thus one
could also argue that in this situation a host may defend its address. To model this
interpretation, one has to add an assignment y := DEFEND
INTERVAL+1 to the reset
transition of the input handler.
—Scenarios F and G. RFC 3927 speciﬁes one more conﬂict scenario (Section 2.2.1,
page 11):
“In addition, if during this period [from the beginning of the probing pro-
cess until ANNOUNCE WAIT seconds after the last probe packet is sent]
the host receives any ARP Probe where the packet’s ‘target IP address’ isthe address being probed for, and the packet’s ‘sender hardware address’
is not the hardware address of the interface the host is attempting to
conﬁgure, then the host MUST similarly treat this as an address conﬂictand select a new address as above. This can occur if two (or more) hosts
attempt to conﬁgure the same IPv4 Link-Local address at the same time.”
In the ihandler code, this corresponds to scenario F. Scenario G, which is implicit in
the RFC, occurs when the incoming packet is not conﬂicting and the host is not yet
using an IP address. In this case the incoming packet is ignored.
—Scenario H and I The Address Resolution Protocol (RFC 826) [Plummer 1982] spec-
iﬁes that if a host receives an ARP request packet, it should return an ARP reply
packet if it uses an IP address that equals the target protocol address of this request.
In the reply packet, the sender ﬁelds contain the local hardware address and localIP address, and the target ﬁeld contains the value of the sender ﬁeld of the received
packet. Zeroconf (RFC 3927) is not explicit about conformance to RFC 826 (it as-
sumes a link-layer technology that “supports ARP”), but in our model we take theview that, once a host is using an IP address, it answers regular ARP requests in
agreement with RFC 826 except when (a) the request has been broadcast by the host
itself, or (b) there is a conﬂict. This is scenario H in our model. The ﬁnal Scenario Ioccurs when the incoming packet is not conﬂicting with the IP address that the host
is using, and no reply packet needs to be sent.
2.5. The Network Automaton
As explained in Section 2.2, we model the underlying network as a set of nidenti-
calNetwork automata. For index w, the automaton Network(w) is shown in Figure 6.
Initially the automaton is in its IDLE location. As soon as it receives a packet via a
send req? transition, it jumps to location BUSY . A local clock zis set to zero and an
invariant z< =1 ensures that within 1 s the network broadcasts the packet (as well as
the answer if there is one) to all hosts. We assume no lower bound on message delivery
ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, Vol. 10, No. 3, Article 34, Publication date: April 2011.

--- Page 15 ---
34:14 J. Berendsen et al.
Fig. 6 . Automaton Network(w) .
time, but we do assume that there is at most one host that answers any given request,
and that an answer does not induce subsequent answers. It is possible to model mul-tiple and successive anwers, but this will require additional state variables and more
complicated data structures.
Our Network automaton maintains two local variables for storing packets: s
buffer
holds the packet that was sent by the host and abuffer holds an answer to a request
when it arrives. In addition, Network maintains Boolean arrays send and answer to
record to which hosts packets still need to be delivered. The function setis used to set
all entries of a Boolean array to true . Via a select statement on the receive msg[w][a]!
transitions, the automaton nondeterministically selects in which order packets aredelivered to the different hosts. The upper transition labeled with send
answer[w]?
occurs when a host returns an answer upon receipt of a request, as explained in
Section 2.4. The lower transition labeled with receive msg[w][a]! is enabled as soon
as there is an answer packet in answer buffer. The network returns to its IDLE location
and resets the buffers to their initial value, as soon as all messages have been delivered.
2.6. Dimensioning the Model
RFC 3927 (Section 9, page 25) speciﬁes the following values for the different timing con-
stants. These deﬁnitions are copied verbatim in the declaration section of our Uppaalmodel.
"PROBE_WAIT 1 second (initial random delay)
PROBE_NUM 3 (number of probe packets)
PROBE_MIN 1 second (minimum delay till repeated probe)
PROBE_MAX 2 seconds (maximum delay till repeated probe)
ANNOUNCE_WAIT 2 seconds (delay before announcing)
ANNOUNCE_NUM 2 (number of announcement packets)
ANNOUNCE_INTERVAL 2 seconds (time between announcement packets)MAX_CONFLICTS 10 (max conflicts before rate limiting)
RATE_LIMIT_INTERVAL 60 seconds (delay between successive attempts)
DEFEND_INTERVAL 10 seconds (minimum interval between defensive ARPs)."
In general, a Zeroconf network has 65024 IP addresses available and it is suitable
for up to 1300 hosts [Cheshire et al. 2005]. These values are too big for automatic
veriﬁcation: with there hardware addresses and 65,024 IP addresses even the simulatorruns out of memory.
A next issue regarding the dimensioning of the model is the number nofNetwork
automata, that is, the maximal number of ARP packets that may be in transit at anygiven point. In our model, a host may select an IP address, send a probe, and return
to its initial location via a reset in zero time. In fact, this behavior may be repeated
MAX
CONFLICTS times in a row in zero time. Once a host is using an IP address, the
ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, Vol. 10, No. 3, Article 34, Publication date: April 2011.

--- Page 16 ---
Formal Speciﬁcation and Analysis of Zeroconf Using Uppaal 34:15
number of messages in transit may increase even further (in fact, unboundedly) since
there is no lower bound on the time between successive ARP requests. Uppaal forces
us to bound the number of Network automata to some small number n.
3. MANUAL VERIFICATION
RFC 3927 does not specify what properties the protocol must satisfy. However, it is
clear that at least the following two correctness properties are desirable:6
(1) Mutual exclusion, that is, two hosts may not use the same IP address. This can be
speciﬁed in Uppaal as follows.
ME = A[] forall (i: HAtype) forall (j: HAtype)
(UseIP[i] && UseIP[j] && IP[i]==IP[j]) imply i==j
(2) Absence of deadlock, that is, in each reachable state a transition is possible. In
Uppaal syntax:
DL = A[] not deadlock
The model described in the previous section is very close to the RFC 3927 deﬁnition of
the protocol, but too big for Uppaal to do a complete state space exploration for non-trivial instances without some drastic abstractions. Using the latest version of Uppaal
(4.0), we only managed to establish MEand DLfor the instance with two hardware ad-
dresses, one link-local IP address, and two network automata. Nevertheless, it is nottoo hard to see that Zeroconf satisﬁes mutual exclusion and absence of deadlock. In
the remainder of this section, we sketch a manual proof of mutual exclusion. We claim
that our model has no deadlocks but do not present the (long and tedious) proof here.
T
HEOREM 3.1. For each instance of the Zeroconf model (i.e., any number of hardware
addresses, IP addresses, and network automata), the mutual exclusion property MEholds.
PROOF . (Sketch) Suppose that iand jare distinct hardware addresses and suppose
that in some reachable state s,UseIP [i]∧UseIP [j]∧(IP[i]=IP[j]). We derive a contra-
diction. Consider an execution αleading up to state s, that is, a ﬁnite sequence of delay
and action transitions in the timed transition system semantics of the model leading
from the start state to s. Observe that, before a host enters the “critical section” (where
it may use its IP address), it resides at least
PROBE_MIN + PROBE_MIN + ANNOUNCE_WAIT = 1 + 1 + 2 = 4
time units in the “trying region” (where it has selected an IP address but is not yet
using it). Formally, the trying region of host iis characterized by the predicate
Config(i).WAIT || Config(i).PROBE || Config(i).PRE_CLAIM ||
(Config(i).CLAIMED && !UseIP[i])
and the critical section is deﬁned by
UseIP[i]
Moreover, exactly ANNOUNCE WAIT=2 time units before entering the critical section, a
host sends a (in fact, the last) probe packet.
6Mutual exclusion will not hold in an extension of our model in which Zeroconf networks can be merged.
In such an extension, the speciﬁcation should be weakened: mutual exclusion may be violated after a join,
but as soon as the violation is detected mutual exclusion will be restored within a speciﬁed amount of time,provided no further joins occur.
ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, Vol. 10, No. 3, Article 34, Publication date: April 2011.

--- Page 17 ---
34:16 J. Berendsen et al.
Fig. 7 . Probe arrives at jbefore it enters critical section.
Assume that host iis in its critical section from time t0 onward, and is in its trying
region from time t1t ot0. Similarly, host jis in its critical section from time u0 onward,
and is in its trying region from time u1t ou0. Let tbe the time at which host isends its
last probe and let ube the time at which this probe is received by the input handler of
host j. Without loss of generality, assume that host jenters the critical section before
(but possibly at the same time as) i. Then we have the following (in)equalities:
t0≥u0,
t0−t1≥4,
u0−u1≥4,
t=t0−2,
u≥t,
u≤t+1.
We consider two cases.
(1) See Figure 7. The probe arrives at host jbefore jenters the critical section. At this
moment, jmust be in its trying region since
u≥t=t0−2≥u0−2>u0−4≥u1.
But this means that host j’s input handler, upon receipt of the conﬂicting probe, will
generate a reset (Scenario F) and immediately drive Config(j) back to its initial
state, that is, out of the trying region. Contradiction.
(2) See Figure 8. The probe arrives at host jafter jhas entered the critical section.
But this means that host j’s input handler, upon receipt of the probe, will return a
reply message (Scenario H). Since we assume a roundtrip delay of at most one time
unit, this reply message will arrive at iat some time t/primewith t/prime≤t+1. At time t/prime
host iis still in its trying region since
t0=t+2>t+1≥t/prime≥t=t0−2>t0−4≥t1.
ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, Vol. 10, No. 3, Article 34, Publication date: April 2011.

--- Page 18 ---
Formal Speciﬁcation and Analysis of Zeroconf Using Uppaal 34:17
Fig. 8 . Probe arrives at jafter it enters critical section.
Hence, the input handler will generate a reset upon receipt of this reply message
(Scenario C) and drive Config(i) back to its initial state, that is, out of its trying
region. Contradiction.
We expect that formalization/mechanization of the proof of Theorem 3.1, for instance,
in PVS using the basic setup of Vaandrager and Groot [2006], will be routine although
it will involve a signiﬁcant amount of work.
Inspection of the proof indicates that Zeroconf is extremely robust: the protocol has
been designed to handle all kinds of error scenarios (loss of messages, failure of hosts,
merge of networks) which do not occur within our idealized model. Without theseerrors, it sufﬁces (for mutual exclusion) to send out a single probe ( PROBE
NUM=1 ), there
is no need for sending announcements ( ANNOUNCE NUM=0 ), and a host may start using
an address after waiting any time longer than the maximal communication delay. Fora model of this simpliﬁed protocol with three hosts, Uppaal can verify MEand DLin a
few seconds on a standard PC.
4. VERIFICATION BY MODEL CHECKING AND ABSTRACTION
Next to the operational proof of mutual exclusion (Theorem 3.1) described in the pre-
vious section, we also would like to have a proof that is obtained in a more automatic
and structured way. Model checking is of course such an automatic way, but it suffers
from state space explosion. Moreover, model checking usually can only verify a singleinstance of a protocol, whereas one would like to establish correctness for all (possibly
inﬁnitely many) instantiations of its parameters ( l,m). We will show that abstractions
are a remedy to both problems.
We use an abstraction relation that is sound for the property to be veriﬁed, meaning
that when the property holds in the (simple) abstract model, then it also holds in the
(more complex) concrete model. We will apply abstractions in a compositional way,which means that, in a parallel composition of a set of automata, a subset is replaced
by an abstraction, thereby obtaining a new full model that in turn is an abstraction of
the original full model.
ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, Vol. 10, No. 3, Article 34, Publication date: April 2011.

--- Page 19 ---
34:18 J. Berendsen et al.
Section 4.1 introduces our compositional abstraction framework. Section 4.2 estab-
lishes soundness of an abstraction that only uses two hosts. Section 4.3 derives an even
more abstract system that can effectively be veriﬁed by Uppaal. Section 4.4, ﬁnally,presents our model checking results.
4.1. Compositional Abstraction
The standard operational semantics of a Uppaal model is deﬁned on the model as awhole; see Behrmann et al. [2004] or the Uppaal help menu. For compositional veriﬁ-
cation, we use the approach described in Berendsen and Vaandrager [2008], in which a
timed transition system (TTS) is associated to each individual timed automaton. TTSscan be composed in parallel and a compositional abstraction relation is deﬁned that is
sound for invariant properties.
Basically, TTSs are labeled transition systems equipped with some additional struc-
ture to support shared variables and committed transitions: states are deﬁned as
valuations of variables, and transitions may be committed, which gives them priority
in a parallel composition. TTSs can be composed in parallel and may communicate bymeans of shared variables and synchronization of actions. Like in CCS [Milner 1989],
two transitions may synchronize when their actions are complementary, leading to an
internal transition in the composition.
Below we write R
≥0for the set of nonnegative real numbers, Nfor the set of natural
numbers, and B={1,0}for the set of Booleans. We let drange over R≥0,i,j,k,nover
N,a n d b,b/prime,... over B.
We consider three different types of state transitions, corresponding to three different
types of actions. We assume a set Cofchannels and let crange over C. The set of external
actions is deﬁned as E/defines{c!,c?|c∈C}. Actions of the form c! are called output actions
and actions of the form c?input actions . We assume the existence of a special internal
action τ,a n dw r i t e EτforE∪{τ},t h es e to f discrete actions . Finally, we assume a set
ofdurations ortime-passage actions , which in this article is just R≥0.W ew r i t e Actfor
Eτ∪R≥0,t h es e to f actions .
TTSs are capable of communication over a universal set Vof typed variables ,w i t h
as u b s e t X⊆Vofclock variables orclocks . Clocks have domain R≥0.Avaluation for a
setV⊆Vis a function that maps each variable in Vto an element in its domain. We
letu,v,w,... range over valuations, and write Val(V) for the set of valuations for V.
For valuation v∈Val(V) and duration d∈R≥0, we deﬁne v⊕dto be the valuation for
Vthat increments clock variables by d, and leaves the other variables untouched, that
is, for all y∈V,
(v⊕d)(y)/defines/braceleftbiggv(y)+d,ify∈X,
v(y), otherwise.
We write dom (f) to denote the domain of a function f(in our case a valuation). For
functions fand g,w el e t fgdenote the combined function where foverrides gfor
all elements in the intersection of their domains. Formally, fgis the function with
dom (fg)=dom (f)∪dom (g) satisfying, for all z∈dom (fg),
(fg)(z)/defines/braceleftbiggf(z),ifz∈dom (f),
g(z),ifz∈dom (g)−dom (f).
We deﬁne the dual operator by f/triangleleftg/definesgf. Two functions fand garecompatible ,
notation f♥g, if they agree on the intersection of their domains, that is, f(z)=g(z)
for all z∈dom (f)∩dom (g). For compatible functions fand g, we deﬁne f/bardblg/definesfg.
Whenever we write f/bardblg, we implicitly assume f♥g.W ew r i t e f[g]f o rt h e update of
function faccording to g,t h a ti s , ∀z∈dom (f):f[g](z)=(f/triangleleftg)(z).
ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, Vol. 10, No. 3, Article 34, Publication date: April 2011.

--- Page 20 ---
Formal Speciﬁcation and Analysis of Zeroconf Using Uppaal 34:19
The state variables of a TTS are partitioned into external and internal variables. In-
ternal variables may only be updated by the TTS itself and not by its environment. This
in contrast to external variables, which may be updated by both the TTS and its en-vironment. Transitions are classiﬁed as either committed oruncommitted . Committed
transitions have priority over time-passage transitions and over internal transitions
that are not committed.
Deﬁnition 4.1 ( TTS ). A timed transition system (TTS) i sat u p l e
T=/angbracketleftE,H,S,s
0,−→1,−→0/angbracketright,
where E,H⊆Vare disjoint sets of external and internal variables, respectively, V=
E∪H,S⊆Val(V) is the set of states, s0∈Sis the initial state, and the transition
relations −→1and−→0are subsets of S×Act×S.
We write ra,b−→sif (r,a,s)∈−→b. The value bdetermines whether or not a transition
is committed. We often omit bwhen it equals 0. A state sis called committed , notation
Comm (s), iff it enables an outgoing committed transition, that is, sa,1−→for some a.W e
require the following axioms to hold, for all s,t∈S,a,a/prime∈Act,b∈B,d∈R≥0and
u∈Val(E),
sa,1−→∧ sa/prime,b−−→= ⇒ a/prime∈E∨(a/prime=τ∧b), (Axiom I)
s[u]∈S, (Axiom II)
sc?,b−−→= ⇒ s[u]c?,b−−→, (Axiom III)
sd−→t=⇒ t=s⊕d. (Axiom IV)
Axiom I states that in a committed state neither time-passage steps nor uncommitted
τ’s may occur. The axiom implies that committed transitions always have a label in Eτ.
Note that a committed state may have outgoing uncommitted transitions with a label inE. The reason is that, for instance, an uncommitted c? transition may synchronize with
a committed c! transition from another component, and thereby turn into a committed
τtransition. Axiom II states that, if the external variables of a state are changed, the
result is again a state. Axiom III states that, enabledness of input transitions is not af-
fected by changing the external variables. This is a key property that we need in order to
obtain compositionality. Axiom IV, ﬁnally, asserts that, if time advances with an amountd, all clocks also advance with an amount d, and the other variables remain unchanged.
In our setting, parallel composition is a partial operation that is only deﬁned when
TTSs are compatible : the initial states must be compatible functions and the internal
variables of one TTS may not intersect with the variables of the other.
Deﬁnition 4.2 ( Parallel Composition ). Two TTSs T
1andT2arecompatible ifH1∩
V2=H2∩V1=∅ and s0
1♥s0
2. In this case, their parallel composition T1/bardblT2is the tuple
T=/angbracketleftE,H,S,s0,−→1,−→0/angbracketright, where E=E1∪E2,H=H1∪H2,S={r/bardbls|r∈S1∧s∈
S2∧r♥s},s0=s0
1/bardbls0
2,a n d −→1and−→0are the least relations that satisfy the rules
in Figure 9. Here i,jrange over {1,2},r,r/primerange over Si,s,s/primerange over Sj,b,b/primerange
over B,eranges over E,a n d cranges over C.
The external and internal variables of the composition are simply obtained by taking
the union of the external and internal variables of the components, respectively. The
states (and start state) of a composed TTS are obtained by merging the states (respec-
tively, start state) of the components. The interesting part of the deﬁnition consists
ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, Vol. 10, No. 3, Article 34, Publication date: April 2011.

--- Page 21 ---
34:20 J. Berendsen et al.
Fig. 9 . Rules for parallel composition of TTSs.
of the rules in Figure 9. Rule EXT states that an external transition of a component
induces a corresponding transition of the composition. The component that takes thetransition may override some of the shared variables. Similarly, rule TAU states that
an internal transition of a component induces a corresponding transition of the compo-
sition, except that an uncommitted transition may only occur if the other component isin an uncommitted state. Rule SYNC describes the synchronization of components. If
T
ihas an output transition from rtor/prime,a n di f Tjhas a corresponding input transition
from s, updated by r/prime,t os/prime, the composition has a τtransition to r/prime/trianglelefts/prime. The synchro-
nization is committed iff one of the participating transitions is committed. However,
an uncommitted synchronization may only occur if both components are in an uncom-
mitted state. Rule TIME , ﬁnally, states that a time step dof the composition may
occur when both components perform a dstep. We refer to Berendsen and Vaandrager
[2008] for proofs that the composition of two TTSs is indeed a TTS, and that parallel
composition is both commutative and associative modulo structure isomorphism.
Uppaal models can be mapped to TTSs in a straightforward manner [Berendsen and
Vaandrager 2008]. Each variable in a Uppaal model corresponds to a variable in a
TTS. We treat each element in a Uppaal array as a distinct variable. For each timed
automaton A, we introduce a fresh variable A.locto record the location. The location
and local variables of an automaton Aare always classiﬁed as internal. If vis a local
variable of automaton Athen A.vbecomes an internal variable of the TTS associated
with A. Each global variable in a Uppaal model becomes an external variable of all
automata. A discrete transition is committed if and only if it starts from a state with acommitted location.
For the axioms of a TTS to hold, we need timed automata to comply with the following
rules as deﬁned in Berendsen and Vaandrager [2008].
—Location invariants do not depend on external variables.
—Satisfaction of guards on input transitions does not depend on the external variables.—In a committed location, always at least one edge is enabled.
—Urgent edges do not synchronize and their guards do not depend on the values of
clocks.
ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, Vol. 10, No. 3, Article 34, Publication date: April 2011.

--- Page 22 ---
Formal Speciﬁcation and Analysis of Zeroconf Using Uppaal 34:21
It is easy to see that all these rules hold for the Zeroconf model. The urgent action
urg! can be viewed as an urgent internal action. Because urg? is used nowhere, this
broadcast synchronization will only involve a single automaton.
Given a timed automaton A,w ew r i t e TTS(A) to denote its TTS semantics. The
semantics of a complete Uppaal model A1,..., Anis obtained by associating a TTS to
each individual automaton in the model, taking the composition of all these TTSs,and then removing all synchronization transitions from the resulting TTS using the
restriction operator \Efrom CCS [Milner 1989]:
(TTS(A
1)/bardbl···/bardbl TTS(An))\E.
We claim that, modulo the “committed” Booleans that label transitions, the resulting
TTS is equal to the semantics for Uppaal models as deﬁned in Behrmann et al. [2004].
For a proof we refer the reader to Berendsen and Vaandrager [2008].
Abstractions on TTSs can be deﬁned by timed step simulations , which are relations
on the states of TTSs. Timed step simulation requires that (a) both TTSs have the sameexternal variables, (b) the initial states are related, (c) related states have the same
values for external variables, and (d) if these values are changed by the environment
the resulting states are again related, (e) if an abstract state is committed then sois every related concrete state, and (f) each transition in the concrete TTS can be
mimicked by a transition between related states in the abstract TTS, except τ,w h i c h
may be simulated by “doing nothing.”
Deﬁnition 4.3 ( Timed Step Simulation ). Two TTSs T
1andT2arecomparable if they
have the same external variables, that is, E1=E2. Given comparable TTSs T1andT2,
we say that a relation R ⊆S1×S2is a timed step simulation from T1toT2, provided
that s0
1Rs0
2and if sRrthen
(1)∀y∈E1:s(y)=r(y),
(2)∀u∈Val(E1):s[u]Rr[u],
(3) if Comm (r)t h e n Comm (s),
(4) if sa,b−→s/primethen either there exists an r/primesuch that ra,b−→r/primeand s/primeRr/prime,o ra=τand
s/primeRr.
We write T1/precedesequalT2when there exists a timed step simulation from T1toT2.
The following two theorems play a key role in our approach. Theorem 4.4 states that
invariants for an abstract system are also invariants for a related concrete system.
Theorem 4.5 establishes that timed step simulations are compositional.
THEOREM 4.4. LetT1andT2be comparable TTSs such that T1/precedesequalT2.L e t φbe an
invariant over the external variables of T1(and T2); then
φholds in T2=⇒φholds in T1.
THEOREM 4.5. LetT1,T2,T3be TTSs such that T1andT2are comparable, and both
T1andT2are compatible with T3.I fT1/precedesequalT2thenT1/bardblT3/precedesequalT2/bardblT3.
4.2. An Abstraction with Two Hosts
In this section we will establish that, for the purpose of proving mutual exclusion, a
model with just two hosts is a sound abstraction of the model with lhosts that we
presented in Section 2. Figure 10 presents an overview of all the abstraction steps that
we are going to make as part of our veriﬁcation effort. The ﬁgure will be explained in
the next paragraphs.
ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, Vol. 10, No. 3, Article 34, Publication date: April 2011.

--- Page 23 ---
34:22 J. Berendsen et al.
Fig. 10 . Overview of abstractions.
Step 1. Reorder. The ﬁrst row of Figure 10 shows the situation of the original, un-
abstracted model. A box Hostx denotes the host with hardware address x. Altogether
there are lhosts with addresses {0,..., l−1}. Each host consists of three automata
Config ,InputHandler and Regular , as illustrated for Host0 . In addition there are the
network automata. We write
Net=/bardbli∈Networktype Network (i).
Whenever Config orRegular sends a message, an automaton Network (i) is activated,
for some i. To simplify reasoning, we associate network automata to speciﬁc hosts
in the system. More speciﬁcally, we introduce one copy of Net for each Config (j)a n d
each Regular (j) automaton in the system. Let Networktype/primedenote the set of indices of
Network automata in the modiﬁed system. Then we have an injective mapping
/angbracketleft·/angbracketright:{C,R}×Networktype ×HAtype →Networktype/prime,
where /angbracketleftC,i,j/angbracketrightrefers to the copy of Network (i)f o ru s eb y Config (j), and /angbracketleftR,i,j/angbracketrightrefers
to the copy of Network (i)f o ru s eb y Regular (j). We also have projections
HA:Networktype/prime→HAtype ,
Comp :Networktype/prime→{ C,R},
ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, Vol. 10, No. 3, Article 34, Publication date: April 2011.

--- Page 24 ---
Formal Speciﬁcation and Analysis of Zeroconf Using Uppaal 34:23
which assign to each Network automaton in the new system the corresponding hardware
address and component, that is, for all c,iand j,HA(/angbracketleftc,i,j/angbracketright)=jand Comp (/angbracketleftc,i,j/angbracketright)=c.
We deﬁne, for j∈HAtype ,
CNet (j)=/bardbli∈Networktype Network [/angbracketleftC,i,j/angbracketright],
RNet (j)=/bardbli∈Networktype Network [/angbracketleftR,i,j/angbracketright].
The modiﬁed system is now obtained by ﬁrst removing automaton Net, replacing each
automaton Config (j)b y
(Config (j)/bardblCNet (j))\send req,
and similarly replace each automaton Regular (j)b y
(Regular (j)/bardblRNet (j))\send req.
The proof that this is a proper abstraction is simple though not compositional. Ob-
serve that, when an automaton Network (i) in the original system is in location BUSY ,
we may infer from the value of variable sbuffer.senderHA which host has sent the
message that is currently being broadcast. Moreover, if sbuffer is a probe or an-
nouncement then we know that it has been sent by Config ; otherwise it has been
sent by Regular . This allows us to map each state of the old model to a state of the
new model: if Network (i) is busy transmitting a message from Config (j), we map the
substate of Network (i) to the identical substate of Network [/angbracketleftC,i,j/angbracketright], and if Network (i)
is busy transmitting a message from Regular (j), we map the substate of Network (i)t o
the identical substate of Network [/angbracketleftR,i,j/angbracketright]. The substates of the Config and Regular
automata remain unchanged. The substates of InputHandler remains unchanged, ex-
cept that local variable network is mapped to the index of the network automaton to
which Network [network ] is mapped. It is straightforward to prove that this map in
fact determines a timed step simulation. Note that the modiﬁed model contains more
Network automata (and therefore has more behaviors) than the original model. Hence
our ﬁrst abstraction adds to the number of states rather than reducing it. Using the
standard CCS distributive laws for the restriction operator [Milner 1989], we may push
the restriction \reset inside. Thus we obtain subexpressions
(InputHandler (j)/bardbl(Config (j)/bardblCNet (j))\send req)\reset .
The second row of Figure 10 illustrates the new situation.
Step 2. Introducing chaos. The mutual exclusion property MEthat we want to prove
states that two hosts may not use the same IP address. Since all hosts in the network
are fully symmetrical, this is equivalent to proving that two speciﬁc hosts, say thosewith HAs 0 and 1, may not use the same IP address:
A[] (UseIP[ 0] && UseIP[ 1]) imply IP[ 0]!=IP[ 1].
It turns out that in order to prove the mutual exclusion property for two speciﬁc
hosts, the behavior of all the other hosts is completely irrelevant. Thus we may over-approximate the behavior of these hosts with a drastic abstraction Chaos , an automaton
that is able to do all externally visible actions of the abstracted automata in any order
and with any timing (cf. the CHAOS process in CSP [Hoare 1985]). Automaton Chaos ,
depicted in Figure 11, can do both input and output actions on channels receive
msg
and send answer in arbitrary order and with arbitrary timing. The shared variable
packet , which is used for value passing, is set arbitrarily whenever an output action is
performed. For h∈HAtype , predicate isConreteHA (h) holds if and only if h∈{0,1}.F o r
r∈Networktype/prime, predicate isUsedByConcreteConfig [r] holds if and only if HA(r)∈{0,1}
and Comp (r)=C.
ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, Vol. 10, No. 3, Article 34, Publication date: April 2011.

--- Page 25 ---
34:24 J. Berendsen et al.
Fig. 11 .Chaos .
It is straightforward to prove that Chaos is an abstraction of all hosts with a HA
different from 0 or 1. Moreover, Chaos is an abstraction of all the Regular automata.
Finally, Chaos is an abstraction of the composition of two Chaos automata. Formally,
the following abstraction relations can be shown to hold.
(InputHandler (j)/bardbl(Config (j)/bardblCNet (j))\send req)\reset /precedesequalChaos ifj/negationslash∈{0,1}
(Regular (j)/bardblRNet (j))\send req/precedesequalChaos
Chaos /bardblChaos /precedesequalChaos .
Since abstractions are compositional (Theorem 4.5), we can replace hosts 2 to l−1a s
well as Regular (0) and Regular (1) and their associated network automata with a single
Chaos automaton, and obtain a new system as depicted on the third row of Figure 10,
where the arrows denote existence of timed step simulations.
Step 3. Only send last probe. The proof of Theorem 3.1 only considers the last probe
sent by a host. Here we take a similar approach by over-approximating all the otherprobes with the chaos automaton. As illustrated in Figure 10, new automata Config2
and ChaosRec
msgare constructed in such a way that
(Config (h)/bardblCNet (h))\send req/precedesequal(Config2 (h)/bardblCnet (h))\send req/bardblChaosRec msg(h).
Config2 is obtained from Config by replacing all send req transitions, except for the
last probe, by an internal transition. The upper four locations of Figure 13 illustrate the
changes. Automaton ChaosRec msg(h) is able to do all possible actions receive msg[s][r]!
just like Chaos . Therefore ChaosRec msg(h)/precedesequalChaos as indicated by the arrow in
Figure 10, and the ChaosRec msgautomata can be abstracted away in the next step.
In order to prove the correctness of this abstraction, we establish a timed step sim-
ulation from the left-hand side (LHS) network to the right-hand side (RHS) network.
Each state of the original model is related to a state of the modiﬁed model iff (1) the
substate of Config is exactly matched by that of Config2 , and (2) for each automa-
tonNetwork (w), either the substates in LHS and RHS match, or the RHS automaton
is in location IDLE . Note that also the values of external variables IPand UseIP are
matched by the simulation. If in the LHS model there is a synchronization on send req
to send the last probe, the RHS model can do exactly the same, and also the substates
of the involved Network in the original and modiﬁed model match. If in the original
model there is a synchronization on send reqdifferent from the last probe, Config2 can
perform a τ-transition to preserve the simulation relation. If some Network (w)o ft h e
LHS model is in location BUSY and this is not the case in the RHS model, the actions
receive msg[s][r]! can be mimicked by ChaosRec msg. The actions send answer [r]? are
ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, Vol. 10, No. 3, Article 34, Publication date: April 2011.

--- Page 26 ---
Formal Speciﬁcation and Analysis of Zeroconf Using Uppaal 34:25
mimicked by Network (w) in the modiﬁed model, since these are also possible from the
location IDLE .
Step 4. Only one network automaton per host. Let automaton Network2 be equal to Network ,
except that its parameter jhas become a local variable j. In addition, Network2 has
a self-loop in location IDLE that non-deterministically updates jto any value from
Networktype/primethat is in use by the host. We claim that7
(Config2(h) /bardblCNet(h) )\send req/precedesequal(Config2(h) /bardblNetwork2 )\send req.
Suppose Config2 sends a message (which can only be a last probe) to the Network
automaton A, by synchronizing on send req. It is easy to see that a next message can
only be sent after resetting the host, that is, after more at least 2 s of delay. At that
point, Awill surely be back in its IDLE location. Thus, from all Network automata in
CNet at most one is in location BUSY . Hence the new automaton Network2 is able to
simulate the behavior of CNet in the given context.
Step 5. Eliminate Networktype. Since only one Network automaton per host is needed,
we can get rid of Networktype/primeand use HAtype instead. To make sure that a network
automaton only serves one designated host, we parameterize channel send req with
HAtype . Given some hardware address h, automata Config (h)a n d Network (h) will syn-
chronize on send req[h]. We adapt our model in the obvious way to use channel types
send req[HAtype ],
receive msg[HAtype ][HAtype ],
send answer [HAtype ].
Let InputHandler2 ,Config3 ,Network3 and Chaos2 denote the new automata in the
model. In Chaos2 , the predicate isUsedByConcreteConfig has been replaced by the
predicate isConcreteHA ,s i n c et h e Network automata that are used by concrete hosts
now have a concrete hardware address. We also move the restriction operators for
send req to the outside again. Correctness of this transformation step can be estab-
lished via a routine simulation proof.
4.3. Further Reduction of the State Space
With the reductions carried out thus far, in theory model checking arbitrary instancesof the model is possible. However, it turns out that the state space of our model is too
big to be fully explored by Uppaal. Therefore we need some further abstractions to
make the model checking problem tractable.
Step 6. Simplifying the network automata. The Chaos2 automaton may generate al-
most arbitrary send answer [r] messages at any time. In particular, it may generate
send answer [0] and send answer [1] messages that are picked up by the network au-
tomata of hosts 0 and 1. The corresponding packets are stored by these network au-
tomata, thus contributing to the total number of reachable states of the system. To
reduce the state space, we replace the automaton Network3 by an automaton Network4
that is identical, except that incoming send answer messages from non-concrete hosts
(that is, from Chaos2 ) are ignored. The template Network4 is displayed in Figure 12.
Here function handle answer is deﬁned by
void handle_answer() {
if (isConcreteHA[packet.senderHA])
{a_buffer:=packet; set(answer,true); }
}
7In fact, there exists a bisimulation between the two networks.
ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, Vol. 10, No. 3, Article 34, Publication date: April 2011.

--- Page 27 ---
34:26 J. Berendsen et al.
Fig. 12 . Timed automaton Network4(w) .
Then clearly, for arbitrary j∈HAtype ,
Network3 (j)/precedesequalNetwork4 (j)/bardblChaos2 .
Thus, we may replace the Network3 byNetwork4 .
Step 7. Weakening, dead variable reduction and state merging. By weakening guards, weak-
ening invariants, or by making an urgent channel nonurgent, we add behavior to atimed automaton. The old behavior with the same values for the variables is still
present. Adding more behavior to an automaton Ausing these methods will give an
automaton Bwhich simulates A,t h a ti s , A/precedesequalB, in the sense of Deﬁnition 4.3 (timed
step simulation).
If, as a result of weakening, a variable is tested in none of the transitions and
it is also not read by the environment, it can be safely omitted from the model, anabstraction which can again be justiﬁed as a timed step simulation. In the case of
Zeroconf, overapproximation and subsequent variable elimination can be applied in
the following two situations.
(1) We may weaken the guards of the two transitions from COLLISION toINIT in
Config(h) totrue , and remove the transition label urg! . In the resulting model
local variable ConflictNum is no longer used and so we can eliminate it. But now,
since COLLISION only has outgoing transitions to INIT with no guards and no effect
on the state, we may just as well merge these two locations.
(2) We may weaken the guard of the lower receive
msg[w]? transition in automaton
InputHandler(h) totrue . In the resulting model local clock yis no longer used and
it can be eliminated.
The basic idea behind abstractions (1) and (2) is that Zeroconf ensures mutual exclusion
even when a host is allowed to always immediately select a new IP address after a reset,and to always defend the IP address that it is using.
Dead variable reduction is a well-known static analysis technique that has, for in-
stance, been studied in the Ph.D. dissertation of Yorav [2000]. In Yorav’s terminology,a variable visused in a transition if it appears in the guard or in the right-hand side
of an assignment. A variable is used in a location if it appears in the invariant of that
location. Variable visdeﬁned in a transition if it is in the left-hand side of an assign-
ment. Notice that in an assignment v:=v+1,vis ﬁrst used, and then it is deﬁned. A
variable vis said to be dead at a location lif on every execution path from l,vis deﬁned
before it is used, or is never used at all.
ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, Vol. 10, No. 3, Article 34, Publication date: April 2011.

--- Page 28 ---
Formal Speciﬁcation and Analysis of Zeroconf Using Uppaal 34:27
Fig. 13 . Final abstract timed automaton Config4(h) .
Fig. 14 . Final abstract timed automaton InputHandler4(h) .
Clearly, automata that only differ in the values of dead variables are equivalent in
a very strong sense, that is, they are strongly bisimilar, which in turn implies they
simulate each other via timed step simulation. Setting variables to a default value assoon as they become dead will reduce the state space, since states that only differ in
their dead variables will now become identical.
In our Zeroconf model, variable counter ofConfig(h) is dead in locations PRE
CLAIM
and INIT . Hence, setting counter:=0 upon entering these locations will not affect
whether the ME property holds or not. Another example is the variable network ,w h i c h
is dead in location IDLE ofInputHandler(h) , and can be reset to a standard value.
To make a standard value available we introduce a global constant HAtype ha0 . The
ﬁnal abstractions of the conﬁguration and input handler automata are displayed in
Figures 13 and Figure 14, respectively.
Step 8. Reduced broadcast. There is no real need for Network4(w) to do
receive msg[w][a]! actions for a’s that are not concrete: the only effect of these ac-
tions is that they update elements of the send and answer arrays. Let Network5(w)
be obtained from Network4(w) by slightly altering the set function: it only sets the
elements to true that correspond to concrete HAs. Via a trivial simulation relation
we can show that Network4(0) and Network4(1) can be replaced by Network5(0) and
Network5(1) , respectively.
ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, Vol. 10, No. 3, Article 34, Publication date: April 2011.

--- Page 29 ---
34:28 J. Berendsen et al.
4.4. Veriﬁcation Results
We have been able to establish mutual exclusion for a system with an arbitrary num-
ber of hosts, an arbitrary number of HA addresses, and an arbitrary number of IP
addresses. We can handle an arbitrary number of hosts since, as we have shown above,
all but two automata can be abstracted away by a chaos automaton.
We can handle an arbitrary number of HAs since any instance of Zeroconf with more
than 3 HAs can be simulated by the same instance but then with 3 HAs: we just
abstract all HAs to 2, except the concrete HAs 0 and 1. This is a sound abstractionsince, apart from a number of transitions which test whether a HA is concrete, the only
places where HAs are tested are in the input handlers: the input handler of Host0 may
test whether the hardware address of an incoming message is equal to 0, and the inputhandler of Host1 may test whether the hardware address of an incoming message is
equal to 1. The outcomes of these tests (and hence the behavior of the protocol) is not
affected by an abstraction that identiﬁes all HAs ≥2.
We can handle an arbitrary number of IP addresses, due to a result of Ip and Dill
[1993] on data saturation . This result (which was proven in the setting of Murphi but
carries over to Uppaal) states that, for certain (“data”) scalar types, the state graphdoes not grow any further once the number of possible values in some scalar type
grows beyond the number of places in the system where that scalar type is used. Places
consist of variables, but also each select statement on a single edge offers a place for anew value to be chosen. This makes model checking with scalar types of arbitrary size
possible.
For IP addresses, at the global level one is in use as zero , and per (concrete) host:
—One is in use in global array IP;
—Two are in use by InputHandler in packet answer ,a n d
—Four IP addresses are in use by Network , namely two in each of the two packets.
InInputHandler ,t h e2I P so f answer are only assigned when entering the committed
location. Some committed locations are used for initialization, but after the total system
is initialized, only the two committed locations of the concrete InputHandler automata
play a role. It is easy to see these are never visited at the same time, and therefore therewill be no interleaving until InputHandler has left its committed location. The IP values
are passed to other automata, and are after that not used anymore. Moreover they are
never tested for their contents. Therefore we do not have to count these variables asextra places where an IP is used.
IPs selected by an select statement are never tested to be different from all other
used IPs. Therefore we do not need an extra IP for the select statements, leading to atotal of 11 IPs.
Summarizing, all instances of the model are all possible combinations of l∈{1,..., 3}
HAs, and m∈{1,..., 11}IP addresses. Model checking all instances took approximately
10 h on the following hardware: 2 x Dual-Core Opteron 280 2.4-GHz, 8-GB RAM. Note
that we used four processing cores to work parallel on different instances. The biggest
instance ( l=3,m=11) takes the full time of 10 h, using 140 MB of memory, exploring
1.754·10
6symbolic states.
5. CONCLUSIONS
Our goal has been to construct a model of Zeroconf that (a) is easy to understand by
engineers, (b) comes as close as possible to RFC 3927, and (c) may serve as a basis for
formal veriﬁcation. Did we succeed?
Understandability. Of course, it is not to us to judge whether our model is under-
standable for others. The present article aims to place the cards on the table as a basis
ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, Vol. 10, No. 3, Article 34, Publication date: April 2011.

--- Page 30 ---
Formal Speciﬁcation and Analysis of Zeroconf Using Uppaal 34:29
for a discussion. The Uppaal syntax, which combines extended ﬁnite-state machines,
C-like syntax and concepts from timed automata, will certainly be familiar to protocol
engineers, except maybe for the use of clock variables. However, our experience is thattimed automata notation is easy to explain, even to people without expertise in the-
oretical computer science. Clocks provide a simple and intuitive means to specify the
various timing constraints in Zeroconf.
There are a number of extensions of the Uppaal syntax that would help to further
improve the readability of our model.
(1) A richer syntax for datatypes and functions, in particular a notion of enumerated
types.
(2) The ability to initialize clock and structure variables, allowing us to eliminate the
initial transition in the InputHandler(h) automaton.
(3) The ability to test the value of clocks within the body of functions, allowing us to
move the test y>DEFEND
interval into the deﬁnition of ihandler , where it belongs
conceptually.
(4) The introduction of urgent transitions (or deadlines) in Uppaal, as advocated in
Gebremichael and Vaandrager [2005], Sifakis [1999], and Sifakis and Yovine [1996].
This would allow us to eliminate the urgent channel urg, which is a modeling trick
that is hard to explain to nonspecialists. Also, it would allow us to replace the
invariant counter < ANNOUNCE NUM imply x <= ANNOUNCE INTERVAL in automaton
Config by an urgency predicate x <= ANNOUNCE INTERVAL . In our opinion, urgency
predicates are more intuitive than location invariants.
Once these extensions have been implemented, a good case can be made for inclusion
of the Config and InputHandler automata (with the ihandler code) in the Zeroconf
standard. These models will help to clarify RFC 3927 and to prevent incorrect inter-
pretations due to ambiguity in the text. The Uppaal simulator is also very useful to
obtain insight in the operation of the protocol.
Faithfulness and traceability. We have shown that Uppaal is able to model Zeroconf
faithfully. Basically, for each transition in the model we can point toward a correspond-
ing piece of text in RFC 3927. The relationships between our model and RFC 3927 havebeen described in great detail in this article, including the design choices and abstrac-
tions that we made. Following Brinksma and Mader [2004], our aim has been to make
the model construction transparent , so that our model may be more easily understood
and checked by others, making its quality measurable in (at least) an informal sense.
We see at least two ways in which Uppaal can be improved to allow for even more
faithful/realistic modeling of Zeroconf and better traceability.
—Zeroconf involves a number of probabilistic aspects that are not incorporated into
our Uppaal model. An extension with probabilities, along the lines of PRISM
[Kwiatkowska et al. 2004], is clearly desirable.
—Uppaal supports modeling of systems that are described as networks of a ﬁxed num-
ber of automata with a ﬁxed communication structure. This modeling approach,
although very convenient as a starting point for veriﬁcation, does not ﬁt very wellwith the highly dynamic structure of Zeroconf networks where hosts may join and
leave, subnetworks may be joined, etc. Support for a more object-oriented speciﬁca-
tion style appears to be desirable.
Veriﬁcation. Our modeling efforts revealed six places where RFC 3927 [Cheshire
et al. 2005] is incomplete/unclear.
(1) It is not clear whether a host “MUST” or “SHOULD” send ARP Probes before using
a new address.
ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, Vol. 10, No. 3, Article 34, Publication date: April 2011.

--- Page 31 ---
34:30 J. Berendsen et al.
(2) It does not specify upper and lower bounds on the time that may elapse between
sending the last ARP Probe and sending the ﬁrst ARP Announcement.
(3) It does not specify whether a host may immediately start using a newly claimed
address or whether it must ﬁrst send out all ARP Announcements.
(4) It does not specify the tolerance that is permitted on the timing of ARP Announce-
ments.
(5) Although it states that Zeroconf requires an underlying network that supports ARP
(RFC 826), we identiﬁed some cases where Zeroconf does not conform to RFC 826.
(6) It is not exactly clear in which situations a host may defend its address.
The model of Zeroconf that we presented in Section 2 cannot be analyzed by Uppaal for
interesting instances with three or more hosts. We presented a simple manual proof of
mutual exclusion for the model of Section 2. In order to verify the general systemautomatically, we had to apply some drastic abstractions. The soundness of these
abstractions has been proven manually. In our view, it is highly desirable to further
extend Uppaal with (semi-)automatic support for proving correctness of abstractions.Only abstractions can bridge the gap between realistic and tractable models.
Future work. In this study, we have modeled and analyzed a fragment of Zeroconf
in a restrictive setting without faulty nodes, merging of subnetworks, etc. In order
to deal with dynamically changing network topologies, a more sophisticated use of
abstractions will be required, for instance along the lines of Bauer [2006]. An obviouschallenge is to mechanize all these abstractions using either (an extension of) U
PPAAL -
TIGA[Cassez et al. 2005] or a general-purpose theorem prover. The timing behavior
of Zeroconf becomes really interesting when studied within a setting in which alsothe probabilistic behavior is modeled. The performance analysis of Zeroconf reported
in Bohnenkamp et al. [2003] and Kwiatkowska et al. [2003] has been carried out for
an abstract probabilistic model of Zeroconf. A challenging question is whether theseresults also hold for a (probabilistic extension) of our more realistic model.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Peter van der Stok (Philips Research) for suggesting the problem to us, Stuart Cheshire (Apple
Computer, Inc.) and Boris Cobelens (Free University, Amsterdam) for answering all our questions aboutZeroconf. Martijn Hendriks, Jozef Hooman, and the students of the Analysis of Embedded Systems course
in Nijmegen commented on earlier versions and came with modeling suggestions. Martijn also helped with
Uppaal and noted the occurrence of data saturation. Guy Leduc, Hubert Garavel, Judi Romijn, and KenTurner commented on the use of formal description languages within protocol standards. Finally, we thankthe anonymous reviewers for some insightful comments.
REFERENCES
ABADI,M . ANDLAMPORT , L. 1994. An old-fashioned recipe for real time. ACM Trans. Program. Lang. Syst. 16, 5,
1543–1571.
ALUR,R . ANDDILL, D. 1994. A theory of timed automata. Theoret. Comp. Sci. 126 , 183–235.
BAUER , J. 2006. Analysis of communication topologies by partner abstraction. Ph.D. dissertation. Universit ¨at
des Saarlandes, Saarbr ¨ucken, Germany.
BEHRMANN ,G . ,D AVID,A . , AND LARSEN , K. 2004. A tutorial on Uppaal. In Formal Methods for the Design of
Real-Time Systems, International School on Formal Methods for the Design of Computer, Communication
and Software Systems, Revised Lectures , M. Bernardo and F. Corradini, Eds., Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, vol. 3185. Springer, Berlin, Germany, 200–236.
BEHRMANN ,G . ,D AVID,A . ,L ARSEN ,K .G . ,H ˚AKANSSON ,J . ,P ETTERSSON ,P . ,Y I,W . , AND HENDRIKS , M. 2006. Uppaal
4.0. In Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on the Quantitative Evaluation of SysTems . IEEE
Computer Society, Press, Los Alamitos, CA, 125–126.
ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, Vol. 10, No. 3, Article 34, Publication date: April 2011.

--- Page 32 ---
Formal Speciﬁcation and Analysis of Zeroconf Using Uppaal 34:31
BERENDSEN ,J . ANDVAANDRAGER , F. 2008. Compositional abstraction in real-time model checking. In Proceedings
of the 6th International Conference on Formal Modeling and Analysis of Timed Systems . Lecture Notes
in Computer Science, vol. 5215. Springer Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 233–249.
BERRY ,G . AND GONTHIER , G. 1992. The E STEREL synchronous programming language: Design, semantics,
implementation. Sci. Comput. Program. 19, 2, 87–152.
BOHNENKAMP ,H . ,S TOK,P .V .D . ,H ERMANSS ,H . , ANDVAANDRAGER , F. 2003. Cost-optimisation of the IPv4 zeroconf
protocol. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Dependable Systems and Networks . IEEE
Computer Society, Press, Los Alamitos, CA, 531–540.
BRINKSMA ,E . ANDMADER , A. 2004. On veriﬁcation modelling of embedded systems. Tech. rep. TR-CTIT-04-03.
Centre for Telematics and Information Technology, University of Twente, Twente, The Netherlands.
BRUNS ,G . ANDSTASKAUSKAS , M. 1998. Applying formal methods to a protocol standard and its implementations.
InProceedings of the International Symposium on Software Engineering for Parallel and Distributed
Systems . IEEE Computer Society Press, 198–205.
CASSEZ ,F . ,D AVID,A . ,F LEURY ,E . ,L ARSEN ,K . , ANDLIME, D. 2005. Efﬁcient on-the-ﬂy algorithms for the analysis
of timed games. In Proceedings of the 16th International Conference on Concurrency Theory , M. Abadi
and L. de Alfaro, Eds., Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 3653. Springer, Berlin, Germany, 66–80.
CHESHIRE , S. 2006. Personal communication.
CHESHIRE ,S . ,A BOBA ,B . , AND GUTTMAN , E. 2005. Dynamic conﬁguration of IPv4 link-local addresses (RFC
3927). http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc3927.txt .
CHESHIRE ,S . AND STEINBERG , D. 2005. Zero Conﬁguration Networking: The Deﬁnite Guide . O’Reilly Media,
Inc., San Francisco, CA.
CHKLIAEV ,D . ,H OOMAN ,J . , AND DE VINK, E. 2003. Veriﬁcation and improvement of the sliding window protocol.
InProceedings of the Workshop on Tools and Algorithmes for the Construction and Analysis of Systems .
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 2619. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Germany, 113–127.
CLARKE ,E .M . ,G RUMBERG ,O . ,H IRAISHI ,H . ,J HA,S . ,L ONG,D .E . ,M CMILLAN ,K .L . , AND NESS, L. A. 1993.
Veriﬁcation of the Futurebus +cache coherence protocol. In Proceedings of the International Conference
on Computer Hardware Description Languages and there Application . 15–30.
DEVILLERS ,M . ,G RIFFIOEN ,W . ,R OMIJN ,J . , AND VAANDRAGER , F. 2000. Veriﬁcation of a leader election protocol:
Formal methods applied to IEEE 1394. Form. Meth. Syst. Des. 16, 3, 307–320.
GEBREMICHAEL ,B . AND VAANDRAGER , F. 2005. Specifying urgency in timed I/O automata. In Proceedings of
the 3rd IEEE International Conference on Software Engineering and Formal Methods . IEEE Computer
Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA, 64–73.
GEBREMICHAEL ,B . ,V AANDRAGER ,F . , AND ZHANG , M. 2006. Analysis of the Zeroconf protocol using Uppaal. In
Proceedings of the 6th Annual ACM & IEEE Conference on Embedded Software . ACM Press, New York,
NY, 242–251.
HENDRIKS ,M . ,B EHRMANN ,G . ,L ARSEN ,K . ,N IEBERT ,P . , AND VAANDRAGER , F. 2004. Adding symmetry reduction
to Uppaal. In Proceedings of the 1st International Workshop on Formal Modeling and Analysis of Timed
Systems . Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 2791. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Germany.
HOARE , C. 1985. Communicating Sequential Processes . Prentice-Hall International, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
HOLZMANN , G. 2004. The SPIN Model Checker: Primer and Reference Manual . Addison Wesley, Readings, MA.
IP,C . ANDDILL, D. 1993. Better veriﬁcation through symmetry. In Proceedings of the 11th IFIP WG10.2 Inter-
national Conference on Computer Hardware Description Languages and their Applications ,D .A g n e w ,
L. J. M. Claesen, and R. Camposano, Eds., IFIP Transactions, vol. A-32. North-Holland, Amsterdam,
The Netherlands, 97–111.
JENSEN ,H . ,L ARSEN ,K . , AND SKOU, A. 2000. Scaling up Uppaal: Automatic veriﬁcation of real-time systems
using compositionality and abstraction. In Proceedings of the 6th Annual Symposium Formal Techniques
in Real-Time and Fault-Tolerant Systems , M. Joseph, Ed., Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 1926.
Springer, Berlin, Germany, 19–30.
KWIATKOWSKA ,M . ,N ORMAN ,G . , AND PARKER , D. 2004. PRISM 2.0: A tool for probabilistic model checking. In
Proceedings of the 1st International Conference on Quantitative Evaluation of Systems . IEEE Computer
Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA, 322–323.
KWIATKOWSKA ,M . ,N ORMAN ,G . ,P ARKER ,D . , ANDSPROSTON , J. 2003. Performance analysis of probabilistic timed
automata using digital clocks. In Proceedings of the Conference on Formal Modeling and Analysis of
Timed Systems , K. Larsen and P. Niebert, Eds., Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 2791. Springer-
Verlag, Berlin, Germany, 105–120.
LANGEVELDE ,I .V . ,R OMIJN ,J . , AND GOGA, N. 2003. Founding FireWire bridges through Promela prototyping.
InProceedings of the 8thInternational Workshop on Formal Methods for Parallel Programming: Theory
and Applications . IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA.
ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, Vol. 10, No. 3, Article 34, Publication date: April 2011.

--- Page 33 ---
34:32 J. Berendsen et al.
LARSEN ,K . ,M IKUCIONIS ,M . , AND NIELSEN , B. 2005. Testing real-time embedded software using UPPAAL-
TRON: An industrial case study. In Proceedings of the 5th ACM International Conference on Embedded
Software . ACM Press New York, NY, 299–306.
LYNCH , N. 1996. Distributed Algorithms . Morgan Kaufmann, San Fransisco, CA.
MILNER , R. 1989. Communication and Concurrency . Prentice-Hall International, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
PLUMMER , D. 1982. An Ethernet address resolution protocol (RFC 826). http://www.ietf.org/rfc/
rfc826.txt .
ROMIJN , J. 2004. Improving the quality of protocol standards: Correcting IEEE 1394.1 FireWire net
update. Nieuwsbrief Nederland. Verenig. Theoret. Informatica 8 , 23–30. http://www.win.tue.nl/
oas/index.html?iqps/ .
SIFAKIS , J. 1999. The compositional speciﬁcation of timed systems—a tutorial. In Proceedings of the 11th
International Conference on Computer Aided Veriﬁcation , N. Halbwachs and D. Peled, Eds., Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, vol. 1633. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Germany, 2–7.
SIFAKIS ,J . ANDYOVINE , S. 1996. Compositional speciﬁcation of timed systems (extended abstract). In Proceed-
ings of the Annual Symposium on Theoretical Aspects of Computer Science ,C .P u e c ha n dR .R e i s c h u k ,
Eds. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 1046. Springer, Berlin, Germany, 347–359.
STOELINGA , M. 2003. Fun with FireWire: A comparative study of formal veriﬁcation methods applied to the
IEEE 1394 root contention protocol. Form. Aspects Comp. J. 14, 3, 328–337.
VAANDRAGER ,F . AND GROOT , A. D. 2006. Analysis of a biphase mark protocol with Uppaal and PVS. Form.
Aspects Comp. J. 18, 4, 433–458.
YORAV , K. 2000. Exploiting syntactic structure for automatic veriﬁcation. Ph.D. dissertation, The Technion,
Israel Insitute of Technology, Haifa, Israel.
Received March 2009; accepted July 2009
ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, Vol. 10, No. 3, Article 34, Publication date: April 2011.
