--- Page 1 ---
 
Abstract—It is inevitable that the response time of a message 
is delayed in a CAN network where multiple ECUs share a 
single bus. However, delays of response time should be 
minimized for messages related to the safety of a driver or a 
vehicle. If the response time exceeds the deadline, the safety of 
the driver and the whole of the vehicle system may be impaired. 
Therefore, it is essential to verify the CAN database in advance 
so that the response time of a message does not exceed the 
deadline. In this paper, we propose a framework composed of 
UPPAAL and a DBC2XML component, which automatically 
generates a UPPAAL model from a CAN database and show 
how to verify the CAN database using this framework. 
 
Index Terms —Controller area network, DBC, formal 
verification, UPPAAL. 
 
I. INTRODUCTION  
CAN (Controller Area Network) is a serial communication 
protocol that supports distributed real-time control and 
multiplexing, and is widely used as an automotive 
communication protocol globally [1]. There are several ECUs 
(Electronic Control Units) connected to one CAN bus, and 
each ECU periodically or aperiodically transmits various 
messages to the CAN bus. If multiple ECUs try to transmit a 
message at the same time, only one message with the highest 
priority is successfully transmitted through the arbitration 
process, and the others that fail to be transmitted are 
retransmitted. Due to this nature of CAN protocol, the 
response time of low priority messages is delayed. By setting 
an offset for each message, the CAN bus bandwidth can be 
utilized to the maximum, reducing the response time delay. 
However, using a large number of messages or allocating 
offsets inefficiently still results in a delay of response time. 
In the case of messages containing information related to 
airbags or brakes, delay of response time can have a serious 
impact on the safety of the driver and the vehicle. That is, the 
delay of response time can damage the safety of the driver and 
the whole of the vehicle system. When designing a CAN 
network, these messages are given relatively higher priority 
than other messages, but there may be other messages in the 
same CAN network that should not be delayed. Therefore, the 
 
Manuscript received July 10, 2017; revised October 23, 2017. This 
research was supported by the MSIP (Ministry of Science, ICT and Future 
Planning), Korea, under the ITRC (Information Technology Research Center) 
support program (IITP-2017-2015-0-00445) supervised by the IITP (Institute 
for Information & communications Technology Promotion. 
Beomyeon Cho and Taewook Kim are with the Department of Automotive 
Convergence, Korea University, Seoul, Korea (e-mail: bycho@ 
formal.korea.ac.kr, twkim@formal.korea.ac.kr).  
Jin-Young Choi is with Graduate School of Information Security, Korea 
University, Seoul, Korea (e-mail: choi@formal.korea.ac.kr). messages of the CAN network used in the vehicle, which is a 
safety-critical system, must be verified to ensure that the 
response time meets the given deadline. 
There are studies on the delay of message response time 
[2]-[6]. Ken Tindell et al.  use equations of the scheduling 
theory [2]. On the other hand, [3] and [4] are studies that verify 
various properties of a CAN network based on model checking 
using timed automata and temporal logic [7]-[9].  
In [3], Jan Krakora et al.  model the CAN network using 
UPPAAL, a formal specification and verification tool, and 
verify logical and timing properties for the model. However, 
because of the complicated model with low abstraction level, 
it takes a long time to verify one property, and verification is 
performed with only four messages in the paper. That is, there 
is a limit to verifying a real CAN database using many 
messages. 
In [4], Can Pan  et al.  model the CAN network using 
UPPAAL and verify 11 given properties. In order to satisfy 
more properties, they propose a way to dynamically change the 
message IDs to raise the priority. However, in order to change 
the priority dynamically, the application layer's algorithm 
must be involved in MAC (Media Access Control), which is 
the role of the data link layer. Also, dynamically changing 
message IDs make other ECUs difficult to interpret the 
messages and require additional mechanisms to solve it. 
In this paper, we propose a framework to automatically 
generate UPPAAL model from real CAN database which 
contains a large number of messages, and to verify logical 
properties and timing properties using the generated UPPAAL 
model. By using this framework, it is possible to verify the 
safety of the CAN database at the vehicle design stage, and to 
find counter examples which violate the properties in advance. 
We can design a safer vehicle by redesigning the CAN 
network to reflect these cases. 
The paper is organized as follows: in Section II, we 
introduce the components that make up the framework. In 
Section III, by using the framework we demonstrate verifying a 
given DBC file, which is a CAN database and show the 
verification results. Section IV concludes the paper. 
 
II. CAN  DATABASE VERIFICATION FRAMEWORK  
The proposed framework consists of DBC2XML 
component and UPPAAL as shown in the Fig. 1. DBC2XML 
accepts a CAN database file (.DBC) as input, and generates an 
UPPAAL model (.XML). The DBC file contains various 
information about the CAN network, and DBC2XML extracts 
only information about the message. DBC2XML generates an 
UPPAAL model based on the extracted information. UPPAAL CAN Database Verification Framework Using UPPAAL  
Beomyeon Cho, Taewook Kim, and Jin -Young Choi  
438International Journal of Computer Theory and Engineering, Vol. 9, No. 6, December 2017
DOI: 10.7763/IJCTE.2017.V9.1182

--- Page 2 ---
performs model checking by inputting the UPPAAL model 
generated by DBC2XML and properties to be verified. The 
logical properties and timing properties used in this paper are 
included in the library, and can be added manually in 
UPPAAL if users want to further verify other properties. If the 
UPPAAL model satisfies the given property, it results in 
'satisfied', and if not, it results in 'not satisfied' with a counter 
example. 
 
 
Fig. 1. Overview of propos ed framework.  
 
A. CAN Database 
The CAN database is an ASCII file containing information 
about the CAN network and can include information about the 
ECUs, the messages, and signals used by each ECU. There are 
many kinds of CAN database, and the DBC format designed 
by Vector is the most widely used. 
Among the information contained in the CAN database, 
information on a message generally includes a message name, 
an ID, a DLC (Data Length Code), and a cycle time, etc. If 
necessary, users can define and use message attributes 
additionally. The message information included in the DBC 
file to be used in this paper is shown in Fig. 2, and it is 
assumed that the deadline and the offset are not included in the 
DBC file. 
 
 
Fig. 2. Example of DBC fil e. B. DBC2XML 
DBC2XML is a component that automatically generates an 
UPPAAL model (.XML) from a CAN database file (.DBC) to 
verify logical properties and timing properties. DBC2XML is 
executed in the following three steps, and they are repeatedly 
executed for all DBCs in the specified folder: 
1) In the parsing step, DBC2XML extracts information 
about messages such as message name, ID, DLC, and 
cycle time from the DBC file and stores it in memory in 
the form of map data structure. 
2) In the processing step, DBC2XML assigns deadlines and 
offsets, which are not defined in the DBC file but are 
necessary for verifying the properties, to each message 
and stores them in the map data structure. In this paper, 
we assume that the deadline of all messages is 1 ms, and 
the offsets are arbitrarily assigned in units of 1 ms. The 
message information after the processing step is shown in 
Fig. 3. 
 
 
Fig. 3. Message information after processing step. 
 
3) In the making XML step, DBC2XML generates a 
UPPAAL model using the information contained in the 
map data structure and libraries located in the specified 
folder. The libraries include common contents for 
generating UPPAAL model independent of a given DBC 
file. Fig. 4 is a part of the DBC2XML source code that 
copies a library into an XML file and writes message ID 
information to the XML file. Fig. 5 is a part of the 
libraries necessary to generate Transceiver model. 
 
 
Fig. 4. Part of DBC2XML source code. 
439International Journal of Computer Theory and Engineering, Vol. 9, No. 6, December 2017

--- Page 3 ---
 
Fig. 5. Part of DBC2XML libraries. 
 
If UPPAAL model is too complicated, a state explosion 
problem may occur or a verification time may become 
excessively long when performing model checking. To prevent 
this situation, DBC2XML generates an abstract UPPAAL 
model considering the following: 
1) 25 μs is set to UPPAAL clock 1. It is preferable to set the 
nominal bit- time 2 μs to UPPAAL clock 1 when the bit 
rate of the CAN network is 500 kbps, but using a small 
unit of UPPAAL clock can lead to impractically long 
verification times.  
2) A 3-bit IFS (Interframe space) field is included in the 
message frame. 
3) All messages are transmitted by different ECUs, and 
aperiodic messages are not considered. 
The UPPAAL model that DBC2XML automatically 
generated from DBC file of Fig. 2 is shown in the Fig. 6, and the comprehensive overview is shown in the Fig. 7. The 
UPPAAL model consists of one Bus model and several ECUs, 
and the ECU consists of one Application model and one 
Transceiver model. 
The Bus model is shared by multiple ECUs transmitting 
messages. If there is no ECU to transmit a message, the Bus 
model is in an idle state, and when a ECU transmit s a message, 
the Bus model transitions to a busy state. 
In the Application model, non-periodic messages are 
transitioned to the not_periodic state and are no longer 
considered. In the case of a periodic message, the Application 
model sets an offset as determined in the processing step, and 
generates a transmission signal of the message at fixed cycle 
time. Before the message transmission starts, the Application 
model transitions to the ready state and consumes time as 
much as jitter. Jitter includes the time the control logic is 
processed and the time the message waits in the transmit queue. 
In this paper, jitter is set to 100 μs as WCET (Worst Case 
Execution Time). When the transmission is completed, the 
Application model transitions to the idle state and waits for 
the next cycle. 
The Transceiver model receives the transmission signal 
from the Application model and performs the arbitration 
process. The highest priority message among the messages 
participating in the arbitration process is transmitted 
successfully (transmitting state of Transceiver model in Fig. 6), 
and the other messages perform the arbitration process again 
for retransmission (failed state of Transceiver model in Fig. 6). 
Since the length of the arbitration field is 12 bits, 12 bit-time 
is consumed to perform the arbitration process (ArbTime). The 
message occupying the CAN bus through the arbitration 
process transmits the remaining bits of the frame, and the time 
corresponding to the number of bits is consumed (AfterArb). 
 
 
Fig. 6. Bus model, application model, and transceiver model. 
 
440International Journal of Computer Theory and Engineering, Vol. 9, No. 6, December 2017

--- Page 4 ---
 
Fig. 7. Comprehensive overview of UPPAAL model. 
 
C. UPPAAL 
UPPAAL is a tool for modeling, simulating, and verifying a 
real-time system and specifies the behavior of the system with 
the network of automata with UPPAAL clock and variables 
[10]. Models specified through UPPAAL consist of templates, 
locations, edges, labels, etc. and are represented in XML 
format.  
Model checking is performed by inputting the UPPAAL 
model automatically generated from DBC2XML and 
properties to be verified into UPPAAL. Model checking is a 
method to automatically explore all the state space of the 
model and check whether the properties are satisfied, and the 
properties are expressed in simplified TCTL (Timed 
Computation Tree Logic). If the UPPAAL model satisfies the 
property, the result is 'satisfied'. If the UPPAAL model does 
not satisfy the property, it returns 'not satisfied' with a counter 
example. 
 
III. VERIFICATION WITH MODEL CHECKING  
We verify the logical and timing properties of the model 
generated using DBC2XML. The verification was carried out 
on Intel Xeon E5-2680 2.7GHz with 256GB RAM, running 
Ubuntu 16.04 LTS. 
A. Verifying Logical  Propertie s of th e Model  
The UPPAAL model generated using DBC2XML should 
be formally verified to satisfy the logical properties of Table I. 
Properties can be expressed in simplified TCTL and we 
confirmed that the model satisfied all the logical properties a s 
a result of performing model checking. 
 
TABLE  I: LOGICAL PROPERTIES IN SIMPLIFIE D TCTL 
1. Two different messages should not be transmitted at the same 
time. 
2. In the arbitration process, the situation that the higher priority 
message fails due to the l ower priority message should not 
happen . 
3. If the message is being transmitted, the CAN bus must be in busy 
state. 
1. A[] not (tra0.transmitting and tra1.transmitting)  
2. A[] not tra0.failed  
3. A[] tra0.transmitting imply Bus.busy  B. Verifying  Timing Properties  of the  Model  
Through the proposed framework, we can verify the timing 
properties of a given DBC file. The given DBC file is as shown 
in the Fig. 2, assuming that the deadline for all messages is 1 
ms as a requirement. That is, if the response time of the 
message is less than 1 ms, the message is successfully 
transmitted according to the requirement. If the response time 
exceeds 1 ms, the predetermined requirement is not satisfied 
and the transmission is delayed. 
The results of the verification of the DBC file of the Fig. 2 
using the proposed framework are shown in the Table II. The 
three messages with IDs 0x106, 0x109, and 0x10E were found 
to have the worst case response times of 1.025 ms, 1.250, and 
1.650 ms, respectively. That is, the load on the CAN bus is 
very low at 28.5%, but the specific messages have been 
transmitted exceeding the deadline. If these messages were 
messages containing information directly related to the safety 
of the driver and the vehicle, delay of response time would 
have undermined the safety of the driver and the entire vehicle. 
 
TABLE  II: RESULT OF TIMING PROPERTIES VERIFICATION  
Message ID  Cycle time  
(ms) Offset  
(ms) Response time  
(ms) 
0x100  10 4 0.350  
0x101  10 4 0.575  
0x102  20 2 0.350  
0x103  20 3 0.350  
0x104  20 4 0.800  
0x105  20 0 0.350  
0x106  10 4 1.025  
0x107  0 2 · 
0x108  0 3 · 
0x109  10 4 1.250  
0x10A  5 0 0.525  
0x10B  5 1 0.350  
0x10C  5 2 0.575  
0x10D  20 3 0.575  
0x10E  10 4 1.650  
 
IV. CONCLUSION  
We propose a framework that can easily verify logical and 
timing properties using UPPAAL and DBC2XML which 
automatically generate UPPAAL model from CAN database. 
CAN network designers can use this framework to easily 
verify the safety of the CAN database at the vehicle design 
stage. It will also help reduce vehicle development costs. 
However, there is a limitation that the CAN network is 
abstracted and modeled to prevent the state explosion problem 
and to minimize the verification time. In order to obtain more 
accurate results, the degree of abstraction should be lowered, 
and research on this will be left as future research. 
REFERENCES  
[1] ISO 11898-1: 2015 Road vehicles – Controller area network (CAN) – 
Part 1: Data link layer and physical signaling.  
[2] K. Tindell and A. Burns, “Guaranteeing message latencies on Control 
Area Network (CAN), ” in Proc. the 1st International CAN Conference , 
1994. 
[3] J. Krakora  and Z. Hanzalek, “Timed automata approach to CAN 
verification, ” in Proc . 11th IFAC Symposium on Information Control 
Problems in Manufacturing , INCOM, Salvador, Elsevier, 2004. 
441International Journal of Computer Theory and Engineering, Vol. 9, No. 6, December 2017

--- Page 5 ---
[4] C. Pan, J. Guo, and L. F. Zhu, “Modeling and verification of CAN bus 
with application layer using UPPAAL, ” Electronic Notes in Theoretical 
Computer Scienc e, vol. 309, pp. 31-49, December 22, 2014. 
[5] P. M. Yomsi, D. Bertrand, N. Navet, and R. I. Davis, “Controlle r area 
network (CAN): Response time analysis with offsets, ” in Proc. the 9th 
IEEE International Workshop on Factory Communication System , 2012, 
pp. 43-52. 
[6] S. Mubeen, J. M. Turja, and M. Sjodin, “Extending offset-based 
response-time analysis  for mixed messages in controller area network, ” 
presented at 18th IEEE Conference on Emerging Technologies and 
Factory Automation (ETFA) , Cagliari, Italy , Sep. 10-13, 2013. 
[7] R. Alur and D. L. Dill, “A theory of timed automata ,” Theoretical 
Computer Science, vol. 126, pp. 183-235, April 25, 1994. 
[8] J
. P. Katoen, Concepts, Algorithms, and Tools for Model Checking , pp. 
189-256, 1999, ch. 4.  
[9] E. M. Clarke, “The birth of model checking, ” 25 Years of Model 
Checking , Springer, pp. 1-26, 2008. 
[10] G. Behrmann , A. David, and K. G. Lars en. (2006). A Tutorial on Uppaal 
4.0. [Online]. Available : 
http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/summary?doi=10.1.1.222.9120  
 
 
Beomyeon Cho  was born in Seongnam, Korea on 
February 11, 1989. He received the BS degree in 
computer science from Korea University in  2016. He 
started MS degree in electronic control from March 
2016.  
His research interests  are formal  methods and 
automotive  communication  protocols (CAN, 
automotive ethernet, and WAVE).  
 Taewook Kim  was born in Seoul, Korea on September 
22, 1990. He rece ived the BS degree in electronic 
engineering from Kookmin University. He started MS 
degree in electronic control from March 2016.  
His research interests include formal methods, 
software integration and safety.  
 
 
 
Jin-Young Choi  was born in 1959 in Korea. He 
received the BS degree in computer engineering from 
Seoul National University in 1982. He received MS 
degree in computer science, Drexel University in 1986 
and acquired the Ph. D degree in computer science from 
the University of Pennsylvania in 1993. His research 
interests are real -time computing, formal methods 
(formal specification, formal verification, and model 
checking), process algebras, SDN, security, and 
software engineering.  
He is a professor in Graduate School of Information Security in Korea 
University.  
 
442
International Journal of Computer Theory and Engineering, Vol. 9, No. 6, December 2017

--- Page 7 ---
 
 
 
 
Virtual Reality and Technology  
