--- Page 1 ---
Software Tools for Technology Transfer manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)
Closed-loop Verication of Medical Devices with Model
Abstraction and Renement?
Zhihao Jiang, Miroslav Pajic, Rajeev Alur and Rahul Mangharam
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia PA, USA
Received: date / Revised version: date
Abstract. The design and implementation of software
for medical devices is challenging due to the closed-loop
interaction with the patient, which is a stochastic physi-
cal environment. The safety-critical nature and the lack
of existing industry standards for verication, make this
an ideal domain for exploring applications of formal mod-
eling and closed-loop analysis. The biggest challenge is
that the environment model(s) have to be both complex
enough to express the physiological requirements, and
general enough to cover all possible inputs to the de-
vice. In this eort, we use a dual chamber implantable
pacemaker as a case study to demonstrate verication
of software specications of medical devices as timed-
automata models in UPPAAL. The pacemaker model
is based on the specications and algorithm descrip-
tions from Boston Scientic. The heart is modeled using
timed automata based on the physiology of heart. The
model is gradually abstracted with timed simulation to
preserve properties. A manual Counter-Example-Guided
Abstraction and Renement (CEGAR) framework has
been adapted to rene the heart model when spurious
counter-examples are found. To demonstrate the closed-
loop nature of the problem and heart model renement,
we investigated two clinical cases of Pacemaker Mediated
Tachycardia and veried their corresponding correction
algorithms in the pacemaker. Along with our tools for
code generation from UPPAAL models, this eort en-
ables model-driven design and certication of software
for medical devices.
Key words: Medical Devices, Implantable Pacemaker,
Software Verication, Cyber-Physical Systems, Model
Abstraction and Renement, CEGAR
?This research was partially supported by NSF research
grants MRI 0923518, CAREER 1253842, CNS 1035715 and CCF
0915777.1 Introduction
Over the past four decades, cardiac rhythm management
devices such as pacemakers have expanded their role
from \keeping the patient alive" to \improving the qual-
ity of the patient's life". The addition of more safety and
ecacy features has resulted in increased complexity, in-
evitably leading to more potential safety issues. From
1996-2006, the percentage of software-related causes in
medical device recalls have grown from 10% to 21% [1].
During the rst half of 2010, the US Food and Drug Ad-
ministration (FDA) issued 23 recalls of defective devices,
all of which are categorized as Class I , meaning there is
a \reasonable probability that use of these products will
cause serious adverse health consequences or death." At
least six of the recalls were caused by software defects [2].
Medical devices, such as the implantable cardiac pace-
maker, are perfect examples of Cyber-Physical Systems
(CPS), in which the controller (the pacemaker) actively
interacts with a stochastic plant (the heart). While in
other CPS domains like the aviation and automotive in-
dustries, standards are enforced during software devel-
opment, manufacturing, and post-market change [3,4],
there are no well-established standards or tools for de-
velopment of software for medical devices. One reason is
because the software design in medical device industry is
dierent from other industries. With physiological con-
trol systems, the is a large degree of uncertainty in the
model of the organ and physiological process. The modes
of operation vary across the population of patients, level
of activities, metabolic rates, and so on. Thus, the safety
and ecacy of the device should be evaluated in closed-
loop based on the well-being of the patient, which relies
on extensive domain knowledge on the physical environ-
ment. In model-based design, this unique feature results
in two contradictory requirements on the environment
model.

--- Page 2 ---
2 Zhihao Jiang et al.: Pacemaker Verication
 
 
 
Conformance Testing  Test  
Generation  Domain  
Expert  
Software 
Engineer  
Electrical  
engineer  Safety/Efficacy  
Requirements  
Software 
specifications  
Implementation  Safety/Efficacy 
properties  
System  
model  
Test Cases  Environment  
model  Model Checking  a 
b 
Fig. 1. a. Traditional real-time software development process;
b. model-based design framework
1. The environment model has to be complex
enough
Since the safety properties are specied based on the pa-
tient conditions, the environment model has to be able
to represent specic patient conditions and condition
groups, regardless of the capability of the device. When
a certain algorithm is targeting a very specic patient
condition, the environment model should be complex
enough to distinguish that particular patient condition
from other conditions.
2. The environment model has to be general
enough
Unlike products in other industries, most medical device
products have to be able to deal with large variety of
environmental conditions. Thus the environment model
used during safety evaluation has to be general enough
to cover all possible scenarios.
The more complex the environment model is, there
are usually more constraints on model outputs, which
then reduce the coverage for the input to the device. It
is contradictory that a single model can be both general
and complex. One possible solution is to use multiple
models with dierent complexity. When dierent mod-
els are used to prove dierent properties, we have to
make sure that the models have certain relations so that
properties veried with one model are preserved when
we use other models.
1.1 Model-based Software Design Framework
In the current practice, medical device software is largely
designed informally, as shown in Fig. 1.a. The domain
expert, the physician in this case, rst comes up with
physiological safety/ecacy requirements which describe
the objective of the device. Together with the software
engineer, they specify the software specications for the
device, which explain how the device software would
achieve the requirements. Then, the software engineer
and electrical engineer convert the software specica-
tions to physical implementation . However, due to the dis-crepancies created during manual translations, there is
no formal correlation from physiological requirements to
specication and then to implementation. It is not guar-
anteed that the nal implementation satises all physio-
logical requirements. Thus, the safety and ecacy of the
device cannot be ensured.
Fig. 1.b demonstrates how to establish formal corre-
lations throughout the development process using model-
based design framework. The software specication of
the system is represented by a model. Together with a
model of the environment, the closed-loop system is veri-
ed using model checking against safety properties which
are converted from the safety/ecacy requirements. Sat-
isfaction of the properties ensures that the software spec-
ications satises the safety/ecacy requirements. Us-
ing automatic code generation, the specication as mod-
eled, can be translated into C code and implemented
on hardware. The same system model can be used to
generate test cases for conformance testing of the im-
plementation. Satisfaction of all the tests ensures that
the implementation successfully conforms to the soft-
ware specication. In this paper, we use an implantable
cardiac pacemaker as an example to demonstrate the
use of model checking to verify whether the pacemaker
specication satises the safety/ecacy requirements.
1.2 Closed-loop Model Checking
Closed-loop model checking is a widely-used technique
to formally verify the closed-loop system model against
safety and ecacy properties. In this paper, we model
the closed-loop system, which consists of the heart and
a pacemaker, using networks of timed automata [5]. The
closed-loop system model is then veried in model checker
UPPAAL[6] against safety properties specied in Timed
Computational Tree Logic (TCTL).
Safety properties are translated from physiological
requirements learned from cardiac electrophysiology[7]
and [8]. Intuitively the objective of a pacemaker is to
maintain appropriate heart rate. Allowing too slow a
heart rate or driving the heart rate too fast can cause
serious adverse eect to the patient. Thus, it is essential
to maintain appropriate heart rate within a safe range.
Unsafe conditions are specied as unsafe regions within
the state space of the closed-loop system, and their reach-
ability can be checked with a model checker. More im-
portantly, there are closed-loop executions in which the
pacemaker inappropriately raises the heart rate up to
the boundary of the unsafe regions - even from healthy
open-loop heart conditions. These unsafe executions are
referred to as Pacemaker Mediated Tachycardia (PMT),
during which the pacemaker incorrectly drives the heart
into an overly fast rate.
We use these examples to show:
{Whether the anti-PMT algorithms developed by de-
vice manufacturers can successfully detect and ter-
minate corresponding PMT.

--- Page 3 ---
Zhihao Jiang et al.: Pacemaker Verication 3
Abstraction
TCTL Safe?No
YesYesHeart
Pacemaker Timed automata model
PhysicianPhysiological 
requirementsNo
Bug found System SafeRefinement
Valid?
Counter -
examplesAmbiguous?
NoYes
Model 
Checker
H0 H1 H2 H3H4
Fig. 2. Counter-Example-Guided Abstraction Renement (CEGAR) framework
{After introducing these additional algorithms into
the previously veried system, whether the combined
system has unsafe states.
{Whether the environment model, the heart model
in this case, is complex enough to distinguish PMT
cases from healthy heart conditions, and at the same
time be general enough to represent all possible heart
conditions.
1.3 Model Abstraction and Renement
Model abstraction [9] was originally proposed as a pow-
erful state-reduction technique to alleviate the state ex-
plosion problem [10] during model-checking. Models are
created as abstraction of the original system. Since the
abstracted models have more behaviors than the original
system, properties satised in an abstract model will also
be satised in the original system. In this paper, we rst
derived a timed automata model of the heart tissue by
extracting its timing behaviors. With a similar abstrac-
tion scheme used in clinical Cardiac Electro-physiology
study [7], we then abstract the whole heart as electrical
conduction network. The heart model is then further ab-
stracted till its simplest form which covers all possible
inputs to the pacemaker. During each abstraction step,
we prove that the abstracted heart model is a timed simu-
lation of the rened heart model and properties specied
in ATCTL* are preserved.
Now we have a set of heart models from the cellu-
lar level to the whole heart, with abstraction relation-
ship between each level. The question we aim to answer
is: What do we determine which environment model to
use during verication for each of the dierent safetyproperties for the closed loop system? We base our ap-
proach on the Counter-Example-Guided Abstraction Re-
nement (CEGAR) framework, proposed by Clake et al.
[11], which can systematically and automatically handle
model complexity.
In this work, we apply and extend the CEGAR frame-
work to handle the complexity of the heart model dur-
ing verication of a dual chamber pacemaker model. The
framework is shown in Fig. 2. The most abstract heart
model is rst combined with a timed-automata-based
pacemaker model [12] based on the algorithm descrip-
tions from Boston Scientic [13]. The closed-loop system
is then veried in model checker UPPAAL [6] against
safety properties (e.g. the pacemaker must not allow the
heart rate to be too slow and must not drive the heart
rate too fast). If the unsafe regions are not reachable
and unsafe executions do not exist, the system is safe.
Otherwise the model checker returns execution traces
as counterexamples which are checked in a more rened
heart model for validity.
There are two scenarios where we use more rened
heart model for model checking:
(1) If the trace is not a valid heart-pacemaker interac-
tion, it is referred to as a spurious counterexample . In this
case we follow the traditional CEGAR framework. The
property is checked with a more rened model until the
spurious behavior is eliminated.
(2) If the trace corresponds to a realistic heart-pacemaker
interaction, we check further whether the returned traces
only contain unsafe conditions that we are looking for.
If the traces returned contains other heart conditions,
the counter-example is referred to as ambiguous . In this
case the property is checked with a more rened model

--- Page 4 ---
4 Zhihao Jiang et al.: Pacemaker Verication
until the ambiguity is removed. Otherwise we conrm a
potential bug has been found.
In this paper, we use two Pacemaker Mediated Tachy-
cardia (PMT) (i.e. when the pacemaker drives the heart
into an unsafe state) cases as example to demonstrate
the two scenarios which require heart model renement.
By using the improved CEGAR framework we are able
to check a wide range of physiological properties. The
framework also improved the model checking eciency
without losing accuracy. The heart model abstraction
enables model checking for more complex systems and
the model renement enables us to check more complex
properties. In contrast to the CEGAR framework pro-
posed by Clarke et al., the model abstraction, model
renement and trace validity check are done manually
and can be potentially automated in the future work.
1.4 Contributions
This paper builds upon our previous work in [12] in
which we described formal modeling of the pacemaker
and verication of closed-loop interactions with a simple
Random Heart Model and its ad-hoc renements. The
contributions of this paper are thus:
1. We abstracted the heart from top-down till its sim-
plest form, which allows us to verify wide range of
physiological properties.
2. The heart model abstraction is formalized and the
timed simulation relation between each abstraction
level are established and proved.
3. We improved the Counter-Example-Guided Abstrac-
tion and Renement (CEGAR) framework to balance
model complexity and expressiveness.
4. The safety properties are checked for all possible com-
binations of pacemaker parameters.
The UPPAAL models developed in this paper are avail-
able online [14]. These models can be used as a starting
point for many purposes (e.g. to build models with costs
and probabilities for quantitative analysis of the ecacy
of pacemaker algorithms; development of patient-specic
algorithms). In particular, the veried pacemaker model
can be automatically translated from UPPAAL into State-
ow charts in Simulink for test generation and code gen-
eration using the UPP2SF tool [15].
1.5 Organization
The paper is organized as follow: In Section 2, we intro-
duce the basic description for the heart and pacemaker
operation. In Section 3, we describe the timed automata
model of the heart and its abstractions. In Section 4,
we describe the timed automata model of a dual cham-
ber pacemaker. In Section 5, we verify the pacemaker
model against two basic safety properties in UPPAAL;
In Section 6 and 7, we use model checking to identify
A-lead 
V-lead 
Marker  AS 
VS 
AP 
VP Fig. 3. (a) Electrical Conduction System of the Heart and
pacemaker leads location. (b) Electrical signal sensed from
the pacemaker leads are converted to event markers (AS,VS).
Pacemaker delivers electrical pacing (AP,VP) from corre-
sponding leads when heart rate is slow.
two known cases of PMT, in which the pacemaker in-
appropriately increases the heart rate. We evaluate the
safety and eectiveness of two anti-PMT algorithms cor-
responding to the two common PMT cases, and demon-
strate two scenarios for heart model renements.
2 Overview of the Heart's Electrical
Conduction System
In this section, we review basic concepts related to the
heart and its electrical conduction system which inter-
acts with the pacemaker. In-depth material of cardiac
electro-physiology can be found in [16].
2.1 Basics of Cardiac Electrophysiology Operation
The coordinated contraction of the heart is governed by
its Electrical Conduction System (see Fig. 3). The Sinoa-
trial (SA) node, which is a collection of specialized tissue
at the upper right atrium, periodically spontaneously
generates electrical pulses that can cause muscle con-
traction. The SA node acts as the natural pacemaker of
the heart. The electrical pulses rst cause both atria to
contract, forcing the blood into the ventricles. The elec-
trical conduction is then delayed at the Atrioventricular
(AV) node, allowing the ventricles to ll fully. Finally,
the fast-conducting His-Pukinje system spreads the elec-
trical activation within both ventricles, causing simulta-
neous contraction of the ventricular muscles, and pumps
the blood out of the heart. The electrical conduction
system of the heart is a timed system and appropriate
timing is key to proper heart rhythm.
Due to various factors such as aging and disease,
the conduction properties of heart tissue may change.
These changes often cause timing anomalies in heart
rhythm, thus decreasing the blood pumping eciency
of the heart. These timing anomalies are referred to as
arrhythmias, and are categorized into so-called Tachy-
cardia and Bradycardia . Tachycardia features undesirable

--- Page 5 ---
Zhihao Jiang et al.: Pacemaker Verication 5
fast heart rate which results in inecient blood pump-
ing. Bradycardia features slow heart rate which results
in insucient blood supply. Bradycardia is due to fail-
ure of impulse generation with anomalies in the SA node,
or failure of impulse propagation where the conduction
from atria to the ventricles is delayed or blocked.
2.2 Interfacing the Heart with the Pacemaker
Heart tissue can also be activated by external electri-
cal pulses. Implantable Pacemakers have been developed
to deliver timely electrical pulses to the heart to main-
tain an appropriate heart rate and Atrial-Ventricular
synchrony. Implantable pacemakers normally have two
leads xed on the wall of the right atrium and the right
ventricle respectively (Fig. 3 (a)). These leads are capa-
ble of both sensing electrical activity in the heart tis-
sue and are able to emit pacing signals into the tissue.
Tissue activation near the leads is sensed by the leads,
triggering an Atrial Sense (AS) and Ventricular Sense
(VS) events in the pacemaker (see Fig. 3 (b)). Atrial
Pacing (AP) and Ventricular Pacing (VP) are delivered
if no sensed events occur within pre-specied deadlines.
A dual chamber pacemaker only utilizes activation tim-
ing information of two small regions in the heart. The
\low-resolution" sensing of the pacemaker results in its
limited knowledge of current heart condition thus could
lead to potential incorrect estimation of the heart's elec-
trical activity and result in inappropriate therapies.
In order to deal with dierent heart conditions, mod-
ern pacemakers can be programmed to operate in dier-
ent modes. The modes are labeled using a three char-
acter system (e.g. DDD) by the Heart Rhythm Society
[16]. The rst character describes the pacing locations
(i.e. atrium or ventricle or both), the second character
describes the sensing locations, and the third character
describes how the pacemaker software responds to sens-
ing. For example, the dual-chamber DDD mode stands
for sensing in both atrium and ventricle, and pace both
of them if needed. In this eort, we describe two most
commonly used modes of pacemaker, the dual-chamber
DDD mode, that paces both the atrium and the ventri-
cle, senses both chambers, and sensing can both activate
or inhibit further pacing. Similarly, the VDI mode paces
only in the ventricle, senses both chambers, and inhibits
pacing if event is sensed [8]. During certain heart condi-
tion changes, the pacemaker has to switch between dif-
ferent modes to achieve better treatment. It is very im-
portant to ensure that the mode-switches are performed
as intended, and no safety issues can occur during the
transition between dierent modes.
3 Heart Modeling and Abstraction
In this section, we model the timing behaviors of the
heart using timed automata [5]. We rst model the hearttissue at cellular level. Through a series of abstractions
we end up with a series of heart model with complexity
from maximum to the minimum. By proving the timed
simulation relationship between each pair of heart model
abstractions, the properties proved in the abstract level
can be preserved. By specifying the safety properties
with a universal subset of Timed Computational Tree
Logic (ATCTL)[17], a model checker like UPPAAL [6,
18] can return counter-examples upon violations of the
properties. This enables us to balance model complexity
and property expressiveness using the Counter-Example-
Guided Abstraction and Renement (CEGAR) frame-
work.
3.1 Timed Automata and Timed Simulation
Timed automata [5] are an extension of a nite automa-
ton with a nite set of real-valued clocks. It has been
used for modeling and verifying systems which are trig-
gered by events and have timing constraints between
events. UPPAAL is a standard tool for modeling and ver-
ication of real-time systems, based on networks of timed
automata. The graphical and text-based interface makes
modeling more intuitive. Requirements can be specied
using Computational Tree Logic (CTL) [19] and viola-
tions can be visualized in the simulation environment.
3.1.1 Syntax of Timed Automata
A timed automaton Gis a tuplehS;S 0;;X;inv;Ei,
where
{Sis a nite set of locations.
{S02Sis the set of initial locations.
{is the set of events.
{Xis the set of clocks.
{invis the set of invariants for clock constraints at
each location.
{Eis the set of edges. Each edge is a tuple hs;;	;;s0i
which consists of a source location s, an event2,
clock constraints 	,as a set of clocks to be reset
and the target location s0.
For the clock variables X, the clock constraints 	2
	Xcan be inductively dened by 	:=x?ck	1^	2,
where?2f;=;g, andc2N.
3.1.2 Semantics of Timed Automata
A state of a timed automaton is a pair hs;viwhich con-
tains the location s2Sand the valuation vfor all clocks.
The set of all states is 
. For all2X,v[:= 0] de-
notes the valuation which sets all clocks x2as zero
and the rest of the clocks unchanged. For all t2R,v+t
denotes the valuation which increase all the clock value
byt. There are two kinds of transitions between states.

--- Page 6 ---
6 Zhihao Jiang et al.: Pacemaker Verication
The discrete transition happens when the condition of an
edge has been met. So we have:
hs;;	;;s0i2E;vj=	;v[:= 0]j=inv(s0)
)(s;v)  !(s0;v[:= 0])
The timed transition happens when the timed automaton
can stay in the same location for certain amount of time.
We have:
2R;80;v+0j=inv(s)
)(s;v)  !(s;v+)
3.1.3 Timed Simulation
For two timed automata T1=
S1;S1
0;1;X1;inv1;E1
andT2=
S2;S2
0;2;X2;inv2;E2
, a timed simulation
relation is a binary relation sim
1
2where
1
and
2are sets of states of T1andT2. We sayT2time
simulatesT1(T1tT2) if the following conditions holds:
{Initial states correspondence: (
s1
0;0
;
s2
0;0
)2sim
{Timed transition: For every ( hs1;v1i;hs2;v2i)2sim,
ifhs1;v1i  !hs1;v1+i, there existshs2;v2+isuch
thaths2;v2i  !hs2;v2+iand
(hs1;v1+i;hs2;v2+i)2sim.
{Discrete transition: For every ( hs1;v1i;hs2;v2i)2sim,
ifhs1;v1i  !hs0
1;v0
1i, there existshs0
2;v0
2isuch that
hs2;v2i  !hs0
2;v0
2iand (hs0
1;v0
1i;hs0
2;v0
2i)2sim.
Certain properties are preserved for timed simulation
relation. For '2ATCTL , ifMtM0, we haveM0j=
')Mj='.[17] However, M06j=')M6j='does not
hold. Violations of ATCTL yield counter-examples and
the validity of which need to be checked on more rened
model.
It is known that timed simulation relation is also
closed under composition [17]. So when we have two
heart models H1tH2we will have H1kPtH2kP
wherePis the timed-automata model of the pacemaker.
For'2ATCTL , we haveH2kPj=')H1kPj='.
With this property we can verify the pacemaker model
with abstract heart model. In the rest of the section, we
will describe how we develop our initial heart model from
the physiological perspective and abstract the model step
by step so that the complexity of the model is reduced
for verication. Given two heart models H1,H2and a
timed simulation mapping sim=
1
2, there are no au-
tomated methods to check H1tH2. In the Appendix,
we show the manual proof for the timed simulation rela-
tion between two heart models H2andH3. Other timed
simulation relations can be proved similarly.
3.2 Initial Tissue Model
The initial model of the heart abstracts the electrical be-
haviors of the heart tissue. When the tissue is activatedby an external electrical signal, the voltage across the
tissue increases rapidly. When the voltage reaches a cer-
tain threshold, the adjacent tissue will be activated. This
activation then propagates throughout the heart, caus-
ing coordinated contraction of the heart muscles. Fig. 4
(a) shows the voltage change over time across a heart
tissue region (solid line) and its adjacent tissue region
(dotted line). After the activation, the heart tissue must
recover from the activation (i.e. recharge) before it can
be activated again. The time interval before the tissue
voltage drops back to resting voltage is referred to as the
Refractory Period . The refractory period can be divided
into the Eective Refractory Period (ERP) and the Rela-
tive Refractory Period (RRP) according to their dierent
response to new activation signals [7] [16].
We construct our initial heart model by modeling the
timing behaviors of the heart tissue. The timed automa-
tonN0is shown in Fig. 4 (b). The tissue starts from
theRest location. The tissue can self-activate after cer-
tain period and go to cond location which models the
short delay before it activates the adjacent tissue. After
thecond location the model goes to ERP location dur-
ing which no activation events can be processed. The
duration of the cond location and ERP location depend
on the state of the tissue when it was activated by the
previous activation signal. In this model, we use non-
determinism to cover all possible duration length. After
the ERP nishes, the model goes from the ERP location
to the RRP location. If the heart tissue receives activa-
tion when it is in the RRP location, it will go to the ERP
location with prolonged ERP length, which is covered
by non-determinism. The tissue then goes back to the
Rest location after the RRP period.
Consider the Actnode? event as input and Actnext!
as output; N0covers all possible timing behaviors of a
heart tissue. The whole heart can be modeled by com-
posing tissue models with dierent parameters H0=
N1
0kN2
0Nn
0. However, for a real heart the number
nis very large and their connectivity and parameter
values are dicult, and perhaps impossible, to deter-
mine, which makes verication with H0infeasible. For
the remainder of the section, please refer to both Fig. 4
along with Fig. 5 for progressive abstraction of the heart
model. The abbreviations for the locations in Fig. 5 are
shown in the table below. The gures are more under-
standable in color.
3.3 Abstraction 1: Model Conduction Delay with Path
During the Electro-physiology testing procedure [16], the
physician places catheters with multiple electrodes into
dierent locations of the patient's heart to perform a
\timing analysis" of the propagation of electrical signals
through heart. The local electrical activity of heart tis-
sue at the locations of the electrodes can be monitored.
The physician then evaluates the heart condition by ex-
amining the refractory properties of local tissue, and the

--- Page 7 ---
Zhihao Jiang et al.: Pacemaker Verication 7
Refractory  
Time Vout 
ERP RRP  Rest Rest 
$POEERP RRP  Rest Rest 
RRP
t<=Trrp_maxERP
t<=Terp_maxcond
t<=Tcond_maxRest
t<=Trest_maxt>Trest_min
t=0
Act_node?
t=0t>Trrp_min
t=0
t>Terp_min
t=0t>Tcond_min
Act_next!t=0Act_node?
t=0
RRP
t<=Trrp_maxERP
t<=Terp_maxtemp Rest
t<=Trest_maxt>Trest_min
t=0
Act_node?
t=0t>Trrp_min
t=0
t>Terp_min
t=0Act_path!Act_node?
t=0 Con/f_lict t<=1
Double t1+t2<=Tcond_maxAnte
t1<=Tcond_maxRetro
t2<=Tcond_maxIdle
t1+t2>Tcond_min
Act_node_1? Act_node_2?t>1
t1>Tcond_min
Act_node_2!t2>Tcond_min
Act_node_1!Act_path_2?
t2=0Act_path_1?
t1=0
Retro
t<=Tcond_maxAnte
t<=Tcond_maxIdle
t>Tcond_min
Act_node_1!t>Tcond_min
Act_node_2!Act_path_1? Act_path_2?Act_path_2?
t=0Act_path_1?
t=0
ERP
t<=Terp_maxtempRest
t<=Trest_maxt>Trest_min
t=0
t>Terp_min
t=0
Act_path!Act_node?
t=0
temp Rest
t<=Trest_maxt>Trest_min
t=0
Act_path!Act_node?
t=0Retro
t<=Tcond_maxAnte
t<=Tcond_max
IdleAct_path_1? Act_path_2?
t>Tcond_min
Act_node_1!Act_path_2?
t=0
t>Tcond_min
Act_node_2!Act_path_1?
t=0
Act_path_2?Act_path_1?
temp Rest
t<=Trest_maxt>0
t=0
Act_path!Act_node?
t=0N0
N1P1Original tissue Model
Abstraction 1N0
Abstraction 2N1 P1
N2 P2
N3 P3
N4a
b
c
d
e
f
Fig. 4. (a) Electrical voltage change on the surface of the heart tissue and its adjacent tissue region (dotted) upon activation.
The whole process is divided into timing periods with dierent behaviors. (b) The original tissue model which captures the
timing behaviors of the heart tissue. (c) The conduction property is separated to the path automaton and the heart can
be modeled as conduction network. (d) Equivalent locations are merged. (e) The blocking property of the ERP location is
replaced by a non-deterministic transition in the path automaton. (f) The correlation between the two nodes is replaced by
allowing the node automaton to have more behaviors.

--- Page 8 ---
8 Zhihao Jiang et al.: Pacemaker Verication
RE 
ID RE RR 
ID RE RE 
ID RR 
RR 
ID RR ER 
AN RE ER 
AN RR RE 
RT ER RR 
RT ER 
ER 
DO ER 
RR 
ID ER ER 
ID RR ER 
ID ER 
RE 
ID 
RE ER 
AN 
RE RE 
RT
ER 
RE 
ID 
ER ER 
ID
RE ER 
ID 
ER 
RE 
ID RE RE 
AN RE RE 
RTRE RE 
RE RE 
RE RR 
RE RE 
RR 
RR 
RR CO 
RE CO 
RR RE
CO RR 
CO 
CO
CO 
ER
CO CO
ER 
RR 
ER ER
RR ER
ER 
Act_next ! 
Act_next ! Act_path_1!  
Act_path_2!  Act_node_2!  
Act_node_1!  
RE 
ID RE RR 
ID RE RE 
ID RR 
RR 
ID RR ER 
AN RE ER 
AN RR RE 
RT ER RR 
RT ER 
ER 
DO ER 
RR 
ID ER ER 
ID RR ER 
ID ER 
RE 
ID 
RE ER 
AN 
RE RE 
RT
ER 
RE 
ID 
ER ER 
ID
RE ER 
ID 
ER Act_path_1!  
Act_path_2!  Act_node_2!  
Act_node_1!  𝑵𝟐𝟏 𝑵𝟐𝟐 𝑷𝟐 Act_path_1!  
Act_path_2!  Act_node_2!  
Act_node_1!  𝑵𝟏𝟏 𝑵𝟏𝟐 𝑷𝟏 
Act_path_1!  
Act_path_2!  Act_node_2!  
Act_node_1!  𝑵𝟐𝟏 𝑵𝟐𝟐 𝑷𝟐 Act_path_1!  
Act_path_2!  Act_node_2!  
Act_node_1!  𝑵𝟑𝟏 𝑵𝟑𝟐 𝑷𝟑 𝑵𝟒𝟏 𝑵𝟒𝟐 a 
b 
c d 
Fig. 5. (a) Model conduction delay between nodes as path; (b) Merging RRP with Rest; (c) Replace blocking property of ERP with
non-deterministic conduction; d. Use self activation to replace conduction

--- Page 9 ---
Zhihao Jiang et al.: Pacemaker Verication 9
Location Abbreviation Description
ERP ER Eective Refractory Period
RRP RR Relative Refractory Period
Rest RE Rest Period
Cond CO Conduction Period
Idle ID No Conduction
Ante AN Antegrade Conduction
Retro RT Retrograde Conduction
Double DO Both Way Conduction
Table 1. Abbreviations used in heart models
timing delays for an electrical activation to conduct from
one electrode to another. Due to the limited number of
electrodes that can be placed into the heart, the physi-
cian can examine the refractory properties at the loca-
tions of the electrodes, and only consider the conduction
delays between the electrodes. The procedure give us the
intuition to abstract the heart as a conduction network
as shown in Fig. 4 (c).
3.3.1 Tissue level abstraction
At the tissue level, we model the conduction delay be-
tween node automata using a path automaton. So two
adjacent node automata N1
0kN2
0can be simulated by
two node automata and a path automaton ( N1
1kP1kN2
1)
(Fig. 4 (c)). In the new node automaton N1, location
cond is replaced by a committed location temp . In cond
location,N0does not have a transition for Act node? ,
which is equivalent to the ERP location. So the time for
thecond location is added to the new ERP location:
N1:Terpmax =N0:Terpmax +N0:Tcondmax
N1:Terpmin =N0:Terpmin+N0:Tcondmin
The path automaton P1models the conduction property
of between N1
0andN2
0with
P1:Tcondmin =min(N1
0:Tcondmin;N2
0:Tcondmin)
P1:Tcondmax =max(N1
0:Tcondmax;N2
0:Tcondmax)
The location correspondence and abstraction are shown
in Fig. 5 (a). A typical timed execution where a node
N1
0got activated and activates the other node N2
0after
delay is shown below:
REkREActnode 1?        !
COkRETcondmin         !
Actnext !ERkCO
Correspondingly, in N1
1kP1kN2
1, the path P1is im-
mediately activated when the node N1
1is activated, and
after the same conduction delay the node N2
1on the
other end of the path is activated.
REkIDkREActnode 1?        !
Actpath 1!
ERkANkRETcondmin         !
Actnode 2!ERkCFkER
We use Double location in path automaton to model
when both node automata are in Cond location. Whenone of the nodes nishes conducting, it will send Act next!
event to the adjacent node and enter ERP location. Since
the other node is in Cond orERP location, there is no
transition for the Act next! event and the conduction is
blocked. So the locations for COkER;ERkCO;ERkER
are abstracted as a single location ERkIDkER. We claim
thatN1
0kN2
0tN1
1kP1kN2
1and the heart can be mod-
eled asH1=N1
1kP1
1kN2
1Pm
1kNn
1. This model trans-
formation does not simplify the heart model, but it pro-
vides an abstract conduction path of arbitrary length
with node and path automata.
3.3.2 Conduction Path Abstraction
A node automaton can generate Actpath! events by
self-activation, and prevent Actnode! event to trigger
Actpath! during ERP. If the self-activation period is
too long for a node automaton Ni
1, and its ERP is short
enough not to block any Actnode! event, it can be re-
moved from the model and the paths connect to it can
be merged. A conduction path with N1kP1kN2kP2kN3
can be abstracted into N4kP3kN5with the following
assumptions:
min(N1:Terpmin;N3:Terpmin)N2:Terpmax
max(N1:Trestmax;N3:Trestmax)<N2:Trestmin
The rst assumption infers that when the location of N3
changes from ERP toRRP, it is guaranteed that N1
1.ERP
&&N2
1.ERP . Under this assumption N2won't block any
activation signal travel from N1toN3and vice versa.
The second assumption guarantees that the clock tof
N2will be reset before reaching Trest mininRest loca-
tion, so there will not be self-activation from N2. Under
these two assumptions we can have N4=N1,N5=N3,
P3.Tcond min =P1.Tcond min +P2.Tcond min
P3.Tcond max =P1.Tcond max +P2.Tcond max
This can be generalized for acyclic conduction paths of
arbitrary length. The rst assumption can be achieved
by assigning node automata to the locations with longer
ERP. Since the pacemaker only has two leads monitor-
ing the timing delay between heart activation events, and
the AV node has the longest ERP period, the heart struc-
ture can be abstracted with two nodes and a path H0
1=
N1
1kP1
1kN2
1kP2
1kN3
1, with theActnode events from N1
1
andN3
1as input to the pacemaker.
3.3.3 Resolve Non-determinism with Linear
interpolation
Abstraction 1 can be used in verication but not testing
due to the non-deterministic choices of parameters. It
captures all behaviors of the heart tissue but is not able
to simulate a particular behavior, especially over multi-
ple heart cycles. In [20], we developed the Virtual Heart
Model (VHM) which resolved the non-determinism in
Abstraction 1 with linear interpolations and can be used

--- Page 10 ---
10 Zhihao Jiang et al.: Pacemaker Verication
Heart  Pacemaker  
Aget !  
Vget ! 
VP ! AP ! 



Fig. 6. (a) The heart model generates heart events (Aget,Vget) and responds to pacemaker events (AP,VP). (b) Basic 5 timing cycles
of DDD pacemaker which maintain minimal heart rate, minimal A-V delay and lter noises
to mimic the behavior of dierent heart conditions. For
example, the non-deterministic ERP range [ Tmin;Tmax]
is interpolated as a linear function:
Tmin+ (1 (1 t=Trrp )3)(Tmax Tmin) (1)
wheretis the time since the node enters the RRP loca-
tion.
3.4 Abstraction 2: Merging Equivalent Locations
The heart model H0
1still has equivalent locations. In
Abstraction 2 we further abstract the node and path
automata. With non-determinism, the node automaton
react to Act node! event the same way in RRP and Rest
state. In the new node automaton N2we merge the RRP
state with the Rest state with:
N2:Trestmin =N1:Trestmin+N1:Trrpmin
N2:Trestmax =N1:Trestmax +N1:Trrpmax
Since during ERP state, the node automata won't re-
act to any Act node! event, for a N1
1kP1kN2
1setting, the
symbolic state ERkDOkERis equivalent to ERkIDkER.
Under the assumption that the ERP period of a node
automaton is much longer than the conduction delay of
a path automaton, it is guaranteed that both node au-
tomata will be in ERP location when the path exits the
Double location. In the path automaton, the Double and
Conict location is merged with the Idlestate. The loca-
tion abstraction and mapping is in Fig. 5 (b). The heart
can be modeled as H2=N1
2kP1
2kN2
2kP2
2kN3
2.
3.5 Abstraction 3: Replacing Blocking with
Non-deterministic Conduction
In Abstraction 3, we replace the blocking behavior of the
ERP location of the node with non-deterministic conduc-
tion in the path automaton. There exists a transitionREkIDkREActnode 1?        !
Actpath 1!Actpath 1?       ! REkIDkRE
inN1
3kP1
3kN2
3to replace transition
ERkIDkERActnode 1?        ! ERkIDkER
inN1
2kP1
2kN2
2
Without the ERP constraint the AV node is no longer
needed and the heart can be modeled as H3=N1
3kP3kN2
3.
The location abstraction and mapping is in Fig. 5 (c).
The detailed proof for this timed simulation relation is
in the appendix.
3.6 Abstraction 4: Random Heart Model (RHM)
In Abstraction 4, we further simplify the heart model
by removing the conduction path between two nodes.
By settingTrestmin for both nodes to 0 the new heart
modelH4=N1
3kN2
3covers all possible behavior of H3.
The location abstraction and mapping is in Fig. 5 (d).
This random heart model with two nodes is the most
abstract model that will be used at the beginning of the
closed-loop verication process in Section 5.
Eventually we have a series of heart models with:
N1
0kN2
0Nn
0
tN1
1kP1
1kN2
1Pm
1kNn
1
tN1
1kP1
1kN2
1kP2
1kN3
1
tN1
2kP1
2kN2
2kP2
2kN2
2
tN1
3kP3kN2
3
tN1
4kN2
4
4 Pacemaker Modeling
In this section, we discuss our timed-automata model of
the pacemaker. The overview of the closed-loop system is
showed in Fig. 6(a). The interactions between the heart
and the pacemaker are modeled by using binary event
channels. The activation of N1of the heart is the input
to the atrial lead
N1:Actpath!!Aget!

--- Page 11 ---
Zhihao Jiang et al.: Pacemaker Verication 11
PVARP  
Aget? 
VS? 
VP? 
AS! 
AR! LRI 
AS? 
VS? 
VP? 
AP! 
AVI 
AS? 
VS? 
VP? 
VP! VS? 
URI 
 VP? 
VRP 
Vget? 
VS! VP? 
(a) LRI component  (b) AVI component  
 (c) URI component  
(d) PVARP component  (e) VRP component  
Fig. 7. (a)LRI component delivers AP!event if the V-A delay exceeds TLRI-TAVI; (b)AVI component delivers VP!if the A-V
delay exceeds TAVI while the V-V delay is longer than TURI; (c)URI component keeps track of the V-V delay; (d)PVARP
component lters certain Aget! from the heart and generates AS!; (e)VRP component lters certain Vget! from the heart and
generates VS!
and for ventricular lead
N2:Actpath!!Vget!
The pacemaker accordingly generates atrial or ven-
tricular pacing actions
AP!!N1:Actnode!
VP!!N2:Actnode!
to the corresponding nodes in the heart. We now present
our pacemaker model within the closed-loop heart-pacemaker
system.
4.1 Basic DDD pacemaker modeling
The DDD pacemaker has 5 basic timing cycles triggered
by events, as shown in Fig. 6(b). We decomposed our
pacemaker model into 5 components which correspond
to the 5 counters. P=LRIkAVIkURIkPVARPkVRP .
These components synchronize with each other using
broadcast channels and shared variables (as shown in
Fig. 7).4.1.1 Lower Rate Interval (LRI)
The Lower Rate Interval (LRI) component is shown in
Fig. 7(a). This component denes the longest interval
allowed between two ventricular events, thus keeps the
heart rate above a minimum value. In DDD mode, the
LRI interval is divided into a V-A interval (TLRI-TAVI)
and a A-V interval (TAVI). The LRI component main-
tains a maximum V-A delay while the AVI component
maintains a maximum A-V delay so together they main-
tain the maximum V-V delay. In the LRI component,
the clock is reset when a ventricular event (VS, VP) is
received. If no atrial event has been sensed (AS), the
component will deliver atrial pacing (AP) after TLRI-
TAVI. The UPPAAL design of LRI component is shown
in Fig. 7(a).
4.1.2 Atrio-Ventricular Interval (AVI) and Upper Rate
Interval (URI)
The function of the AVI component is to maintain the
appropriate delay between the atrial activation and the
ventricular activation. It denes the longest interval be-

--- Page 12 ---
12 Zhihao Jiang et al.: Pacemaker Verication
secV wait_2nd wait_1st
t=0VP?Vget?
VP?
t=0Vget?
t=0
(a) Monitor PLRI test
secV wait_vp wait_v
Vget?t=0t=0VP?
Vget?
t=0VP?
t=0 (b) Monitor PURI test
Fig. 8. (a) Monitor for LRL: Interval between two ventricular events should be less than TLRI, (b) Monitor for URL: Interval between
a ventricular event and a VP should be longer than TURI
tween an atrial event and a ventricular event. If no ven-
tricular event has been sensed (VS) within TAVI after
an atrial event (AS, AP) , the component will deliver ven-
tricular pacing (VP). In order to prevent the pacemaker
from pacing the ventricle too fast, a URI component uses
a global clock clkto track the time after a ventricular
event (VS, VP) . The URI limits the ventricular pacing
rate by enforcing a lower bound on the times between
consecutive ventricle events. If the global clock value is
less than TURI when the AVI component is about to
deliver VP, AVI will hold VP and deliver it after the
global clock reaches TURI. The UPPAAL design of AVI
and URI component is shown in Fig. 7(b) and (c).
4.1.3 Post Ventricular Atrial Refractory Period
(PVARP) and Post Ventricular Atrial Blanking
(PVAB)
Ventricular events, especially Ventricular Pace (VP) are
sometimes so strong that the atrial lead can sense the ac-
tivation as well. This signal may be falsely recognized as
an atrial event and disrupt normal pacemaker function.
This scenario is called crosstalk and was discussed in our
previous work [21]. In order to prevent this undesired
behavior, there is a blanking period (PVAB) followed
by a refractory period (PVARP) for the atrial events
after each ventricular event (VS, VP) . Atrial events dur-
ing PVAB are ignored and atrial events during PVARP
trigger AR!event which can be used in some advanced
diagnostic algorithms. The UPPAAL design of PVARP
component is shown in Fig. 7(d).
4.1.4 Ventricular Refractory Period (VRP)
Correspondingly, the VRP follows each ventricular event
(VP, VS) to lter noise and early events in the ventricu-
lar channel which could otherwise cause undesired pace-
maker behavior. Fig. 7(e) shows the UPPAAL design of
VRP component.
4.1.5 Parameter Selection
In order to cope with the large variety of patient condi-
tions, the timing parameters of the pacemaker can be
programmed to discrete values. In our previous work
[12], we picked a set of default values for the parameters
and veried safety properties on it. In order to evaluatethe safety of the pacemaker software, it is important to
check all possible parameter combinations. Since there
are only a nite number (i.e. 8000) of dierent parame-
ter combinations [13], in this paper we enumerate all of
them and check all properties on each combination.
5 Reachability of Unsafe Regions
In this section, we dene unsafe regions regarding brady-
cardia and tachycardia and specify two fundamental safety
properties. These two fundamental safety properties are
strict so that they must be satised by any pacemaker
under all heart conditions.
5.1 Lower Rate Limit
The most essential function for the pacemaker is to treat
bradycardia by maintaining the ventricular rate above a
certain threshold. We dene the region where the ven-
tricular rate is slow, as unsafe . The monitor PLRI testis
designed to measure interval between ventricular events
and is shown in Fig. 8(a). For property
'LRI=A[] (PLRI test.secV imply PLRI test.tTLRI)
we haveH4kPkPLRItestj='LRI.
5.2 Upper Rate Limit
The pacemaker is not designed to treat tachycardia so it
can only pace the heart to increase its rate and cannot
slow it down. However, it is still important to guarantee
it does not pace the ventricles beyond a maximum rate
to ensure safe operations. To this eect, an Upper Rate
Interval (URI) is specied such that the pacemaker can
increase the ventricular rate up to this limit.
We require that a ventricle pace (VP) can only occur
at leastTURI after a ventricle event (VS, VP). The
monitor PURI testis shown in Fig. 8(b). For the property
'URI=A[] (PURI test.secV imply PURI test.tTURI)
we haveH4kPkPURItestj='URI.
Since'LRIand'URIbelong to ATCTL*, the veried
properties are preserved in the real heart.
In the following two sections, we discuss two closed-
loop unsafe executions where the pacemaker inappropri-
ately increases the heart rate. Such executions are re-
ferred to as Pacemaker Mediated Tachycardia (PMT).

--- Page 13 ---
Zhihao Jiang et al.: Pacemaker Verication 13
Intrinsic pathway
Fast “pathway”: pacemaker
A-V synchrony
(a) Virtual circuit formed by the pacemaker and the
heart
0 1000  2000  3000  AS AS AS AS AS 
VS VP VP VP VP VP 
ms AS 
1 2 
3 (b) Pacemaker trace for ELT initialized by a early ven-
tricular signal
Fig. 9. Endless Loop Tachycardia case study demonstrating the situation when the pacemaker drives the heart into an unsafe state [22]
We use existential properties PE2ETCTLto show the
existence of these executions and use :PEto prove the
correctness of the corresponding Anti-PMT algorithms.
Since AG':EF(:'), the properties also belong to
ATCTL* and are preserved for the real heart.
6 Endless Loop Tachycardia
The AVI component of a dual-chamber pacemaker in-
troduces a virtual A-V conduction pathway. This forms
a timing loop with the intrinsic (physiological) A-V con-
duction pathway (see Fig. 9(a)). A Premature Ventric-
ular Contraction (PVC), i.e. an early extra beat in the
ventricular, may trigger another ventricular event (VS)
and initiate a V-A conduction through the intrinsic path-
way (Marker 1 in Fig. 9(b)). The pacemaker registers
this signal as an Atrial Sense (AS) (Marker 2 in Fig. 9(b)).
This event triggers a VP after TAVI, as if the signal con-
ducts through the \virtual" A-V pathway (Marker 3 in
Fig. 9(b)). We call it \virtual" pathway as the \con-
duction" delay is fullled by a timer in the pacemaker
instead of a physical signal propagation along the heart
tissue. The VP will trigger another V-A conduction and
this VP-AS-VP-AS looping behavior will continue (see
Fig. 9(b)). The interval between atrial events is TAVI
plus the V-A conduction delay, which is normally shorter
than the delay between intrinsic heart beats, thus will
drive the ventricular rate as high as the Upper Rate
Limit. During ELT, the heart rate is not only high, but
also xed, which is unsafe scenario.
Due to the limited information the pacemaker has
about the heart, the pacemaker cannot distinguish a ret-
rograde atrial event from an intrinsic atrial event which
is triggered by the SA node. From the pacemaker's point
of view, the pacemaker paces the ventricles as specied
for every AS. That is why open-loop testing is unable to
detect this closed-loop behavior.
Modern pacemakers are equipped with anti-ELT al-
gorithms to identify and terminate potential ELT. One
common algorithm identies ELT by the ELT patternand terminates ELT by increasing TPVARP time once
to block the AS caused by the V-A conduction. By in-
creasing the blocking interval after a ventricular event,
the pacemaker eectively ignores the early atrial signal
detected due to the PVC.
6.1 Existence of ELT
Two monitors were designed to show the existence of
ELT. One monitor, PELT det, shows the persistence of
the VP-AS pattern and the other monitor, Pvv, shows
that the ventricular rate is always no slower than the
upper rate limit (Fig. 10). The property
'ELT=E[] ((not PELT det.err) && (not Pvv.err))
checks the existence of ELT behavior. After our initial
verication we have:
H4kPkPELTdetkPvvj='ELT
The evidence trace shows the behavior of the system.
For simplicity we only show the state of the heart:
REkREAVI:tTAVI^URI:tTURI                   !
VP!!Actnode 2!
REkREN1:t0           !
Actpath 1!!AS!
REkREAVI:tTAVI^URI:tTURI                   !
VP!!Actnode 2!
REkREN1:t0           !
Actpath 1!!AS!
REkRE
6.2 Trace Validation and Heart Model Renement
We check this trace on more rened H3kPand discov-
ered that the trace above can correspond to two dierent
scenarios:
REkANkREAVI:tTAVI^URI:tTURI                   !
VP!!Actnode 2!
REkIDkREN1:tN1:Trestmin             !
Actpath 1!!AS!
REkANkREAVI:tTAVI^URI:tTURI                   !
VP!!Actnode 2!
REkIDkREN1:tN1:Trestmin             !
Actpath 1!!AS!REkANkRE

--- Page 14 ---
14 Zhihao Jiang et al.: Pacemaker Verication
PELT_det  Pv_v  
Fig. 10. (a) Any pattern other than VP-AS will result in error state (b) If the ventricular rate is slower than the Upper Rate
Limit will go to error state
2 1 3 
Fig. 11. (1) The component PVAS sends VPAS!event when a VP-AS pattern with delay between [150,200] is detected; (2)
Component ELTct . After 8 VP-AS pattern, the algorithm increase TPVARP to 500ms. (3) Modied PVARP' component.
TPVARP can only be set to 500 for one timing cycle.
and
REkIDkREAVI:tTAVI^URI:tTURI                   !
VP!!Actnode 2!
REkRTkREP:tP:Tcondmin                    !
Actnode 1!!Actpath 1!!AS!
REkIDkREAVI:tTAVI^URI:tTURI                   !
VP!!Actnode 2!
REkRTkREP:tP:Tcondmin                    !
Actnode 1!!Actpath 1!!AS!
REkIDkRE
Both traces correspond to actual clinical scenarios.
However, the second trace corresponds to the ELT be-
havior which inappropriately increased the heart rate.
By settingN1:TrestminTURI inH3we can model
the healthy heart and the rst scenario will be elimi-
nated. However, in H4theTrestmin is set to 0 so the
two cases cannot be distinguished. So we use the rened
heart model H3withN1:TrestminTURI . With the
new heart model we have:
H3kPkPELTdetkPvvj='ELT
The evidence trace, which is exactly the second trace
above, shows exactly the ELT scenario.6.3 ELT termination algorithm
The ELT will persists without intervention and the pa-
tient's heart is forced to beat at a fast rate approaching
the Upper Rate Limit. Thus, device manufacturers re-
quire a way to identify ELT and terminate it despite
of the limited information the pacemaker can get. The
ELT detection algorithm by Boston Scientic [23] uti-
lizes these three features:
{Ventricular rate at Upper Rate Limit
{VP-AS pattern
{Fixed V-A conduction delay
The pacemaker rst monitors VP-AS pattern with ven-
tricular rate at upper rate limit. Then it compares the
VP-AS interval with previous intervals. ELT is conrmed
if the dierence between the current VP-AS interval and
the rst VP-AS interval are within 32ms for 8 consec-
utive times. Then the pacemaker increases the PVARP
period to 500ms once so that the next AS will be blocked
and will not trigger a VP. ELT will then be terminated.
As the V-A conduction delays are patient-specic, the
algorithm compares the VP-AS interval to a previously
sensed value instead of an absolute value. Since we can

--- Page 15 ---
Zhihao Jiang et al.: Pacemaker Verication 15
0 1000 2000 3000 4000 AS AS AS AS AS AS AS AS AS 
VS VS VS VS VS AS 
ms 
SVT 
 Bradycardia 
(a)
0 1000 2000 3000 4000 AS [AR] 
AS AS AS AP AP 
VP VP VP VP VS VS [AR] [AR] 
ms 
PMT  
 Appropriate  (b)
Fig. 12. (a) Open-loop: 3:1 A-V conduction during SVT and low ventricular rate without SVT; (b) With DDD pacemaker: the pacemaker
paces the ventricle for every atrial sense (AS), thus increase the ventricular rate inappropriately
not store past clock values in UPPAAL, we can not ex-
plicitly model this ELT detection algorithm. However,
since the conduction delay in our heart model is within
a known range, we can compare the VP-AS interval with
this range. The VP-AS pattern detection module VPAS
for our anti-ELT algorithm is shown in Fig. 11 (1). It
detects the VP-AS pattern with ventricular rate at the
Upper Rate Limit and sends out a VPASevent if the
interval qualies.
A counterELTct counts the number of qualied VP-
AS patterns. It increases the PVARP period to 500ms if
eight consecutive VP-AS patterns are detected. (Fig. 11
(2)) The PVARP component is also modied so that the
PVARP period can only be changed once by the anti-
ELT algorithm. (Fig. 11 (3))
6.4 Verication of the algorithm:
With the new pacemaker model
P1=LRIkAVIkURIkPVARP0kVRPkELTctkVPAS
we rst check whether the two fundamental safety prop-
erties still hold when the anti-ELT algorithm is intro-
duced. We have
H3kP1kPLRItestj='LRI
H3kP1kPURItestj='URI
Then we check the existence of ELT and we have:
H3kP1kPELTdetkPvv6j='ELT
which indicates the algorithm successfully eliminated all
ELT executions.
7 Verication of the Mode-Switch Algorithm
7.1 Supraventricular tachycardia (SVT)
SVT is an arrhythmia which features an abnormally fast
atrial rate. Typically, in the open loop case, the AV node,
which has a long refractory period, can lter most of the
fast atrial activations during SVT thus the ventricular
rate remains relatively normal. Fig. 12(a) demonstratesa pacemaker event trace during SVT, with a ODO mode
pacemaker which just sensing in both channels. In this
particular case, every 3 atrial events (AS) correspond to
1 ventricular event (VS) during SVT. As an arrhythmia,
SVT is still considered as a safe heart condition since
the ventricles operate under normal rate can and still
maintain adequate cardiac output.
However, in the closed loop case with the pacemaker,
the AVI component of a dual chamber pacemaker is
equivalent to a virtual pathway in addition to the in-
trinsic conduction pathway between the atria and the
ventricles. The pacemaker tries to maintain 1:1 A-V con-
duction and thus increases the ventricular rate inappro-
priately to match the atrial rate. Fig. 12(b) shows the
pacemaker trace of the same SVT case with DDD pace-
maker. Although half of the fast atrial events are l-
tered by the PVARP period ([AR]s), the DDD pace-
maker still drives the closed-loop system into 2:1 A-V
conduction with faster ventricular rate, which is inap-
propriate. This problem can be resolved by switching the
pacemaker from the dual chamber mode, which couples
the atrial and ventricular rates, into a single chamber
mode to maintain appropriate ventricular rate indepen-
dent of the atrial rate.
7.2 Existence of PMT during SVT
The monitor Pvvis designed to show existence of PMT
during SVT. It goes to the error state if the ventricular
rate drops below the Upper Rate Limit (Fig. 15).
We specify
'MS=E[](notPvv:err )
which veries the existence of PMT. To identify the
PMT scenario, we rst set H3:N1:Trestmin < 100 so
that the atrial rate can be high and H3:N2:Trestmin>
TURI so that the intrinsic heart rate is less than TURI.
The property is rst veried on pacemaker without the
mode-switch algorithm. We have
H3kPkPvvj='MS
The property is satised and the evidence trace shows
the behavior of the system.
REkIDkREN1:tN1:Trestmin             !
Actpath 1!!AS!

--- Page 16 ---
16 Zhihao Jiang et al.: Pacemaker Verication
Counter  
Fast?  
Slow?  
du_end ? 
DDD!  
VDI! 
du_beg ! 
Duration  
VS? 
VP? 
du_beg ? 
du_end ! 
Interval  
AS? 
AR? 
AP? 
Fast!  
Slow!  1 
2 
3 
Fig. 13. (a) Component INTAn atrial event ( AS,AR ) arrive before thresh after the previous atrial event is regarded as fast
event. Atrial event arrive after thresh andAPare regarded as slow event; (b) Component CNT After 8 fastevent the algorithm
will start a duration by sending dubegand will switch to VDImode when the duration ends ( duend); (c) Component DUR
The duration length is 8 ventricular events ( VS,VP )
REkANkREP:tP:Tcondmin                    !
Actnode 2!!Actpath 1!!VS!
REkIDkREN1:tN1:Trestmin             !
Actpath 1!!AS!
REkANkREP:tP:Tcondmin                    !
Actnode 2!!Actpath 1!!VS!
REkIDkRE
The time between two VS!events are less than TURI
so the property holds. But that is not exactly the PMT
case we are looking for.
7.3 Trace Validation and Heart Model Renement
When a path P3receives aActpath 1! event, there are
two non-deterministic transitions. IDActpath 1!       ! ID
andIDActpath 1!       ! AN. From the trace above we can
see that every atrial event triggers the path conduction.
When the trace is validated against
H2=N1
2kP1
2kN2
2kP2
2kN3
2
we have:
REkIDkREkIDkREN1:tN1:Trestmin             !
Actpath 1!!AS!
ERkANkREkIDkREP1:tP1:Tcondmin                !
Actnode 2!!Actpath 2!
ERkIDkERkANkREN1:tN1:Terpmin             !
REkIDkERkANkREN1:tN1:Trestmin             !
Actpath 1!!AS!
ERkANkERkANkREP1:tP1:Tcondmin             !
Actnode 2!
ERkIDkERkANkRE
The second Actnode 2! is blocked by N2
3so it won't
conduct to N3
3and trigger VS!. So it turns out to be a
spurious counter-example .ERkANkERkANkREis thedead-end state where the trace cannot proceed in the re-
ned model and ERkANkREkANkREis the bad state
which is in the same abstract state as the dead-end state
and enables the trace to proceed in the abstract model.
The heart model needs to be rened so that the bad state
and the dead-end state are separated and the spurious
counter-example is eliminated. So we rene the heart
model from H3toH2withH3tH2. Our second veri-
cation eort shows that:
H3kPkPvvj='MS
The property is satised and the evidence trace shows
the behavior of the system.
REkIDkREkIDkREN1:tN1:Trestmin             !
Actpath 1!!AS!
ERkANkREkIDkREP1:tP1:Tcondmin                !
Actnode 2!!Actpath 2!
ERkIDkERkANkREN1:tN1:Terpmin             !
REkIDkERkANkREN1:tN1:Trestmin             !
Actpath 1!!AS!
ERkANkERkANkREAVI:tTAVI^URI:tTURI                   !
Actnode 3!!VP!
ERkANkERkDOkER
In the trace, the pacemaker delivers VP for every atrial
event, increasing the ventricular rate, which is exactly
the PMT case.
7.4 Mode-Switch Algorithm
We now analyze the approach use in pacemakers to pre-
vent prolonged ventricular pacing under SVT. Intuitively,
the mode-switch algorithm rst detects SVT. After con-
rmed detection, it switches the pacemaker from a dual-
chamber mode to a single-chamber mode. During the

--- Page 17 ---
Zhihao Jiang et al.: Pacemaker Verication 17
LRI-
MS 
AS? 
VS? 
VP? 
 AP! 
DDD?  
VDI?  
AVI-
MS 
AS? 
VS? 
AP? 
 VP! 
DDD?  
VDI?  
Fig. 14. (a) After switching to VDImode, the new LRI component LRI'maintains a minimum V-V interval; (b) After switching
toVDImode, the new AVI component AVI' keeps track of the time after each atrial events.
single-chamber mode, the A-V synchrony function of the
pacemaker is deactivated thus the ventricular rate is de-
coupled from the fast atrial rate. After the algorithm
determines the end of SVT, it will switch the pacemaker
back to the dual chamber mode.
The mode-switch algorithm specication we use is
similar to the one described in the Boston Scientic pace-
makers manual [13]. The algorithm rst measures the in-
terval between atrial events outside the blanking period
(AS, AR). The interval is considered as fastif it is above
a threshold ( Trigger Rate ) and slow otherwise. In our
UPPAAL model we model it as INT (see Fig. 13 (1)). A
counterCNT increments for fastevents and decrements
forslow events (see Fig. 13 (2)). After the counter value
reaches the Entry Count , the algorithm will start a Du-
ration (DUR ) which is a time interval used to conrm
the detection of SVT (see Fig. 13 (3)). In the Duration ,
the counter keeps counting. If the counter value is still
positive after the Duration , the pacemaker will switch to
the VDI mode ( Fallback mode ). In the VDI mode, the
pacemaker only senses and paces the ventricle. At any
time if the counter reaches zero, the Duration will termi-
nate and the pacemaker is switched back to DDD mode.
In our UPPAAL model of the mode-switch algorithm,
we use nominal parameter values from the clinical set-
ting. We dene trigger rate at 170bpm (350ms), entry
count at 8, duration for 8 ventricular events and fallback
mode as VDI.
In order to model both DDD and VDI modes and the
switching between them, we made modications to the
AVI and LRI components. In each component two copies
for both modes are modeled, and switch between each
other when switching events (DDD, VDI) are received.
During VDI mode, VP is delivered by the LRI compo-
nent instead of the AVI component. The clock values areshared between both copies in order to preserve essential
intervals even after switching. The modied AVI ( AVI0)
and LRI (LRI0)components are shown in Fig. 14. So the
new pacemaker model is:
P2=LRI'kAVI'kURIkPVARPkVRPkINTkCNTkDUR
7.5 Verication against fundamental safety properties
We verify the same fundamental safety properties on the
pacemaker model with mode-switch algorithm. We have:
H2kP2kPURItestj='URI
H2kP2kPLRItest6j='LRI
The Upper Rate Limit property still holds but the Lower
Rate Limit property is violated. The counterexample
is proved to be valid after checking the trace of more
rened heart models. By analyzing the trace we found
that when the pacemaker is switching from VDI mode
to DDD mode, the responsibility to deliver VP switched
from LRI component to AVI component. Since the clock
reference is dierent (Ventricular events in LRI compo-
nent and Atrial events in AVI component), the clock
value for delivering the next VP is not preserved. As a
result, if an atrial event which triggered the mode-switch
from VDI to DDD happens within [TLRI-TAVI, TLRI)
after the last ventricular event, the next ventricular pac-
ing will be delayed by at most TAVI time, which violates
the Lower Rate Limit property (Fig. 16(a)).
7.6 Verication Result
After implementing the Mode-switch algorithm, we ver-
ied the model against the same existence property. We
expect the violation of this property, since during VDI

--- Page 18 ---
18 Zhihao Jiang et al.: Pacemaker Verication
Fig. 15. Monitor Pvvfor SVT: There exists an endless se-
quence in which interval between ventricular events is at most
TURI
AS AS
VS (VP) VP
MS
TLRIVDI DDD
TAVI
(a)
PVAB  
VS AS Aget  AS 
Fast Fast 
Slow  (b)
Fig. 16. (a) Safety Violation: VP is delayed due to the reset of
timer during mode-switch, (b) Correctness Violation: The blocking
period may block some atrial events, turning two Fast events to
oneSlow event [12]
mode the ventricular rate of the heart model is less than
the Upper Rate Limit and will not trigger ventricular
pacing. However, this property is still satised, indicat-
ing the mode-switch algorithm failed to eliminate the
PMT scenario. The evidence trace returned by UPPAAL
shows that a subset of atrial events fall into the blank-
ing period after a ventricular event (see Fig. 16(b)). As
a result, two fast events are reduced to one slow event
and mode switch may never happen. This scenario does
exist in all our rened heart models, we conclude that
the trace is physiologically feasible. The mode-switch al-
gorithm in our pacemaker model can not terminate all
PMT behaviors as specied.
7.7 Trace Validation on Real Pacemaker and
Pacemaker Renement
In the previous subsections, we have found two potential
safety violations in our pacemaker model. However, this
does not mean the actual pacemaker has the same viola-
tion. Jiang et al. have implemented the VHM model onto
a programmable integrated circuit (FPGA) platform and
had it interact with a real pacemaker at run-time [24].
The closed-loop behavior can be checked in closed-loop
with a real pacemaker. If the trace is not feasible in the
closed-loop system, the pacemaker model needs to be re-
ned to eliminate the execution. However, rening the
pacemaker model requires more detailed representation
of the pacemaker software, which was not available to us
at that time.
8 Related Work
Chen et. al [25] extended our verication work [12]. They
developed a hybrid heart model which is able to simu-
late action potential at tissue level. The model is a morerened model than our Virtual Heart Model [20], with
linear dynamics on each state of the heart tissue. They
also developed a probability model to simulate natu-
ral pacemaker function. They then used the combined
heart model for quantitative verication of the pace-
maker. However, since the pacemaker only sense the tim-
ing of the heart tissue activation, their hybrid extension
for action potential does not bring much benet but in-
creased model complexity dramatically. As a result, they
have to use bounded model checking thus sacriced ac-
curacy.
Jee et. al present a safety assured development ap-
proach of real-time software using pacemaker as their
case study in [26]. They formally model and verify a sin-
gle chamber VVI pacemaker using UPPAAL and then
implement it and check the preservation of properties
transferred from model to implementation code.
Tuan et. al propose an RTS formal model for pace-
maker and its environment and veried it against num-
ber of safety properties and timed constraints using the
PAT model checker [27]. They have modeled the pace-
maker for all 18 operating modes as described in Boston
scientic, but their work lacks specication and analysis
of complex behaviors of the pacemaker, such as mode-
switch.
Wiggelinkhuizen uses mCRL2 and UPPAAL to for-
mally model the pacemaker from the rmware design of
Vitatron's DA+ pacemaker [28]. Two main approaches
have been used to investigate the feasibility of applying
formal model checking to the design of device rmware.
The main approach consists of verifying the rmware
model in context of a formal heart model and a formal
model of a hardware module which fails for high heart
rates because of the state explosion. Another approach
is to verify a part of rmware design which was feasible
and was able to detect a known deadlock rather soon.
Macedo et. al have developed a concurrent and dis-
tributed real-time model for a cardiac pacemaker through
a pragmatic incremental approach [29]. The models are
expressed using the VDM and are validated primarily
by scenario-based test, where test scenarios are dened
to model interesting situations such as the absence of
input pulses. The models cover 8 modes of pacemaker
operation.
Gomes et. al present a formal specication of pace-
maker system using the Z notation in [30]. They have
also tried to validate that the formal specication satis-
es the informal requirements of Boston Scientic by us-
ing a theorem prover, ProofPower-Z. They have partially
checked the consistency of their specication through
reasoning. No validation experiment regarding safety con-
ditions were performed yet.
Mery et. al in [31], formally model all operational
modes of a single electrode pacemaker system using event-
B and prove them. They use an incremental proof-based
approach to rene the basic abstract model of the system
and add more functional and timing properties. They use

--- Page 19 ---
Zhihao Jiang et al.: Pacemaker Verication 19
the ProB tool to validate their models in dierent situ-
ations such as absence of input pulses.
9 Conclusion and Future Work
In this paper, we rst extend our TACAS'12 paper [12]
by formalizing the heart model abstraction process. By
establishing the timed simulation relation between ab-
straction levels the safety properties specied in ATCTL*
are preserved during renement. Based on the heart model
formulation we proposed a Counter-Example-Guided Ab-
straction and Renement (CEGAR) framework to bal-
ance model complexity and delity for pacemaker ver-
ication. We demonstrated how to identify two unsafe
Pacemaker Mediated Tachycardia (PMT) executions us-
ing model checking and heart model renement for more
specic heart conditions. We also veried the safety and
eectiveness of the corresponding Anti-PMT algorithms.
The work in this paper demonstrated the application
of formal methods and model checking techniques for
evaluating safety and ecacy of Cyber-Physical Systems
like medical devices. This is a step toward certication of
veried models and automated synthesis to veried code
for medical device regulatory eorts. As future work,
there are several directions worth exploration:
1. The CEGAR framework enables us to explore more
complex pacemaker algorithms for more specic heart
conditions.
2. In the CEGAR framework, model abstraction, model
renement and trace validity check are performed
manually using physiological reasoning. The domain
knowledge can be potentially formalized into rules
and the abstraction and renement process can be
automated.
3. In this paper we only evaluated binary safety proper-
ties. We are interested in quantitative properties such
as power consumption and physiological ecacy. Our
current eorts are on extending this framework to in-
corporate tools and techniques for quantitative veri-
cation of closed-loop medical devices.
4. In this work we only investigate the interaction be-
tween the heart and the pacemaker so that only sim-
ple rate-based properties can be specied. Investigat-
ing the interaction between the heart and the oxygen
demands from the rest of the body will give us better
metric for the ecacy of the devices.
Acknowledgements. The authors would like to thank Ashutosh
Trivedi, from the University of Pennsylvania and the Indian
Institute of Technology, Mumbai, for fruitful discussions dur-
ing the preparation of this paper.
References
1. List of Device Recalls, U.S. Food and Drug Admin., (last
visited Jul. 19, 2010).2. K. Sandler, L. Ohrstrom, L. Moy, and R. McVay. Killed
by Code: Software Transparency in Implantable Medical
Devices. Software Freedom Law Center , 2010.
3. AUTOSAR website: http://www.autosar.org/.
4. AVSI website: http://www.avsi.aero.
5. R. Alur and D. L. Dill. A Theory of Timed Automata.
Theoretical Computer Science , 126:183{235, 1994.
6. K.G. Larsen, Paul Pettersson, and Wang Yi. UPPAAL
in a Nutshell. International Journal on Software Tools
for Technology Transfer (STTT) , pages 134{152, 1997.
7. M.E. Josephson. Clinical Cardiac Electrophysiology . Lip-
pincot Williams and Wilkins, 2008.
8. S. Barold, R. Stroobandt, and A. Sinnaeve. Cardiac
Pacemakers Step by Step . Blackwell Futura, 2004.
9. E. M. Clarke, O. Grumberg, and D. E. Long. Model
Checking and Abstraction. ACM Trans. Program. Lang.
Syst. , 16(5):1512{1542, 1994.
10. Edmund M. Clarke, Orna Grumberg, and Doron A.
Peled. Model Checking. 2000.
11. Edmund Clarke, Orna Grumberg, Somesh Jha, Yuan Lu,
and Helmut Veith. Counter Example-Guided Abstrac-
tion Renement for Symbolic Model Checking. J. ACM ,
50(5):752{794, 2003.
12. Zhihao Jiang, Miroslav Pajic, Salar Moarref, Rajeev
Alur, and Rahul Mangharam. Modeling and Verica-
tion of a Dual Chamber Implantable Pacemaker. Tools
and Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis of Sys-
tems, 7214:188{203, 2012.
13. The Compass - Technical Guide to Boston Scientic Car-
diac Rhythm Management Products. 2007.
14. Zhihao Jiang, Miroslav Pajic, Rajeev Alur, and Rahul
Mangharam. Pacemaker UPPAAL model download:
http://mlab.seas.upenn.edu.
15. Miroslav Pajic, Zhihao Jiang, Insup Lee, Oleg Sokolsky,
and Rahul Mangharam. From Verication to Implemen-
tation: A Model Translation Tool and a Pacemaker Case
Study. In Proceedings of the 2012 IEEE 18th Real Time
and Embedded Technology and Applications Symposium ,
RTAS '12, pages 173{184, 2012.
16. R.N. Fogoros. EP Testing . Blackwell Science, 1999.
17. Satoshi Yamane. Timed Weak Simulation Verication
and its Application to Stepwise Renement of Real Time
Software. International Journal of Computer Science
and Network Security , 6, 2006.
18. Gerd Behrmann, Alexandre David, and Kim G. Larsen.
A Tutorial on UPPAAL. Formal Methods for the De-
sign of Real-Time Systems, Lecture Notes in Computer
Science , pages 200{236, 2004.
19. Edmund M. Clarke and E. Allen Emerson. Design and
Synthesis of Synchronization Skeletons Using Branching-
Time Temporal Logic. In Logic of Programs, Workshop ,
pages 52{71, 1982.
20. Zhihao Jiang, Miroslav Pajic, and Rahul Mangharam.
Cyber-Physical Modeling of Implantable Cardiac Medi-
cal Devices. Proceedings of the IEEE , 100(1):122 {137,
Jan. 2012.
21. Zhihao Jiang and Rahul Mangharam. Modeling Car-
diac Pacemaker Malfunctions with the Virtual Heart
Model. In Engineering in Medicine and Biology Soci-
ety,EMBC, 2011 Annual International Conference of the
IEEE , pages 263 {266, Sept 2011.

--- Page 20 ---
20 Zhihao Jiang et al.: Pacemaker Verication
22. Z. Jiang, M. Pajic, and R. Mangharam. Model-based
Closed-loop Testing of Implantable Pacemakers. In IC-
CPS'11: ACM/IEEE 2nd Intl. Conf. on Cyber-Physical
Systems , 2011.
23. PACEMAKER System Specication. Boston Scientic.
2007.
24. Zhihao Jiang, Sriram Radhakrishnan, Varun Sampath,
Shilpa Sarode, Miroslav Pajic, and Rahul Mangharam.
Heart-on-a-Chip: A Closed-loop Testing Platform for Im-
plantable Pacemakers. In Third Workshop on Design,
Modeling and Evaluation of Cyber Physical Systems (Cy-
Phy), CPS Week, 2013.
25. T. Chen, M. Diciolla, M. Kwiatkowska, and A. Mereacre.
Quantitative Verication of Implantable Cardiac Pace-
makers. In Hybrid Systems: Computation and Control
(HSCC 2013) , 2013.
26. E. Jee, S. Wang, J. K. Kim, J. Lee, O. Sokolsky, and
I. Lee. A Safety-Assured Development Approach for
Real-Time Software. The Proceedings of 16th IEEE
International Conference on Embedded and Real-Time
Computing Systems and Applications , pages 133{142,
2010.
27. L. A. Tuan, M. C. Zheng, and Q. T. Tho. Modeling and
Verication of Safety Critical Systems: A Case Study on
Pacemaker. Fourth International Conference on Secure
Software Integration and Reliability Improvement , pages
23{32, 2010.
28. J. E. Wiggelinkhuizen. Feasibility of Formal Model
Checking in the Vitatron Environment. Master thesis,
Eindhoven University of Technology , 2007.
29. Macedo H. D., Larsen P. G., and Fitzgerald J. Incremen-
tal Development of a Distributed Real-Time Model of a
Cardiac Pacing System using VDM. Formal Methods ,
pages 28{30, 2008.
30. A. O. Gomes and M. V. Oliveira. Formal Specica-
tion of a Cardiac Pacing System. In Proceedings of the
2nd World Congress on Formal Methods (FM '09) , pages
692{707, 2009.
31. D. Mery and N. K. Singh. Pacemaker's Functional Be-
haviors in Event-B. Research report, INRIA , 2009.A Appendix
Proof for N1
2kP2kN2
2tN1
3kP3kN2
3
In this subsection we manually prove the timed simu-
lation relation N1
2kP2kN2
2tN1
3kP3kN2
3. The other re-
lations can be proved accordingly.
A.1 Timed Simulation Relation sim
For two timed automata T1andT2, we write timed
simulation relation simis dened on 
1
2where
(s;v)2
1andvis the valuation of all clocks t12X1.
((s;v);(s0;v0)) is in simif and only if v0=v(+), for
2D, such that sim(s;v) = (s0;v(+D))
LetT1=N1
2kP2kN2
2andT2=N1
3kP3kN2
3.X1=
ftn1
2;tp2;tn2
2gandX2=ftn1
3;tp3;tn2
3g, the state map-
ping for the timed simulation relation is shown below:
sim(REkIDkRE;v ) = (REkIDkRE;v (tn1
3+D1;tn2
3+
D2)) whereD1= [N1
2:Terpmin;N1
2:Terpmax],
D2= [N2
2:Terpmin;N2
2:Terpmax]
A special condition for this mapping is the initial state:
sim(REkIDkRE;v (tn1
3:= 0;tp3:= 0;tn2
3:= 0)) =
(REkIDkRE;v (tn1
3+D1;tn2
3+D2))
sim(ERkANkRE;v ) = (REkANkRE;v )
sim(REkRTkER;v ) = (REkRTkRE;v )
sim(ERkIDkER;v ) = (REkIDkRE;v )
sim(ERkIDkRE;v ) = (REkIDkRE;v (tn2
3+D))
whereD= [N2
2:Terpmin;N2
2:Terpmax]
sim(REkIDkER;v ) = (REkIDkRE;v (tn1
3+D))
whereD= [N1
2:Terpmin;N1
2:Terpmax]
The location mapping is shown in Fig. 5.
A.2 Timed Transitions
Here we want to ensure every timed transition for T1
has a corresponding timed transition in T2. We denote
S= (s;v) andS= (s;v+). For each location in T1we
haveS  !Sfor82Runder condition v+j=inv(s).
InT2we useS0= (s0;v0) andS0
= (s0;v0+). For
(S;S0)2simwe show that there exists S0
such that
s0  !s0
and (s;s0
)2sim. For every location we list
all the corresponding components and provide proof.
For location REkIDkREinT1we have:
S= (REkIDkRE;v )
S= (REkIDkRE;v +)
inv(s) =tn1
2+N1
2:Trestmax &&

--- Page 21 ---
Zhihao Jiang et al.: Pacemaker Verication 21
tn2
2+N2
2:Trestmax)
D1= [N1
2:Terpmin;N1
2:Terpmax],
D2= [N2
2:Terpmin;N2
2:Terpmax].
S0= (REkIDkRE;v (tn1
3+D1;tn2
3+D2))
S0
= (REkIDkRE;v (tn1
3+D1;tn2
3+D2) +)
inv(s0) =tn1
3+D1+N1
3:Trestmax andtn2
3+D2+
N2
3:Trestmax
Since
N3:Trestmax =N2:Trestmax +N2:Terpmax
we haveinv(s)inv(s0) so the correspondence holds.
For location ERkANkREinT1we have:
S= (ERkANkRE;v )
S= (ERkANkRE;v +)
inv(s) =tp2+P2:Tcondmax
S0= (REkANkRE;v )
S0
= (REkANkRE;v +)
inv(s0) =tp3+P3:Tcondmax
SinceP2:Tcondmax ==P3:Tcondmax, we have
inv(s)inv(s0) so the correspondence holds.
For location REkRTkERinT1we have:
S= (REkRTkER;v )
S= (REkRTkER;v +)
inv(s) =tp2+P2:Tcondmax
S0= (REkRTkRE;v )
S0
= (REkRTkRE;v +)
inv(s0) =tp3+P3:Tcondmax
SinceP2:Tcondmax ==P3:Tcondmax, we have
inv(s)inv(s0) so the correspondence holds.
For location ERkIDkERinT1we have:
S= (ERkIDkER;v )
S= (ERkIDkER;v +)
inv(s) =tn1
2+N1
2:Terpmax&&
tn2
2+N2
2:Terpmax
S0= (REkIDkRE;v )
S0
= (REkIDkRE;v +)
inv(s0) =tn1
3+N1
3:Trestmax&&
tn2
3+N2
3:Trestmax
Since
N3:Trestmax =N2:Trestmax +N2:Terpmax
We haveinv(s)inv(s0) so the correspondence holds.
For location ERkIDkREinT1we have:
S= (ERkIDkRE;v )
S= (ERkIDkRE;v +)
inv(s) =tn1
2+N1
2:Terpmax&&
tn2
2+N2
2:Trestmax
D= [N2
2:Terpmin;N2
2:Terpmax]
S0= (REkIDkRE;v (tn2
3+D)
S0
= (REkIDkRE;v (tn2
3+D) +)
inv(s0) =tn1
3+N1
3:Trestmax&&
tn2
3+D+N2
3:TrestmaxSince
N3:Trestmax =N2:Trestmax +N2:Terpmax
We haveinv(s)inv(s0) so the correspondence holds.
For location REkIDkERinT1we have:
S= (REkIDkER;v )
S= (REkIDkER;v +)
inv(s) =tn1
2+N1
2:Trestmax&&
tn2
2+N2
2:Terpmax
D= [N1
2:Terpmin;N1
2:Terpmax]
S0= (REkIDkRE;v (tn1
3+D)
S0
= (REkIDkRE;v (tn1
3+D) +)
inv(s0) =tn1
3+D+N1
3:Trestmax&&
tn2
3+N2
3:Trestmax
Since
N3:Trestmax =N2:Trestmax +N2:Terpmax
We haveinv(s)inv(s0) so the correspondence holds.
A.3 Discrete Transitions
During a discrete transition, a state S= (s;v) proceed
toS= (s0;v(:= 0)). Here we prove that for every
discrete transition S  !SinT1, there exists S1=
(s1;v) such that ( S;S 1)2sim,S1  !S;1forS;1=
(s0
1;v(0:= 0)) and ( S;S;1)2sim.
Self-activation for N1
2triggers antegrade conduction,
we haveN3:Trest =N2:Terp +N2:Trest
(REkIDkRE,v)tn1
2>N1
2:TrestminkActnode 1?                     !
Actpath 1!
(ERkANkRE,v(tn1
2:= 0;tp2:= 0))
+
(REkIDkRE,v)tn1
3>N1
3:TrestminkActnode 1?                     !
Actpath 1!
(REkANkRE,v(tn1
3:= 0;tp3:= 0))
Self-activation for N2
2triggers retrograde conduction,
we haveN3:Trest =N2:Terp +N2:Trest .
(REkIDkRE,v)tn2
2>N2
2:TrestminkActnode 2?                     !
Actpath 2!
(REkRTkER,v(tp2:= 0;tn2
2:= 0))
+
(REkIDkRE,v)tn2
3>N2
3:Trestmin )kActnode 2?                     !
Actpath 2!
(REkRTkRE,v(tp3:= 0;tn2
3:= 0))
N2
2activated after antegrade conduction
(ERkANkRE,v)tp2>Tcondmin          !
Actnode 2!
(ERkIDkER,v(tn2
2:= 0))
+
(REkANkRE,v)tp3>Tcondmin          !
Actnode 2!
(REkIDkRE,v(tn2
3:= 0))

--- Page 22 ---
22 Zhihao Jiang et al.: Pacemaker Verication
N1
2activated after retrograde conduction
(REkRTkER,v)tp2>Tcondmin )           !
Actnode 1!
(ERkIDkER,v(tn1
2:= 0))
+
(REkRTkRE,v)tp3>Tcondmin )           !
Actnode 1!
(REkIDkRE,v(tn1
3:= 0))
ERP ofN1
2nishes rst
(ERkIDkER,v)tn1
2>N1
2:Terpmin            !
(REkIDkER,v(tn1
2:= 0))
+
(REkIDkRE,v)tn1
3>N1
3:Terpmin            !
(REkIDkRE,v)
ERP ofN2
2nishes rst
(ERkIDkER,v)tn2
2>N2
2:Terpmin            !
(ERkIDkRE,v(tn2
2:= 0))
+
(REkIDkRE,v)tn2
3>N2
3:Terpmin            !
(REkIDkRE,v)
ERP ofN2
2nishes after N1
2
(REkIDkER,v)tn2
2>N2
2:Terpmin            !
(REkIDkRE,v(tn2
2:= 0))
+
D= [N1
2:Terpmin;N1
2:Terpmax]
(REkIDkRE,v(tn1
3+D))tn2
3>N2
3:Terpmin            !
(REkIDkRE,v(tn1
3+D))
ERP ofN1
2nishes after N2
2
(ERkIDkRE,v)tn1
2>N1
2:Terpmin            !
(REkIDkRE,v(tn1
2:= 0))
+
D= [N1
3:Terpmin;N1
3:Terpmax]
(REkIDkRE,v(tn2
3+D))tn1
3>N1
3:Terpmin            !
(REkIDkRE,v(tn2
3+D))
N2
2is activated when N1
2is in ERP
(ERkIDkRE,v)Actnode 2?        !
Actpath 2!
(ERkIDkER,v(tn2
2:= 0))
(+
(REkIDkRE,v)Actnode 2?        !
Actpath 2!
(REkIDkRE,v(tn2
3:= 0))
N2
2is activated when N1
2is in ERP
(REkIDkER,v)Actnode 1?        !
Actpath 1!
(ERkIDkER,v(tn1
2:= 0))
+
(REkIDkRE,v)Actnode 1?        !
Actpath 1!(REkIDkRE,v(tn1
3:= 0))
Blocking during ERP is simulated by a non-deterministic
transition in the path
(ERkIDkER,v)Actnode 1?        ! (ERkIDkER,v)
+
(REkIDkRE,v)Actnode 1?        !
Actpath 1!Actpath 1?       !
(REkIDkRE,v)
(ERkIDkER,v)Actnode 2?        ! (ERkIDkER,v)
+
(REkIDkRE,v)Actnode 2?        !
Actpath 2!Actpath 2?       !
(REkIDkRE,v)
(ERkIDkRE,v)Actnode 1?        ! (ERkIDkRE,v)
+
D= [N2
2:Terpmin;N2
2:Terpmax]
(REkIDkRE,v(tn2
3+D))Actnode 1?        !
Actpath 1!Actpath 1?       !
(REkIDkRE,v(tn2
3+D))
(REkIDkER,v)Actnode 2?        ! (REkIDkER,v)
+
D= [N1
2:Terpmin;N1
2:Terpmax]
(REkIDkRE,v(tn1
3+D))Actnode 2?        !
Actpath 2!Actpath 2?       !
(REkIDkRE,v(tn1
3+D))
