--- Page 1 ---
1
CSRP: an Enhanced Protocol for Consistent
Reservation of Resources in A VB/TSN
Daniel Bujosa, Student Member, IEEE , In´es´Alvarez, Student Member, IEEE
and Juli ´an Proenza, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract —The IEEE Audio Video Bridging (A VB) Task Group
(TG) was created to provide Ethernet with soft real-time guaran-
tees. Later on, the TG was renamed to Time-Sensitive Networking
(TSN) and its scope broadened to support hard real-time and
critical applications. The Stream Reservation Protocol (SRP) is a
key work of the TGs as it allows reserving resources in the
network, guaranteeing the required quality of service (QoS).
A VB’s SRP is based on a distributed architecture, while TSN’s
is based on centralized ones. The distributed version of SRP is
supported and used in TSN. Nevertheless, it was not designed
to provide properties that are important for critical applications.
In this work we model SRP using U PPAAL and we study the
termination and consistency. We verify that SRP does not provide
such properties. Furthermore, we propose an improved protocol
called Consistent Stream Reservation Protocol (CSRP) and we
formally verify its correctness using U PPAAL .
Index Terms —A VB, CSRP, SRP, TSN, UPPAAL.
I. I NTRODUCTION
THE IEEE Audio Video Bridging (A VB) Task Group
(TG) [1] was created in 2005. Its purpose was creating
a set of standards to provide Ethernet with soft real-time
capabilities oriented to applications related to audio/video
streaming. Speciﬁcally, the A VB TG started three projects,
namely the IEEE Std 802.1AS [2], dedicated to clock syn-
chronization; the IEEE Std 802.1Qav, which standardized the
Credit-Based Shaper [3]; and, ﬁnally, the IEEE Std 802.1Qat,
which standardized the Stream Reservation Protocol (SRP) [4].
In addition, the TG created a proﬁle that sets a series of rules
to ensure a minimum Quality of Service (QoS) when using
the aforementioned standards. The proﬁle is the IEEE Std
802.1BA-2011: Audio Video Bridging Systems [5]. This set
of standards is commonly referred to as A VB standards.
Over time, the interest in the work done by the TG grew,
also in areas of application beyond audio/video streaming,
such as automotive [6], automation [7] and energy distribu-
tion [8]. For this reason, in 2012 the group was renamed to
Time-Sensitive Networking (TSN) TG and its target broadened
to meet the needs of these new applications, which are usually
based on Critical Distributed Embedded Systems (CDES).
Speciﬁcally, the TSN TG aims at providing Ethernet with
proper support for mixed hard and soft real-time communica-
tions, ﬂexibility of the trafﬁc requirements and fault tolerance
This work is supported in part by the Spanish Agencia Estatal de Investi-
gaci´on (AEI) and in part by FEDER funding through grant TEC2015-70313-R
(AEI/FEDER, UE). Corresponding author: D. Bujosa.
D. Bujosa is with the M ¨alardalen University, V ¨aster ˚as, Sweden (e-mail:
daniel.bujosa.mateu@mdh.se).
I.´Alvarez and J. Proenza are with the University of the Balearic Islands,
Palma, Spain (e-mail: ines.alvarez@uib.es and julian.proenza@uib.es).mechanisms. The set of standards developed by the TG is
usually referred to as TSN standards.
Although the number of standardization projects carried out
by the TSN TG grows at high speed, there are some projects
that can be considered the core of the TG activity. One of
the key projects is SRP, which was originally standardized by
the A VB TG in [4] and subsequently reviewed by the TSN
TG in [9]. SRP allows Ethernet to reserve resources along the
path that connects a transmitter to one or more receivers. More
concretely, SRP only authorizes the transmission of messages
after verifying that the network can convey such messages
with the required QoS. This prevents frame delays over the
predeﬁned limits during transmission and frame losses due
to overﬂows of buffers in bridges. Moreover, SRP allows
modifying the trafﬁc requirements at run-time, providing a
certain degree of ﬂexibility to the network.
Currently, there are three different SRP architectures deﬁned
by the TSN TG in [9]. The ﬁrst one is the fully distributed
architecture, created in the context of A VB; whereas the other
two architectures are centralized and they were deﬁned in
the context of TSN. TSN relies on YANG [10] to conﬁgure
the network when using centralized architectures. YANG is
a data modeling language which allows to deﬁne which
data must be used to conﬁgure a network device and which
is the format of said data. This allows to standardize and
simplify the integration of different processes and applications
in distributed systems.
We must note that, at the moment of writing this paper,
there is no available YANG model to support the online con-
ﬁguration of the reservations of event-triggered trafﬁc using
the centralized architectures proposed in TSN [11]. Therefore,
the distributed version of SRP is still used in TSN to manage
the network resources of event-triggered real-time trafﬁc. For
this reason, and for the interest that certain areas such as
automotive have shown on the distributed SRP [12], [13], [14],
[15], [16], [17], [18], we believe that this version of SRP is
going to continue to be used in the upcoming years.
As we have said, TSN targets critical applications, which
means that all protocols, including every version of SRP,
must exhibit certain properties which are common in CDES to
ensure the proper behavior of the overall system. In this work
we focus on termination and consistency. On the one hand, it is
common for applications executed by CDES to carry certain
actions within a bounded time and, thus, termination must
be guaranteed. On the other hand, nodes in CDES usually
need to have a consistent view of the network or share data
consistently to interact with each other correctly.

--- Page 2 ---
2
Nevertheless, the distributed version of SRP was not de-
veloped to be used in CDESs. Even though we can see
that the distributed SRP does not guarantee termination nor
consistency with a simple analysis, it is not effective to
thoroughly identify the potential scenarios without using any
formal tool. For this reason, in this work we use a formal
model checker to verify in an exhaustive manner whether the
distributed version of SRP provides these properties and in
which cases it does not. From now on, whenever we say SRP
we refer to the distributed version of the protocol.
Speciﬁcally, we use the U PPAAL model checker [19] to
build a model of SRP. Modeling any system or protocol
requires to abstract certain details, as analyzing all possible
scenarios in an exhaustive manner requires a great amount of
memory and time. For this reason, our SRP model abstracts
implementation details of the protocol. Nevertheless, the level
of abstraction used in this work is the typical when modeling
communication networks. Moreover, we validate our model,
understanding the term validate as the evaluation done to
ensure that the model is properly implemented and that it is a
faithful representation of the behavior of SRP.
We then use our U PPAAL model to verify that SRP does not
provide termination nor consistency and to detect in which
scenarios this happens. We use the term verify to refer to
the evaluation done to ensure that a system presents a certain
property, i.e., our system is the right one for our needs. More-
over, we discuss the consequences derived from the absence
of termination and consistency. We propose different ways to
modify SRP in order to provide it with the aforementioned
properties and we select what we consider to be the best one.
Finally, we create a U PPAAL model of the modiﬁed proto-
col, which we call Consistent Stream Reservation Protocol
(CSRP). Again, we validate our model and we verify the
correctness of our design.
The remainder of the document is structured as follows.
Section II summarizes the related work, while Section III
explains the parts of SRP that are most relevant for this
work. Section IV provides an overview of the SRP model
we implemented in U PPAAL while Section V and Section VI
show the termination and consistency issues detected and their
consequences. Section VII describes the solution proposed.
Section VIII describes the changes applied to the SRP model to
implement the proposed CSRP while Section IX and Section X
show the formal veriﬁcation of the correctness of CSRP.
Finally, Section XI summarizes the work done.
II. R ELATED WORK
Due to the great relevance of the A VB and TSN stan-
dards, the community has carried out a signiﬁcant amount
of work related to their study, application and improvement.
For example, in [20] authors describe the requirements for
an A VB network, summarize the methods described in the
standards and describe how they can be used by several higher
layer protocols; while in [21] authors provide an up-to-date
comprehensive survey of the TSN standards and the related
research studies.
Furthermore, there are many works related to the study
of A VB’s efﬁciency, such as [14], [16], [22], [23]. On theother hand, in the work presented in [24] the authors detect
a drawback in the resource reservation de-registration speci-
ﬁcation, which leads to the waste of the network resources,
and proposed some solutions. Moreover, some works present
solutions to provide fault tolerance against permanent faults
using SRP [25].
Nevertheless, to the best of the authors’ knowledge, there
are no works related to the study of the termination and
consistency of the distributed version of SRP, apart from
the preliminary work presented in [26]. We next list the
contributions of this paper compared to the work presented
in [26]. In this work we carry out an improvement of the
UPPAAL model of SRP resource reservation mechanism which
is explained in more detail in Section IV. We study the
termination and consistency of the reservations in different
scenarios and components with this new U PPAAL model. We
design an enhanced version of SRP that does exhibit the
termination and consistency properties, thereby eliminating
all the issues we have identiﬁed for SRP and that provides
the network devices with enough information to make rather
complex decisions about the reservation of resources within a
bounded time. Finally, we implement the proposed solution,
i.e., CSRP, in the U PPAAL model and we verify that it is
correct.
III. SRP O VERVIEW
As we anticipate in Section I, SRP is a key piece for many of
the projects developed by the A VB and TSN TGs. Speciﬁcally,
SRP is key to provide real-time guarantees to Ethernet-based
communications. More concretely, SRP allows verifying that
there are enough resources in the network to convey the trafﬁc
and reserving said resources. This allows to bound the end-to-
end delay of the frames and to avoid the loss of packets due to
the buffer overﬂow. Moreover, SRP can be used to modify the
trafﬁc requirements at run-time, giving the network a certain
degree of ﬂexibility.
SRP follows the publisher-subscriber paradigm, where the
publisher is called talker and the subscribers, listeners. The
real-time data communications are made through streams. A
stream is a logical communication channel that carries trafﬁc
deﬁned by a set of parameters, such as the period or frame
size. For example, if one temperature sensor, the talker, wants
to transmit its measurements with a period of 10 ms and a
payload of 1 byte to other nodes, the listeners, the network
has to check that there are enough resources and, if there are,
it must create a stream with the speciﬁed period and payload.
As we have already said, there are three different SRP
architectures. Nevertheless, as this work focuses on the dis-
tributed version of SRP, next we only explain the resource
reservation mechanism of this version. Further details on the
other architectures can be found in [9].
It is important to note that all the decisions regarding the
reservation of resources are taken using local information only.
Nevertheless, there is important information related to the
reservations that must be propagated throughout the network;
e.g. the amount of resources needed for a stream, whether
a certain bridge has resources available or not, etc. This

--- Page 3 ---
3
T
 B1
 B2
 L
AC exec
AC execTA
TA/F
AC exec &
conﬁg resourcesTA/F
LAF/R
AC exec &
conﬁg resources
AC exec &
conﬁg resources
Stream DataLAF/R
LAF/R
Fig. 1: Time diagram of the resource reservation mechanism
in a network with a line topology.
information is conveyed within special messages called talker
and listener attributes. The arrows in Fig.2 represent the
direction in which the attributes are propagated throughout
the network. Next we describe the process in detail.
Fig.1 shows the time diagram of the resource reservation
mechanism in a network with a line topology. This network
consists of one talker (T), one listener (L) and two bridges
(B1 and B2). As we can see in the ﬁgure, when a talker
wants to transmit a set of frames with certain parameters, it
must ﬁrst create the stream to convey such frames. To create
a stream the talker has to declare its intention to communicate
by transmitting in broadcast mode a special message called
Talker Advertise (TA) message. This message conveys stream
identiﬁcation information, as well as the resources needed
to convey the trafﬁc. This information is then used in the
rest of devices of the network to check whether there are
enough resources for the stream so that it can be created. This
evaluation of available resources is called Admission Control
(AC). Note that SRP relies on other mechanisms that eliminate
the loops in the network to prevent the TA message from
circulating the network indeﬁnitely.
The TA message transmitted by the talker is received by the
bridge connected to it. When a bridge receives a TA message,
each forwarding port checks if it has enough resources for
the stream or not by executing the AC. In this protocol, a
forwarding port is any port through which the TA message
was not received, e.g., the port that connects B1 to B2 in
Fig.1. If the port has enough resources, the TA message isforwarded to the next device, i.e., the next bridge or node. On
the other hand, if the port does not have enough resources,
it sends a so called Talker Failed (TF) message instead. A
TF message conveys the same information as the TA message
plus the reason for the failure in the reservation. Bridges that
receive a TA message transmitted by another bridge through
one of their ports behave as we have just described. In contrast,
if the message received is a TF message, bridges transmit a TF
message through all their forwarding ports, without carrying
the AC.
Regarding nodes, we have to note that not all nodes are
listeners for all streams. Therefore, if a node that does not
want to become a listener of the stream receives a TA or TF
message, it does not carry any further actions. In fact, it does
not even inform the talker about its lack of interest in the
stream. On the other hand, if a node receives a TA or TF
message and is willing to listen to the stream there are three
possible scenarios to consider: (i) the listener receives a TF
message and cannot therefore become a receiver of the stream
that is being created, so it sends a message called Listener
Asking Failed (LAF) to the bridge; (ii) the listener receives a
TA message but, while checking its resources it realizes that
it does not have enough resources to receive the stream, so
it sends an LAF message to the bridge; and, (iii) the listener
receives a TA message and, while checking its resources it
realizes that it has enough resources to receive the stream, so
it sends a message called Listener Ready (LR) message to the
bridge.
Each port of the bridges connected to a listener can receive
an LR or LAF message. If a port receives an LAF message it
does nothing else. If a port receives an LR message the port
checks its resources again. If it does not have enough resources
the port changes the LR received to an LAF; otherwise, if it
has enough resources, the port reserves the resources ( conﬁg
resources in the ﬁgure). Whenever a bridge is connected to
several bridges or nodes, it may have several listener responses
to forward. In this case the bridge combines the responses into
a single one and transmits it towards the talker. The result of
combining the responses is the following: (i) if the bridge
receives an LR in all the ports, it transmits to the talker an
LR message; if the bridge receives an LAF in all the ports, it
transmits to the talker another LAF message; and, if the bridge
receives LR messages in some ports and LAF messages in
other ports, it will transmits to the talker a new message called
Listener Ready Failed (LRF) message. Whenever a bridge
receives an LRF message it forwards an LRF message to the
talker, regardless of the other listener attributes it receives.
Note that in Fig.1 listener attributes cannot be LRF because
in a linear topology there is only one port receiving responses,
therefore, bridges cannot receive LR messages through some
ports and LAF messages through other ports.
Finally, the talker waits until it receives an LR or LRF
message to start the data transmission. Once the stream has
been created, the talker can delete it at any time by means
of the unadvertise stream mechanism. The talker transmits a
message to eliminate the stream from all devices. This message
is also transmitted in broadcast mode to ensure that all bridges
and listeners receive the indication to eliminate the stream.

--- Page 4 ---
4
We call a reservation distribution to each possible combi-
nation of paths that reserve resources. We need to note that
we consider to be good and bad reservation distributions. For
instance, let us assume that we have a network with a star
topology with one talker, two listeners and one bridge in
the middle. One example of good reservation distribution is
one where all the ports have reserved the required resources,
whereas one example of bad reservation distribution is one
where the listener ports have reserved the required resources
but the talker port has not. In this last case there is a waste
of resources in the links to the slaves because, as the port of
the talker is not reserved, the slaves are not going to receive
anything from that talker, regardless of their reservations.
IV. SRP U PPAAL MODEL
This section introduces the model developed in this work.
The model is implemented using the U PPAAL model checker
which is a tool for modeling real-time systems and formally
verifying their properties [19]. In U PPAAL the systems are
modeled by means of interconnected timed automata (ﬁnite-
state machines extended with clocks that progress at the same
pace). Each automaton is speciﬁed by a template that can
be instantiated several times. At the same time, templates
are constructed using locations, edges, local variables and
local clocks, and can synchronize through different types of
channels.
In addition, U PPAAL provides a formal query language that
allows deﬁning properties that the system should exhibit.
Using the model and the queries as inputs, the tool performs
an exhaustive check of the properties, i.e., it explores all the
possible execution paths of the model to verify whether the
properties hold. After this, U PPAAL informs the user about the
result and, if a property does not hold, it shows an execution
path in which the property is violated.
In this paper we abstract the description of the model.
Section III of [27] describes our model in an exhaustive way.
The complete model ﬁles and the ﬁles used for its veriﬁcation
can also be found in [27].
Fig.2 (a) represents the network we modeled with U PPAAL
while Fig.2 (b) represents the resulting U PPAAL model. As
can be seen, our SRP model is made of 5 different tem-
plates: Talker template, Stream template, Listener template,
BridgeInput template and BridgeOutput template (represented
as T, S, L, BI, BO respectively in Fig.2(b)). These templates
model the different relevant actions of the protocol carried out
by the talkers, bridges and listeners. Speciﬁcally, as we can
see in Fig.2, our model has one instantiation of the Talker
and Stream templates to model the actions carried out by
one talker. It also has three instantiations of the Listener
template to model the actions carried out by three listeners.
And, ﬁnally, it has 3 instantiations of the BridgeInput template
and ﬁve instantiations of the BridgeOutput template to model
the actions carried out by three A VB bridges. Other network
elements, such as links, are represented in the model by
variables, clocks and channels.
As we can see in Fig.2(a), and as we have already said,
our model is made up of one talker, three bridges and three
BI
BI
BIBO
BO
BO
BOS T
BO
Talker
Bridge 1
Bridge 2
Bridge 3
Listener 1
Listener 2
Listener 3L
L
LTalker Attribute transmissionListener Attribute transmission(a) Modeled network con-
sisting of one talker,
three listeners and three
bridges.(b) Abstraction of the net-
work model made with
UPPAAL .
Fig. 2: Representation of the modeled network and its model
by means of templates where T represents the Talker template,
S the Stream template, BI the BridgeInput template, BO the
BridgeOutput template and L the Listener template.
listeners, each connected to one bridge. We decided to use
three listeners for many reasons. The ﬁrst reason is that, in
many critical systems is usual to use active replication, using
three replicas which perform majority vote on each result, in
order to tolerate the failure of nodes. Moreover, three listeners
are enough to have all relevant combinations of responses of
the listeners. This is because, as listeners can only be or not
interested in the stream or interested with or without resources,
having more listeners would increase the times one of this
options appears but would not produce a different scenario.
On the other hand, we connected one listener to each bridge
to have paths with different lengths and end-to-end delays,
factors that increase the likelihood of encountering consistency
issues. Finally, we used a line topology because SRP relies on
other protocols that eliminate the loops of the network, such
as the Rapid Spanning Tree Protocol [28] or the Shortest Path
Bridging Protocol [29].
Like any model of a system, our SRP model has a series
of abstractions. First, we only model the transmission of one
stream because allowing the model to transmit several streams
would lead to the explosion of the state space without provid-
ing any beneﬁt, on the contrary, it would make the model more
difﬁcult to analyze. We neither model the transmission of data
frames because it is not part of SRP and it would increase the
complexity of the model unnecessarily, as it would distort the
model without giving greater precision to the analysis of the
protocol. Finally, we did not take into account the presence of
errors for several reasons. First, the property issues we detected

--- Page 5 ---
5
appear in the absence of faults in the network. Secondly, there
are some works like the one presented in [30] that allow
tolerating faults in the channel by using proactive replication
of frames. It is important to note that this level of abstraction
is typical for network models and that we have validated our
model to ensure that it is a faithful representation of SRP.
The model used in [26] abstracted the number of ports of
the devices. Speciﬁcally, all devices had a single reception
port and a single transmission port, even though A VB bridges
can have an undetermined number of ports. This abstraction
reduced the state space and the complexity of the Bridge tem-
plate, and, in addition, avoided specifying a speciﬁc number
of ports on the bridges which would decrease the generality
of the model. However, this abstraction moved slightly away
from reality, reduced the information present in the bridges and
transferred certain decisions from the bridges’ output ports to
the input ports of the devices connected to them.
In this work we present a more detailed, yet analyzable
and general model. Speciﬁcally, our model divides the Bridge
template into two, one for the reception port of the talker
attributes and transmission of the listener attributes and another
for the reception of the listener attributes and transmission of
the talker attributes. These templates can be instantiated as
many times as necessary for each bridge, so the generality
of the model is maintained. In addition, the model conforms
more to reality and allows to keep decisions and information
on the bridge. Nonetheless, this new model has an increased
state space compared to the one in [26], which increases the
time required for the analysis.
V. E VALUATION OF THE TERMINATION OF SRP
As we said in Section I, termination is a basic property of
the CDESs. Thus, all TSN protocols should provide it in order
to support this kind of systems, even more if we talk about
SRP which is responsible to accept the streams and reserve
the resources, a key piece to ensure a good behavior of the
system.
This analysis does not aim at demonstrating that the dis-
tributed version of SRP does not present termination, since
this is relatively obvious once we know the protocol. Instead,
we use it to analyze in depth the cases of non-termination and
their consequences. In addition, this analysis is helpful to ﬁnd
a solution to the problem and to have a reference to evaluate
the proposed solution.
In this work we differentiate two levels of termination:
termination for the application and for the infrastructure. The
ﬁrst one affects the nodes and, therefore, the application.
The lack of termination at the application level can cause
malfunction of some critical applications. This is due to the
fact that many of those applications require to know the result
of the reservation to make important decisions.
The infrastructure level refers to the bridges of the network.
Even if in an ideal system these devices do not require
termination, it is important to provide it to prevent unforeseen
and undesirable effects in future reservations. For example, if a
bridge receives many requests without resolution, it would be
possible to cause an overﬂow of the buffer that could preventthe bridge from accepting new reservation requests or force it
to eliminate some already accepted ones.
We next present the problems detected but it is important
to note that the issues are mainly due to the fact that in SRP
listeners do not inform the bridges nor the talkers when they
are not interested in binding to a stream. Section IV of [27]
shows and explains in more detail the queries used.
A. Termination at the Application Level
Using the U PPAAL model, we ﬁnd a series of scenarios
where the talker does not receive any response from the
listeners and, thus, it waits indeﬁnitely. This can happen
even in the absence of faults, when there are no listeners
interested in the stream. As we have said before, many critical
applications require to know the result of the reservations to
make important decisions. Thus, the lack of termination can
cause a malfunction of those applications, such as blocking
the decision process or leading to incorrect decisions due to
the lack of knowledge.
To check the termination for the application level and
determine the causes of the issues detected we used the query
(Q1), which corresponds to query 1 in [27]. This query checks
if there is a path of states in the system in which the talker
never receives any listener response. The query is satisﬁed
which means that there are scenarios in which a talker does
not receive any listener response leading to a termination issue.
Then we checked if it is possible that this happens if at least
one listener is interested in the stream. To do that we used
another query (Q2), which corresponds to query 2 in [27]. This
query checks if, at the end of the listeners actions, the response
of at least one listener, i.e., there is at least one listener
interested in the stream, implies the reception of responses by
the talker. This query is satisﬁed, which means that if at least
one listener is interested in the stream, the talker receives at
least one response. Finally, we checked that the non-reception
of responses by the talker was due to the non-transmission
of responses by the listeners. This was checked with another
query (Q3), which corresponds to query 3 in [27]. This query
checks if, at the end of the listeners actions, if no listener has
responded, the talker receives no response.
The use of the previous queries allowed us to determine
that the only case where termination is not achieved in the
application level is when no listener is interested in the stream
that the talker is announcing.
B. Termination at the Infrastructure Level
A bridge that forwards the request of a talker waits for the
responses of the listeners indeﬁnitely. Also, bridges register
talkers’ attributes in all their ports, and they do so for all
the talkers willing to transmit. Similar to what happens for
termination at the application level, we ﬁnd some scenarios
where some bridges do not receive any response from the
listeners, even in the absence of faults and even if the ﬁrst
level of termination is actually achieved by the protocol. Thus,
bridges can wait indeﬁnitely, e.g., if there are no listeners
interested in the stream connected directly or indirectly to
the bridge. This can cause an unnecessary use of memory

--- Page 6 ---
6
in bridges and can later prevent the creation of streams with
listeners willing to bind due to a lack of memory.
To check the termination at the infrastructure level, and
determine the causes of the issues detected, we used three
different queries for each port. These queries are similar
to the ones used in the veriﬁcation of the termination at
the application level, but have the particularity that must be
checked for each port of the bridge. The ﬁrst of these three
queries (Q4), which corresponds to queries 4, 7, 10, 13 and
16 in [27], checks if there is any path of states in the system
in which the port of the bridge does not receive any listener
response. As the query is satisﬁed, it is possible that the port
of a bridge does not receive any listener response, leading to
a termination issue in the bridges.
Then, we used another query (Q5), which corresponds to
queries 5, 8, 11, 14 and 17 in [27], to verify if this is possible
even if at least one listener connected directly or indirectly to
the bridge is interested in the stream. This query checks if the
response of at least one listener, i.e., if at least one listener is
interested in the stream, leads to the reception of responses by
the bridge port. As this query is satisﬁed, if at least one listener
is interested in the stream, the port of the bridge receives at
least one response.
Finally, we checked that the non-reception of responses
by the port of a bridge was due to the non-transmission of
responses by the listeners connected directly or indirectly to
the port of the bridge. This was checked with the third query
(Q6), which corresponds to queries 6, 9, 12, 15 and 18 in [27].
This query checks if when no listeners have responded at the
end of the listeners actions, so there are no listeners interested
in the stream, the port of the bridge receives no response.
The use of these queries allowed us to conclude that the only
case where there is no termination at the infrastructure level
is the one where no listeners connected directly or indirectly
to a bridge are interested in the stream.
VI. E VALUATION OF THE CONSISTENCY OF SRP
As it was introduced in Section I, consistency is an im-
portant property in CDESs. For instance, SRP should do the
reservation of resources in a consistent manner if we intend
to have several replicated nodes. The nodes should have the
same inputs and outputs, which cannot be guaranteed without
a consistent reservation of resources. This is just a simple
example that illustrates the importance of consistency, even
though consistency can be required in any distributed system.
As in Section V, this analysis was not performed to demon-
strate that the distributed version of SRP does not present
consistency, which is relatively obvious once you know the
protocol, but to analyze in depth the scenarios that can cause
inconsistencies and their consequences. In addition, again, this
analysis is helpful to ﬁnd a solution to the problem and to have
a reference to evaluate the proposed solution.
As in the previous section, we differentiate two levels of
consistency: consistency for the application level and for the
infrastructure level. Again, the ﬁrst one affects the nodes
and, therefore, the application. The lack of consistency at
the application level can cause malfunction of some criticalapplications. Some of the applications targeted by TSN require
the different nodes to carry out coordinated actions because,
e.g., they may rely on active replication of the nodes. In
these applications, consistency in the communications is key
to guarantee the correct operation of the overall system. The
ﬁrst step towards achieving consistent communications is to
reserve the network resources consistently. Thus, at this level,
SRP should guarantee that enough listeners have resources
reserved for the communication before starting to transmit.
As before, the infrastructure level refers to the bridges of the
network. As we will see later, inconsistencies when reserving
resources in bridges can cause the waste of resources. This, in
the long term, causes that streams, for which there would be
sufﬁcient resources, cannot be declared due to the resources
reserved and wasted in some bridges.
As in the evaluation of the termination, despite the impor-
tance of consistency, we found some issues in both levels even
in the absence of faults. We next present the problems detected
but it is important to note that the issues are mainly due to the
fact that information related to the reservations is propagated
in a single direction. That is, the talker attribute transmitted
by a talker is forwarded always towards the listeners; while,
when listeners and bridges reply to a stream declaration,
the information is only forwarded towards the talker. Thus,
not all the devices involved in the reservation of a stream
receive the same information. We next describe the consistency
issues detected and their effects. Section V of [27] shows and
explains in more detail the queries used.
A. Consistency at the Application Level
In SRP, resources can be reserved for a subset of listeners,
even when there are listeners willing to communicate that
do not have resources to do it. In this case, the talker only
communicates to a subset of listeners, generating an unnoticed
inconsistency in the exchange of data. This means that actually
starting a stream (with some listeners) has priority over doing
it consistently (with either all or none of them). In addition,
talkers cannot know which listener has enough resources and
which one does not. A talker only knows if all interested
listeners have enough resources when it receives LR messages;
if all interested listeners have not enough resources when it
receives LAF messages; if no listener is interested when it does
not receive any answer; or, if at least one interested listener
has enough resources when it receives LRF messages. This
limited information does not allow the talker to take intelligent
decisions. Furthermore, we have to take into account that
this information can change during the execution of the SRP
mechanism e.g. it is possible for a talker to receive an LR
message and then receive an LRF message. Something similar
can happen in listeners. They may be interested in the stream
and have sufﬁcient resources, but they do not receive anything
because during the transmission of the response, the route to
the talker did not have enough resources.
Furthermore, even when all listeners willing to bind have
enough resources to do so, there are scenarios where con-
sistency for the application is not guaranteed all the time.
This can happen for two reasons, ﬁrst the paths between a

--- Page 7 ---
7
talker and different listeners may differ in length and end-to-
end delay and, second, the talker starts transmitting as soon
as it receives the response of one listener ready to receive.
Therefore, some listeners willing to bind to the stream, with
enough resources throughout the whole path towards the talker,
may miss the ﬁrst frames transmitted by the talker. This can
cause, for example, two replicas to be in two different states
so that, although from that moment they receive the same data,
they will not provide the same result.
To check the consistency for the application level, and to
determine the causes of the issues detected, we used query
(Q7), which corresponds to queries 19, 20 and 21 in [27],
to check if there is at least one state in which the talker is
already transmitting, a listener is interested in the stream and,
from his point of view, has sufﬁcient resources but the route
from the talker to the listener has not reserved the necessary
resources for that stream. This test shows that the talker can
start transmitting even when there are interested listeners that
will not be able to receive the stream. Moreover, it also shows
that there are listeners that believe they are going to receive
the stream but never will.
Another query (Q8), which corresponds to query 22 in
[27], is used to verify that, even when all interested listeners
can bind to the stream, some of them may miss the ﬁrst
messages because the talker starts transmitting before ﬁnishing
the resource reservation. Speciﬁcally, it checks if a talker
transmitting, a listener waiting for the stream and the route
not yet reserved may lead the system to a state in which the
route will never be reserved. As the query is not satisﬁed we
proved the inconsistency in the data received at the beginning
of the stream.
B. Consistency at the Infrastructure Level
In this work we also ﬁnd out that bridges can make
inconsistent decisions regarding the reservation of resources of
a stream. Speciﬁcally, in SRP it is possible that some bridges
reserve resources for a stream but other bridges in the same
route to the listener do not. This implies a waste of resources
in the bridges that reserved the resources because the listener
for which they reserved the resources is not going to receive
the stream because of the bridges in the same route that did not
reserve the resources. This may not be problematic at ﬁrst, but,
with an utilization close to 100%, this may cause streams, for
which there would be sufﬁcient resources, cannot be declared
due to the resources wasted in these bridges.
To check the consistency for the infrastructure level, and
to determine the causes of the issues detected, we used query
(Q9), which corresponds to queries 23 and 24 in [27], to check
if there is at least one state, after the mechanism has been
executed, in which the stream is being transmitted while the
link that supplies one or more bridges is not reserved but the
links of the bridges are. This reservation distribution implies
a waste of resources in all the links reserved by the bridges
affected because, as the link that supplies them is not reserved,
they are not going to receive data messages from this stream.
Finally, another query (Q10), which corresponds to query 25
in [27], checks if the transmission of the stream always leadsto one of all correct distributions of resource reservations. As
it is not satisﬁed, we can determine that incorrect distributions
of resource reservations (with waste of resources) may happen
using SRP.
VII. CSRP D ESCRIPTION
We designed a series of solutions to deal with the drawbacks
described in Sections V and VI. The main objective is to pro-
vide network devices with a consistent view of the reservation
of resources so that they can make rather complex decisions
within a bounded time.
A trivial solution could consist in modifying the current
SRP in the following way:
1) The talker multicasts the talker attribute instead of broad-
casting it. With this change, the network avoids sending
the talker attribute to non-interested listeners, eliminating
the termination issue of the application and infrastructure
level. The problem is that it makes the network less open
and adaptive, understanding open as a network where
nodes can join or leave a stream dynamically and adaptive
as a network where stream requirements change during
run-time.
2) A bridge that has decided that it has enough resources
when retransmitting the talker attribute cannot change
this decision when it receives the listeners’ responses.
This would allow bidirectional propagation of decisions
without adding another round of transmissions solving the
consistency issue at the infrastructure level. The problem
is that it can hinder the creation of streams that attempt
to be declared simultaneously and does not prevent the
waste of resources in unnecessary reservations.
3) The listeners multicast the listener responses, instead of
unicasting them, conveying their ID in the response. In
this way the listeners can inform the talker, the bridges
and other listeners of whether they can receive or not,
solving the consistency issue at the application level.The
problem is that listeners can ﬂood the network with
control messages because each of them would transmit
its status in multicast mode.
4) The talker, listener and bridges must make decisions de-
terministically based on the information received which,
in the absence of faults, will be consistent.
Despite solving the problems detected, this solution greatly
modiﬁes the mechanism and has several limitations. For these
reasons we decided to develop the following solution which
is a compendium of the different solutions proposed in [26].
The most relevant differences between this new protocol
and previous proposals are:
1) The listener responses convey the ID of the listeners that
sent them. This gives the talkers and bridges the necessary
information to know which listeners can receive and
which not.
2) Bridges’ and listeners’ decisions can change depending
on the decision taken by the talker.
3) The talker, after a bounded time limited by a timer in
it, will decide which listener can receive the stream and
which cannot based on the information received. After

--- Page 8 ---
8
this, the talker will send the result of his decision to all the
devices so that they have a consistent view of the status
of the reservations and carry out the necessary actions.
Even if this solution requires some changes in SRP, it can
be implemented in a way that non-modiﬁed devices can still
work normally. For example, in the implementation we are
proposing next, listeners do not need to implement the solution
although this would imply that these listeners would not have
a consistent view of the network. Furthermore, it provides the
talker the necessary information to make a centralized, rather
complex and bounded in time decision which, in addition,
will be sent to the rest of the network to maintain the
consistent view of the reservation of resources. Moreover,
all this would be achieved by adding only one additional
broadcast transmission, the one by the talker with the ﬁnal
decision, avoiding the multiple multicast transmissions of the
listeners added in the previously proposed trivial solution.
The name of this new protocol is CSRP and its resource
reservation mechanism is as follows:
The transmission of talker and listener attributes proceeds as
in SRP, as it is described in Section III. The ﬁrst modiﬁcation
of the protocol is found in the transmission of listeners
attributes by the bridges. Bridges receive the listener attributes
and combine them to send them to the talker. In order to
accomplish this, bridges analyze the responses received by
each port and then generate the new response that they
transmit towards the talker. Whenever a bridge receives an
LR message through a port, it checks whether the port has
enough resources. If there are enough resources, the LR re-
mains unchanged and the port reserves the necessary resources
provisionally, instead of deﬁnitely like in SRP; otherwise, the
LR becomes an LAF message. On the other hand, if the bridge
receives an LAF message the value is left unchanged and the
port does not reserve the resources. In case of concurrent
requests, and this is another change with respect to SRP,
the provisional reservation is made for the ﬁrst LR or LRF
message received, while the rest are transferred to a ﬁrst-in,
ﬁrst-out (FIFO) list. The items in this list are only deleted
when their reservation processes are completed or when the
reservation of resources is conﬁrmed.
After processing the listener attributes, each bridge must
join them to forward an updated one to the talker. This process
is the same as in SRP and is described in Section III. It is
important to note that bridges do not wait for the reception
of all the listener attributes, but they are continuously joining
and retransmitting them as they receive new answers. In this
way a bridge can transmit an LR or LAF message and then
transmit an LRF message, just like in SRP. Nevertheless, in
CSRP bridges must specify in the listener attribute which
listeners can receive and which listeners cannot. To do so,
CSRP relies on two lists, one for successful reservations and
one for unsuccessful ones. Speciﬁcally, edge bridges introduce
the identiﬁer of the node that sends the LR or LAF message
in the corresponding list and sends them embedded in the
response to the talker. Whenever a bridge receives a response
from another bridge, it checks the lists and updates them
accordingly when joining the responses.
The talker waits for the answers for a bounded period oftime. This time will depend on the application, topology and
size of the network. Basically, it must ensure that the response
from the farthest slave has enough time to reach the talker.
This is implemented by means of a local timer in the talker
which is activated at the beginning of the transmission of the
TA and expires after the predeﬁned time. After that time, the
talker uses the lists with the nodes identiﬁers to know which
listeners can receive and which listeners cannot and it decides
whether to transmit the stream to all the listeners that can
receive, to a subgroup or to none of them. This decision is
communicated by transmitting in broadcast mode a message
called Final Decision (FD), which contains a list of listeners
that will receive the stream and listeners that will not receive
the stream.
When a bridge receives the FD message it knows which
listeners must receive the stream and which must not. In this
way, bridges can lock the resources or eliminate unnecessary
reservations. Listeners, on the other hand, can know whether
they are subscribed to the stream or not and do not wait
indeﬁnitely for the data transmission.
Once the FD message has been transmitted and the resource
reservation mechanism has ﬁnished, the talker starts transmit-
ting the data stream. Finally, as in standard SRP, once the
stream has been created, the talker can delete it at any time
by means of the unadvertised stream mechanism.
VIII. CSRP U PPAAL MODEL
The U PPAAL model of CSRP has the same topology, same
templates, same instantiations of the templates and same
abstractions as the model of the standardized SRP explained in
Section IV. To formally verify the correction of the improved
mechanism (CSRP’s resource reservation mechanism), we
modiﬁed as little as possible the model shown above to include
the changes proposed in our solution. Again, the templates and
the modiﬁcations applied to them can be found in Section VII
of [27]. The complete model ﬁles and the ﬁles used for its
veriﬁcation can also be found in [27]. We next explain in an
abstract way the main changes done to the SRP model.
In the Talker template we basically eliminated the instanta-
neous transmission of data that occurred as soon as the speaker
received an LR or LRF message. On the other hand, we added
a timer to deﬁne the waiting time for listener responses and
implement the transmission of the FD message.
In the bridge templates we implemented the reception and
forwarding of the FD message and the mechanisms to change
the resource reservations based on it.
Finally, in the Listener template we implemented the recep-
tion of the FD message and the mechanism so that listeners
know if they can receive or not. It is important to remember
that these modiﬁcations in listeners are not essential. However,
not implementing them would imply that listeners remain
unsure of whether they will receive or not until they receive
any data message of the stream.
IX. E VALUATION OF THE TERMINATION OF CSRP
We next describe the veriﬁcation of CSRP from the ter-
mination point of view. Again, we address the issues at the

--- Page 9 ---
9
application and infrastructure level. To do that, we used the
same queries that proved the non-termination in SRP plus
some additional queries. These are explained in more detail
in Section VIII of [27].
Just like in SRP, if in CSRP no nodes want to bind to
a stream, the talker and bridges do not receive any listener
responses. Thus, we provide termination with the timer in the
talker and the FD message in the bridges, as now both, talkers
and bridges, know when to stop waiting for listener responses.
A. Termination at the Application Level
In CSRP it is still possible that the talker does not re-
ceive any response from the listeners (see Sub-section V-A).
However, using the timer, the talker always stops waiting for
an answer, makes a decision based on the information it has
received and informs about it by means of the FD message to
the rest of the network. We used the U PPAAL model of CSRP
to verify the behavior of the protocol. Speciﬁcally, we check
that all the nodes ﬁnish the resource reservation process within
a bounded time determined by the timer in the talker and the
distance between the talker and the listeners.
To check the termination at the application level of CSRP
we used the same three queries that we used to evaluate SRP
(Q1, Q2 and Q3), which correspond to queries 26, 27 and 28
in [27]. The results of evaluating these queries allow us to
determine that in CSRP it is still possible that the talker never
receives any response from the listeners. However, we used
another query (Q11), which corresponds to query 29 in [27],
to evaluate whether the talker stops waiting for a response
after the timer has expired, makes a decision based on the
received information and informs about it by means of the FD
message to the other devices of the network. This query proved
that CSRP provides termination at the application level.
B. Termination at the Infrastructure Level
With this evaluation we see how bridges’ ports may not
receive any listener response. However, thanks to the FD
message sent by the talker, bridges always stop waiting for
an answer and change their reserved resources based on the
talker decision. We used the U PPAAL model of SRP to verify
that all bridges ﬁnish the resource reservation process within
a bounded time.
Using the same queries as the ones used to evaluate SRP
(Q4, Q5 and Q6), which correspond now to queries 30 to 36,
38 to 40, 42 to 44 and 46 to 48 in [27], we found that bridges’
ports may not receive any listener response. However, another
query (Q12), which corresponds to queries 33, 37, 41, 45 and
49 in [27], demonstrated that, thanks to the FD message, the
bridges always stop waiting for an answer and change their
reserved resources based on the talker decision. Thus, CSRP
provides termination at the infrastructure level.
X. E VALUATION OF THE CONSISTENCY OF CSRP
In this section we describe the veriﬁcation of CSRP from the
consistency point of view, at the application and infrastructure
level. To do so, we use the same queries that proved theinconsistency in SRP plus some additional queries. These
are explained in detail in Section IX of [27]. Nevertheless,
this solution solves all the detected consistency issues. We
achieved this by centralizing the decisions in the talker and
ensuring the homogeneous propagation of information related
to the reservation of resources.
A. Consistency at the Application Level
First, note that this solution does not aim at providing
resources for all the listeners that want to bind. Instead, it
aims at ensuring that all listeners know what is the status of
the reservation regardless of whether they can receive or not.
This was not guaranteed in the standard SRP but it is achieved
in CSRP thanks to the FD message. We verify the consistent
view of the network. Speciﬁcally we prove that when CSRP
ﬁnishes the reservation process, all devices know which nodes
are subscribed to the stream and which are not, including the
nodes.
By using query Q7, which corresponds now to queries 50,
53 and 56 in [27], also used to evaluate SRP, we found that
in CSRP there are states where a listener wants to bind to
the stream and it thinks it can but the resources have not been
reserved. However, another query (Q13), which corresponds to
queries 51, 52, 54, 55, 57 and 58 in [27], demonstrated that,
thanks to the FD message, now listeners know when they can
and when they cannot receive the stream.
Finally, we used two queries (Q14 and Q15), which corre-
spond to queries 59 and 60 in [27], to verify the consistent
view of the network. These queries verify that always at the
end of the reservation process all the lists with the successful
and unsuccessful reservations explained in Section VII are
consistent. Therefore, we can conclude that CSRP provides
consistency at the application level.
B. Consistency at the Infrastructure Level
Finally, at the infrastructure level, we verify that CSRP
avoids wasting resources with unnecessary reservations thanks
to the FD message that informs the bridges about which
listeners have been able to bind to the stream and which
listeners have not, so that the bridges can free the resources
they reserved for the listeners that cannot receive. We carry
out this veriﬁcation using the CSRP U PPAAL model.
To check the consistency at the infrastructure level of CSRP
we used queries Q9 and Q10, which correspond now to queries
61, 62 and 63 in [27], also used in the evaluation of SRP. These
queries prove that, at the infrastructure level, not only we
avoid wasting resources with unnecessary reservations but also
only the appropriate reservation distributions are generated.
Moreover, we can conclude that CSRP provides consistency
at the infrastructure level.
XI. C ONCLUSIONS
The IEEE A VB TG deﬁned a series of standards to provide
Ethernet with soft-real time capabilities. Later on, the TG
broadened its scope and was renamed to TSN. The new
TG aims at providing hard real-time guarantees, ﬂexibility of

--- Page 10 ---
10
the network conﬁguration and fault tolerance mechanisms to
Ethernet. Therefore, the work carried out by the TSN TG is
intended to enable the use of standard Ethernet as the network
technology for critical distributed embedded systems. One of
the most important projects of the TGs is SRP, as it allows
to reserve resources to provide timing guarantees and prevent
frame losses.
In this work we present a model of the A VB’s distributed
version of SRP in U PPAAL . Thanks to it, we identify multiple
scenarios in which SRP does not exhibit termination nor
consistency and we determine the possible adverse effects that
their lack can cause. Moreover, we have proved that these
properties can be violated even in the absence of faults. Some
of the problems detected and their effects are: (i) talkers and
bridges in most of the cases do not know whether the resource
reservation process is over, (ii) talkers never know which
listeners have bound to the stream and which ones have not,
(iii) subscribed listeners can miss the ﬁrst data messages of
the stream and (iv) some bridges can waste resources because
they don’t know if the bridges they depend on (bridges located
on the route between the talker and them) have been able to
reserve resources for them.
Thus, in this work we propose an enhanced version of SRP
that enforces termination and consistency, thereby eliminating
all the issues we have identiﬁed for SRP. This solution is called
CSRP and not only it solves the aforementioned problems, but
it also provides the nodes and bridges with enough information
to make rather complex decisions about the reservation of
resources within a bounded time. For instance, now a talker
can advertise a stream and know which listeners can receive
and which ones cannot, after a certain time determined by an
internal clock. Based on this information, the talker can decide
whether all, a subset or none of the nodes that manifest their
interest in the stream can subscribe.
Finally, we have developed a U PPAAL model of CSRP and
we have used it to verify that CSRP provides termination
and consistency to the reservation of resources in the absence
of faults. Further work will be done to extend the study of
the behavior of CSRP in other scenarios and even using an
experimental implementation to evaluate new aspects, such as
its performance in real networks.
REFERENCES
[1] (2019, April) IEEE Audio and Video Bridging Task Group. https://1.
ieee802.org/tsn/.
[2] “IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area Networks - Timing
and Synchronization for Time-Sensitive Applications in Bridged Local
Area Networks,” IEEE Std 802.1AS-2011 , pp. 1–292, March 2011.
[3] “IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area Networks - Virtual
Bridged Local Area Networks Amendment 12: Forwarding and Queuing
Enhancements for Time-Sensitive Streams,” IEEE Std 802.1Qav-2009
(Amendment to IEEE Std 802.1Q-2005) , pp. C1–72, Jan 2009.
[4] “IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area Networks—Virtual
Bridged Local Area Networks Amendment 14: Stream Reservation Pro-
tocol (SRP),” IEEE Std 802.1Qat-2010 (Revision of IEEE Std 802.1Q-
2005) , Sept 2010.
[5] “IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area Networks–Audio
Video Bridging (A VB) Systems,” IEEE Std 802.1BA-2011 , pp. 1–45,
Sept 2011.
[6] S. Samii and H. Zinner, “Level 5 by Layer 2: Time-Sensitive Networking
for Autonomous Vehicles,” IEEE Communications Standards Magazine ,
vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 62–68, JUNE 2018.[7] M. Wollschlaeger, T. Sauter, and J. Jasperneite, “The Future of Industrial
Communication: Automation Networks in the Era of the Internet of
Things and Industry 4.0,” IEEE Industrial Electronics Magazine , vol. 11,
no. 1, pp. 17–27, March 2017.
[8] R. Salazar, T. Godfrey, L. Winkel, N. Finn, C. Powell, B. Rolfe, and
M. Seewald, “Utility Applications of Time Sensitive Networking White
Paper (D3),” IEEE, Tech. Rep., Sep 2018.
[9] “IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area Networks–Bridges and
Bridged Networks – Amendment 31: Stream Reservation Protocol (SRP)
Enhancements and Performance Improvements,” IEEE Std 802.1Qcc-
2018 (Amendment to IEEE Std 802.1Q-2018 as amended by IEEE Std
802.1Qcp-2018) , pp. 1–208, Oct 2018.
[10] M. Bj ¨orklund, J. Sch ¨onw¨alder, P. Shafer, K. Watsen, and R. Wilton,
“NETCONF Extensions to Support the Network Management Datastore
Architecture,” RFC 8526, ISSN: 2070-1721, https://tools.ietf.org/html/
rfc8526, Tech. Rep., 2019.
[11] (2018) YANG Modules. https://1.ieee802.org/yang-modules/.
[12] S. Thangamuthu, N. Concer, P. J. L. Cuijpers, and J. J. Lukkien,
“Analysis of Ethernet-switch Trafﬁc Shapers for In-Vehicle Networking
Applications,” in 2015 Design, Automation Test in Europe Conference
Exhibition (DATE) , March 2015, pp. 55–60.
[13] L. Lo Bello, “Novel Trends in Automotive Networks: A Perspective on
Ethernet and the IEEE Audio Video Bridging,” in Proceedings of the
2014 IEEE Emerging Technology and Factory Automation (ETFA) , Sep.
2014, pp. 1–8.
[14] P. Meyer, T. Steinbach, F. Korf, and T. C. Schmidt, “Extending IEEE
802.1 A VB with Time-Triggered Scheduling: A Simulation Study of the
Coexistence of Synchronous and Asynchronous Trafﬁc,” in 2013 IEEE
Vehicular Networking Conference , Dec 2013, pp. 47–54.
[15] H. Lim, D. Herrscher, and F. Chaari, “Performance Comparison of IEEE
802.1Q and IEEE 802.1 A VB in an Ethernet-Based In-Vehicle Network,”
in2012 8th International Conference on Computing Technology and
Information Management (NCM and ICNIT) , vol. 1, April 2012.
[16] R. Queck, “Analysis of Ethernet A VB for Automotive Networks using
Network Calculus,” in 2012 IEEE International Conference on Vehicular
Electronics and Safety (ICVES 2012) , July 2012, pp. 61–67.
[17] T. Steinbach, F. Korf, and T. C. Schmidt, “Real-time Ethernet for
Automotive Applications: A Solution for Future In-Car Networks,” in
2011 IEEE International Conference on Consumer Electronics -Berlin
(ICCE-Berlin) , Sep. 2011, pp. 216–220.
[18] A. Gothard, R. Kreifeldt, and C. Turner, “A VB for Automotive Use
White Paper,” A Vnu Alliance, Tech. Rep., Oct 2014.
[19] G. Behrmann, A. David, and K. G. Larsen, A Tutorial on Uppaal ,
M. Bernardo and F. Corradini, Eds. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, 2004.
[20] M. D. Johas Teener, A. N. Fredette, C. Boiger, P. Klein, C. Gunther,
D. Olsen, and K. Stanton, “Heterogeneous Networks for Audio and
Video: Using IEEE 802.1 Audio Video Bridging,” Proceedings of the
IEEE , vol. 101, no. 11, pp. 2339–2354, Nov 2013.
[21] A. Nasrallah, A. S. Thyagaturu, Z. Alharbi, C. Wang, X. Shao,
M. Reisslein, and H. ElBakoury, “Ultra-Low Latency (ULL) Networks:
The IEEE TSN and IETF DetNet Standards and Related 5G ULL
Research,” IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials , vol. 21, no. 1, pp.
88–145, Firstquarter 2019.
[22] H. Lim, L. V ¨olker, and D. Herrscher, “Challenges in a Future
IP/Ethernet-based in-car Network for Real-Time Applications,” in 2011
48th ACM/EDAC/IEEE Design Automation Conference (DAC) , June
2011, pp. 7–12.
[23] J. Migge, J. Villanueva, N. Navet, and M. Boyer, “Insights on the
Performance and Conﬁguration of A VB and TSN in Automotive
Ethernet Networks,” in 9th European Congress on Embedded Real
Time Software and Systems (ERTS 2018) , Toulouse, France, Jan. 2018.
[24] D. Park, J. Lee, C. Park, and S. Park, “New Automatic De-Registration
Method Utilizing a Timer in the IEEE802.1 TSN,” in 2016 First IEEE
International Conference on Computer Communication and the Internet
(ICCCI) , Oct 2016, pp. 47–51.
[25] O. Kleineberg, P. Fr ¨ohlich, and D. Heffernan, “Fault-Tolerant Ethernet
Networks with Audio and Video Bridging,” in ETFA2011 , Sept 2011,
pp. 1–8.
[26] D. Bujosa, I. Alvarez, D. ˇCavka, and J. Proenza, “Analysing Termi-
nation and Consistency in the A VB’s Stream Reservation Protocol,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE 24th International Conference on Emerging
Technologies and Factory Automation (ETFA 2019) , October 2019.
[27] D. Bujosa, I. ´Alvarez, and J. Proenza, “Description of the U PPAAL
Models for SRP and CSRP and Veriﬁcation of their Termination and
Consistency Properties,” arXiv:2007.15712 [cs.NI], https://arxiv.org/abs/
2007.15712, Tech. Rep., 2020.

--- Page 11 ---
11
[28] “IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area Networks: Media
Access Control (MAC) Bridges,” IEEE Std 802.1D-2004 (Revision of
IEEE Std 802.1D-1998) , pp. 1–281, June 2004.
[29] “IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area Networks–Media
Access Control (MAC) Bridges and Virtual Bridges,” IEEE Std
802.1Q, 2012 Edition, (Incorporating IEEE Std 802.1Q-2011, IEEE
Std 802.1Qbe-2011, IEEE Std 802.1Qbc-2011,IEEE Std 802.1Qbb-2011,
IEEE Std 802.1Qaz-2011, IEEE Std 802.1Qbf-2011,IEEE Std 802.1Qbg-
2012, IEEE Std 802.1aq-2012, IEEE Std 802.1Q-2012 , pp. 1–1782, Dec
2012.
[30] I. Alvarez, J. Proenza, and M. Barranco, “Towards a Time Redundancy
Mechanism for Critical Frames in Time-Sensitive Networking,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE 22nd International Conference on Emerging
Technologies and Factory Automation (ETFA 2017) , January 2018.
Daniel Bujosa received the degree in automation
and industrial electronic engineering from the Uni-
versity of the Balearic Islands (UIB), Palma de
Mallorca, Spain, in 2017 and a master in industrial
engineering from the same University in 2019.
He is currently working towards the Ph.D. degree
at the School of Innovation, Design and Engineer-
ing at M ¨alardalen University. His research interests
include dependable and real-time systems, fault-
tolerant distributed systems and dependable commu-
nication topologies.
Mr. Bujosa is a Student Member of the IEEE and IEEE Industrial Elec-
tronics Society (IES) since 2020.
In´es´Alvarez received the degree in computer sci-
ence with a specialization in computer engineering
from the University of the Balearic Islands (UIB),
Palma de Mallorca, Spain, in 2014 and a master in
computer engineering from the same University in
2016.
She is currently working towards the Ph.D. degree
in information and communications technologies at
UIB and she is a Lecturer with the Department
of Mathematics and Computer Science, UIB. Her
research interests include dependable and real-time
systems, fault-tolerant distributed systems and dependable communication
topologies.
Ms. Alvarez is a Student Member of the IEEE since 2016.
Juli´an Proenza received the ﬁrst degree in physics
(Licenciatura en Ciencias F ´ısicas) and the doctorate
in informatics from the University of the Balearic
Islands (UIB), Palma de Mallorca, Spain, in 1989
and 2007, respectively.
He is currently a Lecturer with the Department
of Mathematics and Computer Science, UIB. His
research interests include dependable and real-time
systems, fault-tolerant distributed systems, adaptive
systems, clock synchronization, dependable com-
munication topologies, and ﬁeld-bus and industrial
networks.
Dr. Proenza is a Member of the IEEE Industrial Electronics Society (IES)
since 2009 and Senior Member since 2012. He is also a member of the IES
Technical Committee on Factory Automation.
