--- Page 1 ---
  
Formal Specification and Verification of System of Systems 
Using UPPAAL: A Case Study of a Defensive Missile 
Systems 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract—In this paper, w e specify and verify System of 
Systems (SoS) using Formal Method s. As software evolved, its 
size and weight increased. This makes the embedded system 
more complex. This trend led to the concept of SoS. SoS is an 
integrated system, which has systems as components. This has a 
very large system complexity. At this time, the total system 
complexity is larger than each sum. Due to the complexity of the 
system it is very difficult to evaluate and develop the SoS 
appropriately. So we use system engineering. The advantages of 
system engineering are as follows. First, it is possible to clarify 
the requirements of the independent systems and the SoS 
requirements. Second, it is not only possible to demonstrate and 
evaluate independently the requirements for each system, but 
also to demonstrate and evaluate requirements in a SoS . At the 
same time, system engineering has the following challenges. First, 
it is difficult to simulate and model from the perspective of SoS. 
Second, it is difficult to verify the time constraints of SoS. In this 
work we try to solve this challenge using formal methods. We use 
model checking among Formal Methods. And we model and 
verify the system using a tool called UPPAAL. The reason for 
using UPPAAL is because the system definition of it is suitable 
for SoS. And because UPPAAL is suitable for verifying real-time 
systems. In  this study, we do modelling and verify the behavior 
of Defensive Missile System(DM S). Through this we objectively 
verified the time constraints of SoS using formal methods. And 
we verified interoperability of DMS. And we have verified that 
the procedures of the DMS are logically error free and the time 
constraints that the DMS has. The DMS model, an 
implementation of our study, is reusable and extensible.  
Index Terms —Systems of systems, system engineering, model 
checking, formal verification of missile defense system, 
UPPAAL, formal metho ds 
 
I. INTRODUCTION  
With advances in software technology, the proportion 
and importance of embedded SW in major industrial 
sectors is increasing every year. As of 2013, SW accounts 
for 53.7% of households, 52.7% of communications, 
52.4% of automobiles, and 51.5% of industrial automation. 
In addition, SW functions in the automotive and aircraft 
sectors account for more than 90% of the major industries. 
[1] In addition to this, the scale also increased. This 
tendency is especially noticeable in embedded systems. 
                                                           
Manuscript received March 12, 2017; revised August 24, 2017. 
doi:10.12720/jcm. 12.8.482-488Due to the increase in the proportion of SW and the scale of 
SW, the system is becoming more complex. The system 
consists of many heterogeneous elements and elements 
interact with each other. This tendency has led to th e 
formation of a complex system in which several systems 
constitute one system. This complex system is called SoS. 
System failures and errors cause massive human casualties 
and property damage.  
So it is important to prevent and eliminate these system 
errors. System engineering is effective in preventing and 
eliminating system failures. However, there is always a 
possibility of system error or failure even if this method is 
used. To reduce this possibility, we must do our best to 
prevent and eliminate system failures. 
In this paper, we model the DMS based on US 
MIM-104A Patriot . A DMS is a complex of embedded 
systems and human operators. It consists of multiple 
systems, which are radar (RS), controller (ECS) and 
missile launchers (LS). Each system performs its own 
process independently, and these processes are integrated 
into a single process. And this system has its own timing 
issues and resource constraints. And the DMS is in final 
decision stage in air defense system. 
In the DMS, each system interacts through events. In 
this sense, this system is event driven architecture (EDA) . 
Here, EDA can be defined as follows. EDA, also known as 
message-driven architectures, is a SW architecture pattern 
promoting the production, detection, consumption of, and 
reaction to events. An event can be defined as "a significant 
change in state". [2 ]  
In this study, we try to use formal methods as a 
cornerstone to ensure that the model to be developed and 
verified has such predictability and accuracy. We applied 
model checking to the DMS . Our goal is to more 
objectively evaluate DMS behavior by modeling the 
behavior of the system and determining the time constraint 
of the system. Because the missile defense system is a SoS 
consisting of an embedded system and a human operator, 
we verify the time constraints by including people in the 
loop when modeling. In past studies on modeling and 
verifying the behavior of these SoS have been preceded, 
but these studies have limitations in verifying the time 
constraints of system behavior. [3]  
482 ©2017 Journal of CommunicationsJournal of Communications Vol. 12, No. 8, August 2017
Joon- Ha Jang1 and Jin-Young Choi2
1Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Korea University, Seoul Korea 
2Graduate School of Information Security, Korea University, Seoul Korea 
Email: {jhjang, Choi}@formal.korea.ac.kr

--- Page 2 ---
  
Unlike previous studies, this study can more accurately 
and objectively verify the time constraints of system 
behavior by using formal methods. The results of this case 
study are SoS interoperability verification and 
development of a reusable system behavior verification 
model. At this time, interoperability is defined as an 
attribute indicating whether the individual systems 
constituting the complex system satisfy the system 
requirements and meet the requirements of the integrated 
system. [4] The first paragraph, we talk about SoS and the 
strengths and challenges of SoS engineering. Second, we 
describe the UPPAAL used as a modeling tool in this study, 
and explain why we chose it . Then, we describe the 
modeling target system, validation process, formal 
specification, and formal verification that have been 
conducted to verify system interoperability and time 
constraints. Next, we describe the contribution of our 
research in terms of interoperability, model reusability. 
Finally, the conclusions are discussed in terms of the 
implications of this study and future research. 
II. CHARACTERISTICS OF THE SYSTEM OF SYSTEMS 
ENGINEERING  
This section explains why the System of Systems 
Engineering is needed and what challenges are there.  
First, we define System of Systems in this paper like 
below. System of Systems is an integrated system, which 
has systems as components. But it does not just mean a 
complex of systems. System can be called SoS when it has 
the following two attributes. The first component needs to 
be operationally independent and the second is to be 
managerially independent.  
To explain, the independence of the operational aspect 
means that the function can be performed according to the 
original purpose even if the system component is separated 
from the complex system. It means that the process of the 
component system works independently and meets its own 
system requirements.  
In addition, the independence of the managerial aspect 
means that the management of the component system is 
managed not only for the overall system purpose but also 
for the purpose of the system itself. That is, they are 
managed as one organism in the whole system, but each 
constituent system is independent. [5]  
In order to develop and evaluate the SoS, it is important 
and essential to approach from a systems engineering 
perspective. The reason for this is as follows.  
First, by engineering approach to designing the structure 
of a SoS, it is possible to clarify the requirements of the 
independent systems and to define the system requirements . 
Second, it is not only possible to demonstrate and evaluate 
independently the requirements for each system, but also to 
demonstrate and evaluate requirements in a complex 
system , [6] and [7].The application examples of the system engineering 
procedure for the complex system are as follows. 1) A case 
applied to estimate the ability to track jointly from various 
units at the time of US-Air Force's Joint tracking 
management system development. 2) A case used to 
predict the engagement capability and to evaluate the 
actual development engagement capability for launching 
the missile defense system to defend the ballistic missile at 
sea through Aegis. 3) There is a case based on the results of 
system engineering analysis of the complex system in 
advance in order to decide whether or not to invest in the 
research project. When developing complex systems, if 
system engineering is not applied, system failures will 
eventually lead to system requirements revision and 
expensive redevelopment procedures.  
The challenges that arise when applying system 
engineering to the development of SoS systems, are as 
follows. First, SoS require shared architecture and vision 
across different systems. A SoS is a complex system in 
which a plurality of systems operate as one, and the 
technical complexity is very high. The complexity of a 
system is greater than the sum of the complexities of each 
component system. Because the system interface must be 
compatible with each system, and the entire system is 
operated through the distribution of functions. In other 
words, for the development of complex systems, it is 
necessary to understand not only the complex interactions 
between the systems but also to share the vision of how the 
system should function.  
Secondly, there are difficulties in that a large number of 
programs run simultaneously in many systems. As 
mentioned above, since the SoS have high complexity and 
mutual independence. So it is necessary to establish a 
concept and generalize the system requirements. The clear 
requirements reduce overall system complexity and 
improves mutual independence and system integration. 
This process was applied to Aegis's development process 
in the past.  
The third challenge is that System component systems 
are not all in the same development phase. So, it is 
necessary to analyze and integrate requirements of each 
system. In the process of matching the tempo between the 
legacy system and the new system, it is important to 
explore and define the core concept in the SoS. It is also 
important to ensure backward compatibility. In this paper 
we call this compatibility is interoperability. To ensure 
interoperability, it is necessary to accurately model and 
verify the existing system.  
Finally, it is a difficulty in testing and simulation. The 
process of testing and simulating a complex is logically 
much more complex. To solve this logical complexity, we 
use formal methods as a system modeling and verification 
method. The use of formal techniques can provide 
appropriate reliability for modeling at the individual 
483 ©2017 Journal of CommunicationsJournal of Communications Vol. 12, No. 8, August 2017

--- Page 3 ---
  
system level and integration level, and can further improve 
the objectivity of the verification results.  
III. UPPAAL 
A. UPPAAL’s  Character and Strength Points  
We used UPPAAL for formal verification. This tool 
provides user with an integrated tool environment that 
enables modeling, verification, and simulation. UPPAAL 
allows the user to model the behavior of systems and 
systems by switching between specified states and states. 
In this tool, the system is specified through timed automata. 
It also use the TCTL [8] , [9] logic and the corresponding 
query statement to verify that the model has the appropriate 
attributes for the specified model. UPPAAL consists of a 
verifier and a stimulator. And this has the advantage that it 
can create counter examples when the attribute i s 
unsatisfied. This character allows you to track logical 
errors during property validation and improve the model 
more efficiently. In addition, the UPPAAL simulator has 
the advantage that the relationship of each model, the 
transition of the state according to time, and the change of 
property can be confirmed.  
The reason for choosing UPPAAL as a tool for 
modeling and verification of a DMS is as follows.  
First, the definition of the system in UPPAAL  is suitable 
for SoS.  
Second, due to the non-determinism of the real-time 
properties of UPPAAL . This property allows an acceptable 
degree of abstraction when modeling and verifying system 
behavior. A detailed explanation of the above two reasons 
is as follows. 
In UPPAAL A system is modeled as a network of 
Templates, Which consisted of Timed Automata (TA) [8 ] 
in parallel. This definition is well suited for modeling a 
System of Systems . The detailed syntax used in UPPAAL 
is as follows. [3] 
Each TA is a finite state machine equipped with clock 
variables that acts as the semantics basis of Stateflow. 
Let N be the set of natural numbers, X be a finite set of 
clocks, and Φ(X) the set of formulas obtained as 
conjunctions of atomic constraints of the form x ∼ n, where 
x ∈ X, n ∈ N, and ∼ ∈ {<,≤,=,>,≥}. The elements of 
Φ(X) are called clock constraints over  X.  A TA over 
clocks X and action Act is a tuple {L, l 0,E, I, }  where L is a 
set of locations, l 0 is the initial location, E ⊆ L × Φ(X) × 
Act × P(X) × L is the set of edges, I : L →  Φ(x) assigns 
invariants to locations.[3] 
In UPPAAL syntax Location is a set of states that has a 
time variable called clock. And this feature is available in 
TA. TA permits two-way synchronization on 
complementary input and output actions (marked as a? and 
a! respectively).  UPPAAL's two-way synchronization is 
suitable for inter-system interaction modeling.  
A network of TA, NTA = TA 1 . . . TA n over X and Act, is 
defined as the parallel composition of n TAs over X and Act. Semantically, the network of TAs (NTAs) describes 
the transition of time using time variables between 
components and synchronization through events, 
respectively. 
IV. MODELING DMS  BEHAVIOR USING UPPAAL 
A. Defensive Missile System 
Our modeling target is a DMS. From the air-defense 
system point of view, on the air side, this system is the final 
step in determining whether we can defend against an 
enemy missile attack. So this system is affected by time 
constraints. Therefore, the upper bound of the missile 
defens e system’s  action time is important in terms of air 
defense.  So we want to objectively verify the upper boun d 
of the minimum execution time of defense procedure by 
using UPPAAL. In this study, we modeled DMS behavior 
based on the MIM-104A Patriot, which is a typical 
example of DMS. And the target system is the SoS . So we 
used UPPAL and the system consists of Timed Automatas 
(TA). Because it consists of independent systems such as 
Engagement Control System (ECS), Radar Set (RS) and 
Launcher Station (LS), and each system operates 
independently and operates as a single system. When 
modeling, we implemented each co mponent system as one 
model. Each model operates in parallel and eventually 
becomes a single system. In the modeling and specification, 
each system is an actor. Each actor in the DMS performs its 
own procedures independently and is implemented as a 
single model . One model can be simulated and verified 
independently, and can be simulated and verified in an 
integrated manner. We further implement a system monitor 
model ( ‘Proc’) to model and verify DMS as SoS .   
In our DMS model, we limit actors to ECS, RS, LS, and 
System monitor when modeling a defensive missile system. 
And the number of launchers is limited to two, and the 
real-time error checking function of the ECS system is 
limited to two. However, we can change the number of 
error checking functions and the number of Missile 
Launchers to suit our purposes using the parameters and 
instances of UPPAAL model.  
Our UPPAAL model targets the behavior of the DMS. 
And this model is implemented with three purposes. First, a 
model for verifying and simulating DMS from SoS 
perspective. Second, a model to verify that the defense 
procedures of the DMS are logically error free. Third, a 
model for verifying the time constraints of the system.  For 
this modeling purpose, we use time variables such as clock, 
invariant, and channel. In addition, we use a 
non-deterministic approach that considers all possible 
cases in the modeling process. This allowed us to limit the 
degree of abstraction of modeling to acceptable limits and 
perform more objective verification.  
B. Formal Specificatio n of DMS Behavior  
Fig. 1 shows the model we developed using UPPAAL. 
First, the Proc model on the left is a model for monitoring 
484 ©2017 Journal of CommunicationsJournal of Communications Vol. 12, No. 8, August 2017

--- Page 4 ---
  
the DMS system with SoS concept. On the right side, 
models composed of ECS, LS (0), LS (1), LS_que, and 
ErrorCheck systems are behavior models of the DMS 
system. The five models on the right side of Fig. 1 are the 
component systems that make up the DMS. The models 
work in parallel and interact with each other. It can be 
monitored by the integrated system process through the left 
monitor model. 
 
Fig. 1. DMS behavior and system monitor UPPAAL model. 
 
Fig. 2. System monitor UPPAAL model. 
As mentioned above, the ‘Proc’ model (Fig. 2) is a 
modeling of the DMS system process from the SoS 
perspective and is used for formal verification of the time 
constraints of the DMS system behavior. The 'Proc' model 
specifies and verifies the interactions between independent 
systems using UPPAAL's time variable clock and a 
synchronization variable called action. In other words, we 
implement the 'Proc' model to monitor the system behavior 
of the DMS from a SoS perspective. The automata that exist in the 'Proc' model are called locations in the 
UPPAAL tool. We use this to monitor the processes of the 
systems that make up the DMS. And we use TCTL queries 
as a means of monitoring.   
The ECS model (Fig. 3) represents the system behavior 
of ECS and RS in the MDS system. In this model, we 
implemented ECS's ability to control RS, LS equipment, 
and automatically check for equipment failures. We also 
use the local variable x in the ECS model as well as the 
global time variable  now. Using x, we can distinguish 
between the total defense operation time and the ECS and 
RS procedure execution time separately in the DMS.  
 
Fig. 3. ECS UPPAAL model. 
The error checking model (Fig. 4) represents a system 
for recovering random errors occurring in a DMS system. 
When modeling  this system, we first implemented the 
interaction when the error occurred with bidirectional 
synchronization through the  action variable. And we 
randomly implemented the occurrence of errors using 
non-determinism.  
 
Fig. 4. Error checking UPPAAL model. 
LS model (Fig. 5) shows that LS (0) and LS (1) are the 
same. In the DMS system, since LS operates in the FIFO 
(First in First Out) manner , we implemented LS (0) and LS 
(1) as instances with a common frame.  The advantage of 
this implementation is that it can be used by reducing or 
increasing the number of LS's depending on the purpose.  
The LS_que model(Fig. 6) monitors each Ls operating 
independently in the system and interacting with each other. 
In this case, we implemented LS to be generated 
485 ©2017 Journal of CommunicationsJournal of Communications Vol. 12, No. 8, August 2017

--- Page 5 ---
  
nondeterministically using parameters and functions  The 
LS (0), LS (1) and LS_que models use the local clock y and 
the global clock now. LS (0) and LS (1) have independent 
clock y, and each y is integrated through LS_que. Through 
y of LS_que, we can analyze the system execution time of 
LS independently. Also, through now, we can see whether 
the LS execution time is appropriate for the whole  DMS 
system execution time.  
 
Fig. 5. LS(0), LS(1) UPPAAL model. 
 
Fig. 6. LS_que UPPAAL model. 
In summary, we have implemented the DMS behavior 
model as ECS, LS_que, LS (0), LS (1), and ErrorCheck, 
which operate in parallel, and monitor model('Proc') to 
analyze and verify the implemented DMS behavior from 
the SoS point of view. To analyze the time constraints of 
the DMS, we used the global time variable Now and the 
local time variables x, y. 
C. Simulation  of Defensive Missile System Behavior 
Model  
We constantly simulated to develop a model that 
correctly reflects the behavior of the DMS. Using a 
simulator, we tested whether the system models that make 
up the DMS work independently and that there are no 
deadlocks. In addition, we have implemented the DMS 
behavior model by dynamically validating that each system 
works well as single system in this model. We used the red 
line in Fig. 7 to analyze the interaction between each model. 
And through the intermediate <Global variables> menu, 
we analyzed the changes of time variables and variables 
according to the simulation process. And through the 
<Enabled Transitions> menu, we simulated whether or not 
each system was deadlocked. Table I below Fig. 7 shows the hardware environment and UPPAAL tool settings that 
we simulated. 
 
Fig. 7. Simulation using UPPAAL. 
TABLE I: SIMULATION ENVIRONMENT  
1. CPU : Intel (R) Core (TM) i5 -3470 3.20 GHz  
2.  RAM : 12.0GB  
3.  OS : window 10 x86 . 
4.  Diagnostic Menu : shortest path, fastest path  
5. Search order : random depth search  
D. Formal Verification of DMS Behavi or 
Table II shows the TCTL [8 ] we used to verify the 
correctness [ 10] of the model and the upper bound of the 
system time limit. And TCTL is translated into natural 
language. 
TABLE II: PROPERTIES IN TCTL 
1. A[]  ECS.H MComplete imp ly Proc.Proc_Done  
2.  A[]  ECS.StateGreen imply  LS_que.Cm_h t 
3.  A[]  LS_que.Com_hot  imply Proc. LS_done  
4.  A[]  Proc.Proc_Done imply now<= NUMBER  
5.  A[]  ECS.HM Complete imply ECS.x<=  NUMBER  
6.  E<> Proc.Proc_Done  
1. The monitor model  (‘Proc’)  correct ly mo nitors the ECS 
model.  
2. The ECS model correctly  controls the LS_que models.   
3. The LS_que model correctly controls LS (0) and LS (1).  
4. Minimum procedure execution time is less than or equal 
to NUMBER . 
5. Minimum ECS procedure execution time is less than or 
equal t o NUMBER.  
6. Deadlock verification of monitor model ('Proc’)  
 
486 ©2017 Journal of CommunicationsJournal of Communications Vol. 12, No. 8, August 2017

--- Page 6 ---
  
"A [] ECS.HMComplete imply Proc.Proc_Done" We 
use this TCTL statement to verify that the procedure of the 
ECS model works horizontally in the monitor model. In 
short, this statement verifies that the Proc model correctly 
monitors the ECS model.  
"A [] ECS.StateGreen imply LS_que.Cm_ht" This 
statement verifies the correctness of the interaction 
between the ECS model and the LS_que model. In other 
words, this verifies that the ECS model correctly controls 
the LS_que model. "A [] LS_que.Cm_ht imply 
Proc.LS_done" This statement verifies the correctness of 
the interaction between the LS model and the LS_que 
model. In statement 4, 5, the fourth statement verifies the 
minimum procedure execution time of the DMS behavior . 
The fifth query verifies the minimum procedure execution 
time of ECS. And the final query is "E <> 
Proc.Proc_Done" This is a statement to verify that the 
monitoring model does not have deadlocks.   
 
Fig. 8. Result of verification. 
Fig. 8 shows the result of our verification using the 
above six TCTL sentences. In the UPPAAL, when the 
verification result is true, "attribute is satisfied" is 
displayed. In the figure, the part marked "Property not 
satisfied" is the result of boundary value generated in the 
process of verifying the time constraint In our study, the 
minimum execution time of DMS is 291 clocks and the 
minimum execution time of ECS is 270 clocks. 
The result of formal verification can be summarized as 
follows. We do formal specification and formal 
verification about DMS behavior. We modeled and 
simulated the SoS using formal methods. And we verified 
that our model is correct . Furthermore we have verified the 
time constraints of SoS.  Finally, our verification results and system model can be 
reused for evaluation of similar systems because they 
analyze and verify the behavior of existing SoS systems 
without additional expansion and implementation. As 
mentioned above ( Ⅴ), this model can be extended to air 
defense system behavior models through additional 
implementations. 
E. Contribution of This Study 
The contribution of our research is as follows. First, we 
have done accurate modeling and simulation and have 
verified SoS time constraints. These are the challenges of 
SOS engineering [6] and [7].  
Second, our model verifies interoperability of DMS. 
And verify the reliability of the defense procedures 
performed by the DMS.  
Third, this system model is a reusable model for similar 
systems. In addition, it is a model that can be used to 
evaluate interoperability when introducing new elements 
into a DMS system.  
Fourth, we improved  logical objectivity by system 
engineering using formal methods.  Formal methods 
improve the logical  objectivity  of our DMS modeling and 
simulation because it limits th e degree of abstraction in the 
modeling process.  
Fifth, our model is scalable and reusable. Specifically, 
our model is scalable by parameter or instance 
manipulation. And our model can be used to improve or 
change defensive procedures and add new component s to 
the DMS.  
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS  
In this paper, we apply system engineering to SoS using 
formal specification and formal verification. As a case 
study of this study, we model and verify DMS at operator 
level. We use model-checking in formal methods to verify 
the time constraints of SoS and the soundness of the whole 
process. The results are used to verify interoperability of 
missile defense systems, which can be extended to 
Air-Defense systems.  
The models and validation results developed in this 
study are more objective than previous studies. [ 10]-[14] 
This is because we modeled the target system with the SoS 
concept and verified the time constraints. This model can 
also be modified to improve current defensive missile 
system procedures and can be used to improve the model 
when adding a new system to a defensive missile system. 
However, our research modeled the behavior of SoS 
system, it can be applied only to system process evaluation, 
attack response time improvement, and system extension 
evaluatio n. We performed the time constraint in 100 clock 
units. More detailed verification is possible if the clock 
unit is increased. However, we performed 100 units due to 
the hardware environment. 
 
487 ©2017 Journal of CommunicationsJournal of Communications Vol. 12, No. 8, August 2017

--- Page 7 ---
  
Future research based on the results of this study is as 
follows. First, there is research to model and verify SoS 
when developing a new missile defense system. On the 
other hand, there is a study that automatically generates 
code according to the model. Third, there are studies to 
model and verify embedded system or controller that 
constitute SoS. 
REFERENCES  
[1] South Korea Future of Creation Science Division: Press 
Release, Oct. 9, 2013, Media It (Reuse), Feb. 24, 2014. 
[2] K. M. Chandy , “Event -Driven applications : Costs, benefits 
and design approach es,” California Institute o f Technology, 
2006 . 
[3] E. Y. Kang, L. Ke, M. Z. Hua, and Y. X. Wang, “Verifying 
automotive systems in EAST-ADL/Stateflow using 
UPPAAL, ” presented at Asia-Pacific Software Engineering 
Conference, New Delhi, India, Dec. 1- 4, 2015 . 
[4] E. Morris, L. Levine, C. Meyers, P. Place, and D. Plakosh, 
“System of systems interoperability (SOSI): Final report, ” 
Technical Report, 
CMU/SEI- 2004 -TR-004ESC- TR-2004 -004April, 2004 . 
[5] E. A. Lee, “Cyber physical systems: Design challenges, ” 
presented at International Symposium on Object / 
Component / Service-Oriented Real-Time Distributed 
Computing , Orlando, FL, USA, May 2008. 
[6] M. W. Maier , “Arichitecing principles for systems of 
systems, ” Systems Engineering , vol. 1, no. 4, pp. 267-284, 
1998 . 
[7] S. Sommerer , M. D. Guevara, M. A. Landis, J. M. Rizzuto, J. 
M. Sheppard, and C. J. Grant, “Systems- of-Systems 
Engineering in air and missile defense, ” Johns Hopkins Apl 
Technical Digest , vol. 31, no. 1, 2012. 
[8] J. P. Katoen, Principles of Model Checking , MIT Press, 
2008.  
[9] G. O. Young, “Synthetic structure of industrial plastics,” in 
Plastics , 2nd ed. vol. 3, J. Peters, Ed. New York: 
McGraw-Hill, 1964, pp. 15- 64. 
[10] M. Kezadri, M. Pantel, B. Combemale, and X. Thirioux, “A 
formal framework to prove the correctness of model driven engineering composition operators, ” in Lecture Notes in 
Computer Science , S. Merz and J. Pang , Eds., vol. 8829 , 
Springer, Cham , 2014 . 
[11] R. Alur and D. L. Dill, “A theory of timed automata,” 
Theoretical Computer Science , vol. 126, no. 2, pp. 183-235, 
1994.  
[12] A. Agrawal, G. Simon, and G. Karsai, “Semantic translation 
of Simulink/Stateflow models to hybrid automata using 
graph transformations,”  ENTCS , vol. 109, pp. 43-56, 2004. 
[13] K. M. Sukumar, “Translation of simulink-stateflow models 
to hybrid automata ,” Ph.D. dissertation, University of 
Illinois, 2011. 
[14] R. Alur, C. Courcoubetis, T. Henzinger, and P. H. Ho, 
“Hybrid automata: An algorithmic approach to the 
specification and verification of hybrid systems,” Hybrid 
Systems , vol. 736, pp. 209- 229, 1993 . 
 
Joon Ha Jang  was born in Seoul, Korea 
on April 9, 1990. He received BS in 
Electronic Engineering from Korea Air 
Force Academy, in 2014. He started MS 
program in Computer Science, Korea 
University, 2016. His research interests 
are formal methods and System 
Engineering, Software Engineering, 
Complex System, Embedded Software Engineering.  
 
 
Jin-Young Choi  was born in 1959 in 
Seoul, Korea. He received BS degree in 
Computer Science from Seoul National 
University in 1892. He received MS i n 
Computer Science from Drexel 
University in 1986, and PhD in computer 
science from the University of 
Pennsylvania in 1993. His research 
interests are real-time computing, formal methods, and process 
algebras, SDN, and software engineering. He is a Professor in 
Graduate School of Information Security in Korea University. 
 
488 ©2017 Journal of CommunicationsJournal of Communications Vol. 12, No. 8, August 2017
