--- Page 1 ---
Model Checking Techniques applied to the design of Web Servi ces
Gregorio D´ ıaz, M. Emilia Cambronero, Juan J. Pardo ,
Valent´ ın Valero and Fernando Cuartero
Department of Computer Science, Univ. of Castilla La Mancha
EPSA, Avd. Espa˜ na s/n, Albacete, Spain, 02071.
email: [gregorio,emicp,jpardo,valentin,fernando]@inf o-ab.uclm.es
May 10, 2007
Abstract
In previous work we have presented the generation of WS-CDL a nd WS-BPEL documents.
In this paper we show the uniﬁcation of both generations. The aim is to generate correct
WS-BPEL skeleton documents from WS-CDL documents by using t he Timed Automata as an
intermediary model in order to check the correctness of the g enerated Web Services with Model
Checking Techniques. The model checker used is UPPAAL, a wel l known tool in theoretical and
industrial cases that performs the veriﬁcation and validat ion of Timed Automata. Note that
our interest is focused on Web services where the time constr aints play a critical role.
1 Introduction
Web Service technology is a framework, in which the study of d esign errors can become a master
piece, due to the big amount of money and other resources spen t on it. Recent studies have been
realized about the acceleration of the increasing of the per cent of gross domestic product that e-
commerce represents for the world economy. Thus, possible e rrors on the technologies supporting
this framework could cause a big cost, not just economically , but also sociologically. For instance,
you can think of an e-stock market, where, due to a design erro r, the system always forces all
transactions to use the most expensive seller. This situati on can avoid the money saving for
users of this platform. Then, it is economically feasible th e use of algorithms, methodologies and
techniques in order to allow system designers to determine w hether designs are free of errors or
not.
In Web Services the design phase is the most important phase f or Choreography and Orches-
tration layers, ﬁgure 1. These layers describe the behavior s of each participant in a Web Service.
In brief the Choreography describes the general behavior an d the Orchestration describes each
particular behavior. Thus an important goal is the validati on and Veriﬁcation of these layers in
order to prove their correctness.
There is growing consensus that the use of formal methods, de velopment methods based on some
formalism, could have signiﬁcant beneﬁts in developing E-b usiness systems due to the enhanced
rigor these methods bring [7, 10]. Furthermore, these forma lisms allow us to reason with the
CLEI ELECTRONIC JOURNAL, VOLUME 10, NUMBER 2, PAPER 2, DECEMBER  2007

--- Page 2 ---
Trasport HTTP,□BEEP,□IIOP,□JMS,□SMTPXML,□EncodingsSOAP
TrasportDescription WSDLDiscovery UDDIReliable
Messaging
ContextTransactions
CoordinationQuality□of
ServiceSecurityQuality□of
Service
Business□Process□Languages:
BPEL,□CI,□XPDL,□BPMLBusiness□Collaboration□Language:
Choreography□Description□Language
Figure 1: The Stack Protocol for WS.
constructed models, analysing and verifying some properti es of interest of the described systems.
One of these formalisms are timed automata [1], which are ver y widely used in model checking [4],
and there are some well-known tools supporting them, like UP PAAL [9].
Web services choreography and orchestration layers are the highest layers of the web services
framework and they have the proper level of abstraction that is necessary due to the veriﬁca-
tion complexity. Thus, our goal with this work is to generate “correct” web services by applying
formal techniques. In order to achieve it, we will describe t he translation processes from choreogra-
phy speciﬁcations written in Web Services Choreography Description Language (WS-CDL) [8] into
Timed Automata UPPAAL XML format and from Timed Automata int o orchestration speciﬁca-
tions written in web services business process execution language (WS-BPEL )[2]. However, before
the translation between Timed Automata and WS-BPEL, we must verify the time restrictions that
the web service must fulﬁll.
To illustrate this methodology, we use a particular case stu dy, an airline ticket reservation
system, whose description contains some time constraints.
The paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, we describe the main features of WS-CDL and
WS-BPEL. The translation of WS-CDL documents into Timed Aut omata is presented in Section
3. In Section 4 we apply the ﬁrst translation to the case study , and the UPPAAL tool is used to
describe, simulate and analyze the timed automata obtained . The generation of WS-BPEL from
timed automata is presented in section 5. Finally, the concl usions and future work are presented
in Section 6.
CLEI ELECTRONIC JOURNAL, VOLUME 10, NUMBER 2, PAPER 2, DECEMBER  2007

--- Page 3 ---
Choreography Layer
WS-CDLOrchestration□Layer
WS-BPEL
DIRECTOR
WS-CDL
DOCWIND
WS-BPEL
DOCPERCUSSION
WS-BPEL
DOC
STRINGS
WS-BPEL
DOCORCHESTRA
Figure 2: WS-CDL and WS-BPEL relationship.
2 WS-CDL and WS-BPEL Descriptions
Figure 2 illustrates the relationship between WS-CDL, the c horeography layer and the orchestra-
tion level (WS-BPEL), taking an orchestra as a metaphor of th is relation. The key document
is the director score, which corresponds to the WS-CDL docum ent, in which each participant is
represented as well as the time it enters into action. Furthe rmore, the wind, percussion and strings
scores correspond to the WS-BPEL documents, which show the b ehaviour of each particular group.
2.1 WS-CDL Description
WS-CDL describes interoperable collaborations between pa rties. In order to facilitate these col-
laborations, services commit themselves to mutual respons ibilities by establishing Relationships.
Their collaboration takes place in a jointly agreed set of or dering and constraint rules, whereby
information is exchanged between the parties. The WS-CDL mo del consists of the following entities:
•Participant Types, Role Types and Relationship Types. Within a Choreography,
information is always exchanged between parties within or a cross trust boundaries. A Role
Type enumerates the observable behavior a party exhibits in order to collaborate with other
parties. A Relationship Type identiﬁes the mutual commitme nts that must be made between
two parties for them to collaborate successfully. A Partici pant Type is grouping together
those parts of the observable behavior that must be implemen ted by the same logical entity
or organization.
•Information Types, Variables and Tokens. Variables contain information about com-
monly observable objects in a collaboration. Tokens are ali ases that can be used to reference
parts of a Variable. Both Variables and Tokens have Types tha t deﬁne the structure of what
the Variable contains or the Token references.
•Choreographies deﬁne collaborations between interacting parties:
– Choreography Life-line expresses the progression of a collaboration. Initially, t he
CLEI ELECTRONIC JOURNAL, VOLUME 10, NUMBER 2, PAPER 2, DECEMBER  2007

--- Page 4 ---
collaboration is established between parties, then work is performed within it and ﬁnally
it completes either normally or abnormally.
– Choreography Exception Block speciﬁes what additional interactions should occur
when a Choreography behaves in an abnormal way.
– Choreography Finalizer Block describes how to specify additional interactions that
should occur to modify the eﬀect of an earlier successfully c ompleted Choreography, for
example to conﬁrm or undo the eﬀect.
•Channels realize a point of collaboration between parties by specify ing where and how
information is exchanged.
•Work Units prescribe the constraints that must be fulﬁlled for making p rogress and thus
performing actual work within a Choreography.
•Activities and Ordering Structures. Activities are the lowest level components of the
Choreography that perform the actual work. Ordering Struct ures combine activities with
other Ordering Structures in a nested structure to express t he ordering conditions in which
information within the Choreography is exchanged.
•Interaction Activity is the basic building block of a Choreography, which results in an
exchange of information between parties and possible synch ronization of their observable
information changes and the actual values of the exchanged i nformation.
•Semantics allow the creation of descriptions that can record the seman tic deﬁnitions of every
component in the model
In Figure 3 we can see a detailed piece of the WS-CDL document d escribing our study case.
It describes part of the relationship between the Airline an d the Travel Agent. The interaction
determines the time that the reservation is available, name ly, one day.
2.2 WS-BPEL Description
The Web Services Orchestration speciﬁcation is aimed at bei ng able to precisely describe the behav-
ior of any type of party and the collaboration among them, reg ardless of the supporting platform
or programming model used by the implementation of the hosti ng environment.
WS-BPEL is an interface description language and describes the observable behavior of a ser-
vice by deﬁning business processes consisting of stateful l ong-running interactions in which each
interaction has a beginning, a deﬁned behavior and an end, al l of this being modelled by a ﬂow,
which consists of a sequence of activities. The behavior con text of each activity is deﬁned by a
scope, which provides fault handlers, event handlers, comp ensation handlers, a set of data variables
and correlation sets.
Let us now see a brief description of these components:
•Events , describe the ﬂow execution in an event driven manner.
•Variables , are deﬁned by using WSDL schemes, for internal or external p urposes, and are
used in the message ﬂow.
•Correlations , identify processes interacting by means of messages.
CLEI ELECTRONIC JOURNAL, VOLUME 10, NUMBER 2, PAPER 2, DECEMBER  2007

--- Page 5 ---
<interaction
name="reservation&booking" align="true"
channelVariable="travelAgentAirlineChannel"
operation="reservation&booking" initiate="true">
<participate
relationshipType="TravelAgentAirline"
fromRole="TravelAgent" toRole="Airline" />
<exchange name="reservation"
informationType="reservation" action="request">
<send variable="tns:reservationOrderID"
causeException="true" />
<receive variable="tns:reservationAckID"
causeException="true" />
</exchange>
<timeout time-to-complete="24:00" />
<record name="bookingTimeout"
when="timeout" causeException="true" />
<source variable=
"AL:getVariable(’tns:resOC’, ’’, ’’)" />
<target variable=
"TA:getVariable(’tns:resOC’, ’’, ’’)" />
</record>
</interaction>
Figure 3: Part of WS-CDL especiﬁcation
/c167/c32Time RestrictionsChoreography Layer
WS-CDLOrchestration□Layer
WS-BPEL
TIMED
AUTOMAXSLT
XSLT
Figure 4: From WS-CDL to WS-BPEL.
•Fault handling , deﬁnes the behavior when an exception has been thrown.
•Event handling , deﬁnes the behavior when an event occurs.
•Activities , represent the basic unit of behavior of a Web Service. In ess ence, WS-BPEL
describes the behavior of a Web Service in terms of choreogra phed activities.
3 Translation from WS-CDL to Timed Automata
Figure 4 depicts the translation processes that we present. In this ﬁgure, we can also see that
WS-CDL documents are translated into timed automata in a ﬁrs t step and in a second step the
timed automata latter are translated into WS-BPEL document s. We now present the automatic
translation from WS-CDL documents into timed automata that we have presented in [6]. For this
purpose, we must ﬁrst analyze the WS-CDL documents in order t o identify the common points
shared between them. The ﬁrst stage is to obtain the general s tructure describing the system that
we are analyzing. In timed automata, this structure is deﬁne d by the so-called System , which
CLEI ELECTRONIC JOURNAL, VOLUME 10, NUMBER 2, PAPER 2, DECEMBER  2007

--- Page 6 ---
consists of the individual processes that must be executed i n parallel. Each one of these processes
is deﬁned by using a template. Templates are used to describe the diﬀerent behaviors that are
available in the system.
Then, for each component of a WS-CDL description we have the f ollowing correspondence in
timed automata (see Fig. 5 for a schematic presentation of th is correspondence):
Roles : These are used to describe the behavior of each type of party that we are using in the
choreography. Thus, this deﬁnition matches with deﬁnition of atemplate in timed automata
terminology.
Relation types : These are used to deﬁne the communications between two role s, and the chan-
nels needed for these communications. In timed automata we j ust need to assign a new
channel for each one of these channels, which are the paramet ers of the templates that take
part in the communication.
Participant types : These deﬁne the diﬀerent parties that participate in the ch oreography. In
timed automata they are processes participating in the syst em.
Channel types : A channel is a point of collaboration between parties, toge ther with the spec-
iﬁcation of how the information is exchanged. As mentioned a bove, channels of WS-CDL
correspond with channels of timed automata.
Variables : They are easily translated, as timed automata in UPPAAL sup port variables, which
are used to represent certain information.
Now the problem is to deﬁne the behavior of each template. Thi s behavior is deﬁned by using
the information provided by the ﬂow of choreographies. Chor eographies are sets of workunits or sets
of activities. Thus, activities and workunits are the basic components of the choreographies, and
they capture the behavior of each component. Activities can be obtained as result of a composition
of other activities, by using sequential composition, para llelism and choice. In terms of timed
automata these operators can be easily translated:
•The sequential composition of activities is translated by c oncatenating the corresponding
timed automata.
•Parallel activities are translated by the cartesian produc t of the corresponding timed au-
tomata.
•Choices are translated by adding a node into the automata whi ch is connected with the initial
nodes of the alternatives.
Finally, time restrictions are associated in WS-CDL with wo rkunits and interaction activities.
These time restrictions are introduced in timed automata by means of guards and invariants.
Therefore, in the case of a workunit of an activity having a ti me restriction we associate a guard
to the edge that corresponds to the initial point of this work unit in the corresponding timed
automaton.
CLEI ELECTRONIC JOURNAL, VOLUME 10, NUMBER 2, PAPER 2, DECEMBER  2007

--- Page 7 ---
Role = Template
Relation Type = Channel+
Participant Type = Process+
Channel Type = Channel
Variables = Variables
Choreography = Choreography+|Activity
Activity = Work Unit |Sequence |Paralelism |Choice
Sequence = Activity+
Paralelism = Activity+
Choice = Activity+
Work Unit = State & Guard & Invariant
where the symbols +, |are BNF notation,
em and & is used to join information
Figure 5: Schematic view of the translation.
4 The veriﬁcation of the Case Study
Some examples of the use of WS-CDL can be found in [3, 5]. The ca se study that we are going to
use to illustrate how the translation works is closely linke d to [5], where this particular case study
was used to illustrate how timed automata can be used for the f ormal veriﬁcation of properties for
WS-CDL documents.
This system consists of three participants: a Traveller, a T ravel Agent and an Airline Reservation
System, whose behavior is as follows:
A Traveller is planning on taking a trip. Once he has decided t he concrete trip he wants to
make he submits it to a Travel Agent by means of his local Web Se rvice software ( Order Trip ).
The Travel Agent selects the best itinerary according to the criteria established by the Traveller.
For each leg of this itinerary, the Travel Agent asks the Airl ine Reservation System to verify the
availability of seats ( Verify Seats Availability ).
Thus, the Traveller has the choice of accepting or rejecting the proposed itinerary, and he can
also decide not to take the trip at all.
•In the case where he rejects the proposed itinerary, he may su bmit the modiﬁcations ( Change
Itinerary ), and wait for a new proposal from the Travel Agent.
•In the case where he decides not to take the trip, he informs th e Travel Agent ( Cancel
Itinerary ) and the process ends.
•In the case where he decides to accept the proposed itinerary (Reserve Tickets ), he will
provide the Travel Agent with his Credit Card information in order to properly book the
itinerary.
Once the Traveller has accepted the proposed itinerary, the Travel Agent connects with the
Airline Reservation System in order to reserve the seats ( Reserve Seats ). However, it may occur
that at that moment no seat is available for a particular leg o f the trip, because some time has
elapsed from the moment in which the availability check was m ade. In that case the Travel Agent
CLEI ELECTRONIC JOURNAL, VOLUME 10, NUMBER 2, PAPER 2, DECEMBER  2007

--- Page 8 ---
x<24check_seats? available_seat!
reserve_seat?
reserve_seat_ok!
x:=0
x<24
book_seat?no_available_seat!
x==24timeout!
x<24
cancel_reserve_seat?
cancel_reserve_seat_ok!book_seat_ok!receive_tickets!
book_seat_no!reserve_seat_no!
Figure 6: Timed automata for airline Reservation System.
is informed by the Airline Reservation System of that situat ion (No seats ), and the Travel Agent
informs the Traveller that the itinerary is not possible ( Notify of Cancellation ).
Once the reservation is made the Travel Agent informs the Tra veller ( Seats Reserved ). However,
this reservation is only valid for a period of one day, which m eans that if a ﬁnal conﬁrmation has
not been received in that period, the seats are unreserved an d the Travel Agent is informed. Thus,
the Traveller can now either ﬁnalize the reservation or canc el it. If he conﬁrms the reservation
(Book Tickets ), the Travel Agent asks the Airline Reservation System to ﬁn ally book the seats
(Book Seats ).
4.1 Translation of the Case Study
Figure 3 presents a detailed piece of the WS-CDL document des cribing the example that we have
used to obtain the translation into timed automata. Followi ng the guidelines described above we
have obtained in this case three timed automata: the travele r, the travel agent and the airline
company. These automata are shown in Figures 6, 7 and 8. Notic e the use of the clock xin the
timed automaton corresponding to the airline reservation s ystem, which is used to control when
the reservation expires. This clock is initialized when the action reserved seatis carried out.
4.2 Simulation and Veriﬁcation
In the simulation we can check whether the model keeps the sys tem behavior or not. This can
partially be done by means of simulations. These are made by c hoosing diﬀerent transitions and
delays along the system evolution. At any moment during the s imulation, you can see the variable
values and the enabled transitions. Thus, you can choose the transition that you want to execute.
Nevertheless, you can also select the random execution of tr ansitions, and thus, the system evolves
by executing transitions and delays which are selected rand omly. We have some other options in
the Simulator. For example, you can save simulation traces t hat can later be used to recover an
speciﬁc execution trace. Actually, the simulation is quite ﬂexible at this point, and you can move
back or forward in the sequence.
CLEI ELECTRONIC JOURNAL, VOLUME 10, NUMBER 2, PAPER 2, DECEMBER  2007

--- Page 9 ---
ordertrip!
available!
cancel_itinerary?change_itinerary?
reserve_tickets?
reserve_seat! reserve_seat_no?
reserve_seat_ok? timeout?
notify_timeout!check_seats!available_seat?
no_available_seat?no_available!
book_seat!book_seat_ok?receive_statement!
cancel_reserve_seat!cancel_reserve_seat_ok?accept_cancel!
book_seat_no?book_ticket?
cancel_reservation?timeout?no_reservation!
no_reservation!
Figure 7: Timed automata for Travel agent web service.
Startordertrip?available?
change_itinerary!
cancel_itinerary!
reserve_tickets!
cancel_reservation!book_ticket!
receive_statement?notify_timeout?
receive_tickets?
accept_cancel?no_available?
no_reservation?no_reservation?
Figure 8: Timed automata for traveler.
CLEI ELECTRONIC JOURNAL, VOLUME 10, NUMBER 2, PAPER 2, DECEMBER  2007

--- Page 10 ---
Then, with respect to our study case, our main goal in the vali dation phase is to check the
correctness of the message ﬂow and time-outs, taking into ac count the protocol deﬁnition. Having
made a number of simulations, we have concluded that the syst em design satisﬁes the expected
behavior in terms of the message ﬂow between the parties.
Before starting the automatic veriﬁcation, we must establi sh the properties that the model must
fulﬁll. We have divided these properties into three classes : Safety, Liveness and Deadlocks. These
properties are speciﬁed by means of a Temporal Logic . The temporal Logic used by UPPAAL is
described in [9].
Safety Properties allow us to check if our model satisﬁes some security restric tions. For
example, if we have two trains that have to cross the same brid ge, a security property is that both
trains cannot cross the bridge at the same time: ∀/square¬(Train 1.crossing ∧Train 2.crossing ) or
¬∃♦(Train 1.crossing ∧Train 2.crossing )
The main Safety properties are:
•The TravelAgent always sends the itinerary on the traveler’ s demand:
∀/squareTraveler.Itinerary ⇒ (1)
TravelAgent.sendItinerary
•The TravelAgent always changes the itinerary on the travele r’s demand:
∀/squareTraveler.ChangeItinerary ⇒ (2)
TravelAgent.PerformChange
•The TravelAgent always cancel the reservation on the travel er’s demand:
∀/squareTraveler.CancelReservation → (3)
(TravelAgent.CancelReservtRcv ∧
Airline.PerformCancel ∧
Airline.Clockx < 24)
•A reservation is only available 24 hours before performing t he booking:
∀/square(TravelAgent.Booking ∧ (4)
Airline.ReceiveBoking ∧
Airline.ClockX < = 24)
•A Traveler always receive theirs ticket and statement after perform the payment:
∀/squareTraveler.PaymentPerform → (5)
(Traveler.Finish ∧Airline.SnddTckt ∧
TravelAgent.SenddSttment )
Liveness Properties are used to check that our model can evolve in the right order. Returning
to the train example, if a train approaches the bridge, some t ime later, the train could cross it.
Train.approach →Train.crossed
CLEI ELECTRONIC JOURNAL, VOLUME 10, NUMBER 2, PAPER 2, DECEMBER  2007

--- Page 11 ---
Liveness Properties for our model are simple. For example, i f a Traveler sends a trip demand,
some time later, the TravelAgent will send the itineraries. Translating it into Temporal Logic we
have:
Traveler.PlanOrder −→TravelAgent.SendItinerary (6)
Or for example, if a Traveler makes a booking, within 24 hours after the reservation, the Airline
performs the booking. Translating it into Temporal Logic we have:
(Traveler.BookOdr ∧Airline.ClockX < 24)− → (7)
Airline.PerformBook
Deadlocks are clear restrictions. We could check if our model is deadlo ck-free:
∀/square¬Deadlock (8)
5 Translation from Timed Automata into WS-BPEL
For each component of timed automata we have the following co rrespondence in WS-BPEL speci-
ﬁcation:
Templates and Processes : These are used to describe the behavior of each type of party that
we are using in the choreography. Thus, this deﬁnition match es with the deﬁnition of a process
in WS-BPEL terminology.
Synchronization : These are used to deﬁne the communications between two auto mata tem-
plates, and the constraints needed for these communication s. In WS-BPEL we just need to
assign a correlation set for each one of these synchronizati ons.
Channel : The channel is a point of collaboration between parties, to gether with the speciﬁcation
of how the information is exchanged. Channels of Timed Autom ata correspond with ports of
WS-BPEL.
Variables : These are easily translated, as WS-BPEL supports variable s, which are used to rep-
resent certain information.
Now the problem is to deﬁne the behavior of each template. Thi s behavior is deﬁned by
using the information provided by the ﬂow and synchronizati on between the diﬀerent automata.
Timed Automata are sets of processes. Thus, processes are th e basic components of the Timed
Automata, and they capture the behavior of each component. P rocess can be obtained as a result
of a composition of process activities, by using sequential , choice and parallel operators. In terms
of timed automata these operators can be easily translated:
•The sequence of transitions is translated by composing a seq uence of activities.
•Parallel proceses are translated by the parallel operator w ith the involved processes.
•Choices are translated by adding activities to a choice oper ator.
CLEI ELECTRONIC JOURNAL, VOLUME 10, NUMBER 2, PAPER 2, DECEMBER  2007

--- Page 12 ---
Finally, time restrictions are associated in WS-BPEL with a ctivities and correlations. These
time restrictions are introduced in timed automata by means of guards and invariants. Therefore,
in the case of a guard in a loop transition having a time restri ction we generate a workunit that
involves the activities generated from the target of the loo p transition to the beginning.
Figure 9 presents a detailed piece of the WS-BPEL document de scribing our example this is
the mirror image of Figure 3 that has been obtained by applyin g the translations.
...
<context>
<process name ="BookSeats"
instantiation="other">
<action name="bookSeats"
role="tns:travelAgent"
operation="tns:TAtoAirline/bookSeats">
</action>
</process>
<exception>
<onMessage>
<action name="ReservationTimeOut"
role="tns:TravelAgent"
operation=
"tns:TAtoAirline/AcceptCancel">
<correlate
correlation="defs:reservationCorrel"/>
</action>
<action name="NotifyOfTimeOut"
role="tns:TravelAgent"
operation=
"tns:TAtoTraveller/NotifyofCancel"/>
<fault code="tns:reservatTimedOut"/>
</onMessage>
...
</exception>
...
</context>
Figure 9: Part of WS-BPEL especiﬁcation
6 Conclusions and Future Work
Nowadays, Web Services are becoming a powerful tool for the i mplementation of distributed ap-
plications over Internet. In many cases these services have associated time restrictions, as we have
seen in the case study that we have presented here. Therefore , the speciﬁcation and design of Web
Services can be made by using some well known formalisms, suc h as timed automata, and tools
supporting them (UPPAAL) in order to verify and validate the system behavior. Consequently, it
becomes of interest to obtain correct web services speciﬁcations written in WS-CDL and WS-BPEL
languages by using Timed Automata and Model Checking in orde r to exploit the veriﬁcation capa-
bilities that they can provide. In this paper we have seen how to exploit these capabilities by using
translations between them, applied to a particular case stu dy. We are currently implementing these
translations in a suite tool that uses UPPAAL as the engine fo r simulation and veriﬁcation.
CLEI ELECTRONIC JOURNAL, VOLUME 10, NUMBER 2, PAPER 2, DECEMBER  2007

--- Page 13 ---
Our future work addresses the issue of implementing a comple te methodology on the generation
ofcorrect web services. We will use UML graphical diagrams and require ments engineering in the
design and analysis of real-time web services respectively , WS-CDL and WS-BPEL as implemen-
tation languages, and Timed Automata and Model Checking as f ormal techniques.
References
[1] R. Alur and D. Dill, Automata for modeling real–time systems , In Proceedings of the
17th International Colloquium on Automata, Languages and P rogramming, volume 443,
Editors. Springer–Verlag, 1990.
[2] Assaf Arkin, Sid Askary, Ben Bloch, et. al., Web Services Business Process Execu-
tion Language Version 2.0 , Editors. OASIS Open, December 2004. In http://www.oasis-
open.org/committees/download.php/10347/wsbpel-speci ﬁcation-draft-120204.htm.
[3] Mario Bravetti, Claudio Guidi, Roberto Lucchi and Gianl uigi Zavattaro , Supporting E-
commerce system formalization with Choreography Language s, In Proc. of the 20th ACM
Symposium on Applied Computing (SAC’05), special track on E -Commerce Technologies
, ACM Press, 2005.
[4] Edmund M. Clarke and Jr. and Orna Grumberg and Doron A. Pel ed,Model Checking ,
MIT Press, 1999.
[5] G. Diaz, J. J. Pardo, M. E. Cambronero, V. Valero and F. Cua rtero, Veriﬁcation of
Web Services with Timed Autoamata , In proceedings of First International Workshop on
Automated Speciﬁcation and Veriﬁcation of Web Sites, Valen cia, March 2005.
[6] G. Diaz, J. J. Pardo, M. E. Cambronero, V. Valero and F. Cua rtero,Automatic Translation
of WS-CDL Choreographies to Timed Automata , In proceedings of WS-FM, 2005.
[7] Constance Heitmeyer and Dino Mandrioli. Formal Methods for Real-Time Computing .
John Wiley & Sons. 1996.
[8] Nickolas Kavantzas et al. Web Service Choreography Description Language (WSCDL) 1.0 .
In http://www.w3.org/TR/ws-cdl-10/.
[9] K. Larsen and P. Pettersson and Wang Yi, Uppaal in a Nutshell , Int. Journal on Software
Tools for Technology Transfer, Editors. Springer–Verlag v ol.1, 1997.
[10] Simon Woodman, et al., Speciﬁcation and Veriﬁcation of Composite Web Services , In
proocedings of The 8th Enterprise Distributed Object Compu ting Conference 2004.
CLEI ELECTRONIC JOURNAL, VOLUME 10, NUMBER 2, PAPER 2, DECEMBER  2007
