--- Page 1 ---
HAL Id: hal-04070711
https://hal.science/hal-04070711v1
Submitted on 22 Jan 2024
HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access archive
for the deposit and dissemination of scientific re-
search documents, whether they are published or not.
The documents may come from teaching and research
institutions in France or abroad, or from public or pri-
vate research centers.L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL , est des-
tinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents scien-
tifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non, émanant
des établissements d’enseignement et de recherche
français ou étrangers, des laboratoires publics ou
privés.
HAL Authorization
Implementation of a Model-Oriented Approach for
Supporting Safe Integration of GNSS-Based Virtual Balises in
ERTMS/ETCS Level 3
Ouail Himrane, Julie Beugin, Mohamed Ghazel
To cite this version:
Ouail Himrane, Julie Beugin, Mohamed Ghazel. Implementation of a Model-Oriented Approach for Support-
ing Safe Integration of GNSS-Based Virtual Balises in ERTMS/ETCS Level 3. IEEE Open Journal of Intelligent
Transportation Systems, 2023, ⟨10.1109/OJITS.2023.3267142⟩. ⟨hal-04070711⟩

--- Page 2 ---
Received XX Month, XXXX; revised XX Month, XXXX; accepted XX Month, XXXX; Date of publication XX Month, XXXX; date of
current version XX Month, XXXX.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/OJITS.2022.1234567
Implementation of a Model-Oriented
Approach for Supporting Safe
Integration of GNSS-Based Virtual
Balises in ERTMS/ETCS Level 3
OUAIL HIMRANE∗, JULIE BEUGIN∗, AND MOHAMED GHAZEL∗
1Univ. Gustave Eiffel, COSYS-ESTAS, F-59650 Villeneuve d’Ascq, France
CORRESPONDING AUTHOR: Julie Beugin (e-mail: julie.beugin@univ-eiffel.fr).
This research has received funding from the Shift2Rail Joint Undertaking (JU) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and
innovation program under Grant Agreement N. 101015416 (PERFORMINGRAIL). The JU receives support from the European Union’s
Horizon 2020 research and innovation program and the Shift2Rail JU members other than the Union.
ABSTRACT Moving Block is a railway signaling concept that paves the way for increasing line capacity
while reducing maintenance and operating costs. Its implementation relies on autonomous solutions for
train localization, mainly based on GNSS technology. However, the introduction of such technological
innovations leads to the emergence of new risks. These risks need to be investigated meticulously, and some
confidence level needs to be assigned to GNSS-based localization solutions in railways while considering
various settings. The contribution of this paper falls within this context by bringing formal approaches
into play in order to evaluate performance and safety properties related to the use of GNSS-based virtual
balises for train localization. Specifically, the adopted model-based approach consists in translating the
relevant behavior of the localization system through configurable timed and probabilistic automata. The
elaborated models being parameterizable, various test scenarios, considering a wide range of configurations,
can be investigated. Quantitative and qualitative analysis results can be generated on the basis of our
models by means of statistical model-checking algorithms implemented in the UPPAAL-SMC modeling
and verification tool. A case study is used to illustrate the application of the presented approach, and
various numerical analysis results are provided. As the present contribution implements a model-driven
approach to perform safety analysis in railways, it is fully in line with the increasing willingness to reduce
recourse to on-site tests in the sector. Such tests are indeed costly and time-consuming, thus jeopardizing
the introduction of technical innovations in railways.
INDEX TERMS ERTMS/ETCS L3, Fixed Virtual Block, Formal Model, GNSS-based localization, Moving
block, Railway safety, Statistical Model-Checking, Train positioning, Virtual balises
I. INTRODUCTION
IN railway transportation, the localization function plays
a critical role in the safe control of train movement and
in traffic management. New technologies, such as GNSS-
based systems (Global Navigation Satellite Systems), offer
promising means to implement this function while allowing
for better operational performances. Furthermore, beyond
performance improvement, such solutions allow new oper-
ational concepts and principles to be implemented, such as
the concept of ‘virtual balise’ that will be addressed later in
this paper.Introducing virtual objects for the control of train move-
ment was initially envisaged by means of the ‘virtual block’
concept which aims at shortening urban train separation
distance, and thus increasing metro line capacity [1], [2].
Indeed, virtual block sections subdivide a classical fixed
block section1into several ones, allowing the presence of
more trains throughout the line. Besides, the ‘moving block’
1When lines are divided into block sections, a train must not enter a
block section until it has been cleared by the train ahead. This allows safe
train separation [3].
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
VOLUME , 1This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Open Journal of Intelligent Transportation Systems. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/OJITS.2023.3267142
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

--- Page 3 ---
Himrane et al. : Implementation of a Model-Oriented Approach for Supporting the Safe Integration of GNSS-Based Virtual Balises in ERTMS/ETCS Level 3
concept is based on virtual blocks and amounts to (theoret-
ically) reducing the length of virtual block sections to zero.
In so doing, the moving block notion allows for considering
a minimal and dynamical virtual protection zone around
the train for ensuring safe and optimal operation [3]. The
virtual/moving block notions are today investigated for im-
proving the operation of conventional and high-speed railway
lines. They lie today at the center of the highest operational
level (L3) of ERTMS (European Rail Traffic Management
System), which is the European railway control/command
and signaling standard2. Virtual/moving block concepts are
known under the FVB and FMB principles (respectively
Fixed Virtual Block - Full Moving Block) in the framework
of ERTMS L3 [5].
However, the monitoring of virtual/moving block occu-
pancy requires to track in a more precise way train position,
which is under the responsibility of the localization function.
Currently, in ERTMS, this function has another goal: to
ensure the control of speed limits on-board train and to
guarantee train stop prior to dangerous location. It relies
on a number of embedded sensors interacting with trackside
equipment, the balises, distributed punctually along the block
sections. Virtualization techniques have also been extended
to balises by using software applications and databases
(geographical data and embedded telegrams), both emulating
the role initially fulfilled by trackside equipment. In partic-
ular, instead of using the geographical reference position
classically provided by the physical balises, GNSS-based
localization devices constitute an interesting alternative solu-
tion for providing such position references [6]. It is plain that
integrating virtual objects in the railway control-command
can substantially reduce the installation and maintenance
costs of equipment deployed all along the track, i.e. the
trackside train detectors installed on the block sections and
the physical balises. However, it is less clear whether or
not virtual balises can improve directly operational perfor-
mances. For this purpose, an adjustment between the size of
virtual block sections (in FVB operation) /the safety margins
added in the moving blocks (in FMB operation), the number
of block sections if virtually defined, and the number and
the location of balises need to be conjointly investigated for
reaching optimized operational performances. Such investi-
gation raises a number of tricky issues, and requires tackling
the interaction complexity between the existing physical
components and the new virtual items that are part of the
railway control-command system.
In this context, the Shift2Rail Joint Undertaking that coor-
dinates the research and innovation investments of the H2020
European program in the railway domain has launched
several projects, some of which consider the evolution of
ERTMS, such as, X2Rail-1–5, MOVINGRAIL, and PER-
FORMINGRAIL. Among different innovative topics pertain-
ing to the ERTMS railway standard, these research projects
2To go deeper into operation levels and modes of ERTMS, the reader
can find a detailed description in [4].explore the concepts of virtual blocks, moving blocks, and
virtual balises, particularly in terms of safety and perfor-
mance evaluation. They have resulted in the definition of
early and high-level specifications for ERTMS L3 that will
be improved and detailed in the next European program
supported by Europe’s Rail, the successor of Shift2Rail [7].
Yet, no detailed specifications that can serve as a stable
baseline for the implementation of ERTMS L3 are available
nowadays.
In the H2020 European program as well as in previous
European research programs, some projects have explic-
itly focused on GNSS-based on-board systems with the
aim of proving the feasibility of using such systems to
implement the railway localization function [8]. Projects
such as STARS, RHINOS, ERSAT-GGC, ASTRAIL and
GATE4RAIL have resulted in multiple innovative solutions,
large measurement campaigns and testing platforms that
support the integration of GNSS-based solutions in ETCS
(European Train Control System), which is the automatic
train control and protection subsystem in ERTMS. Several
challenging issues were tackled in these projects, such as
the local propagation effects on satellite signals in harsh
railway environments (with vegetation, buildings, hills, rail-
way cuttings, etc.) and those due to interference. These
aspects directly impact the signal quality and, therefore, the
localization performances, which can heighten safety risks.
Considering the safety-critical aspects of the localization
function in railway Control-Command and Signaling systems
(CCS) like ERTMS, an essential prerequisite for the adoption
of GNSS-based systems is to define the safety requirements
and to provide a set of safety evidence that allows their
certification in accordance with the in force regulations
(today the CCS Technical Specification of Interoperability
[9]). For this purpose, the safety analysis has to be conducted
at railway system level, not only at the localization system
level, in order to consider the global risk of the system
in operation within a given environment. Nevertheless, it
can be observed that, today, safety analyses focus more on
the embedded equipment, mainly because the constraints
induced by the railway environment on GNSS signals are
very difficult to characterize and quantify. Important efforts
are also spent on the development of robust architectures and
fault detection techniques using fail-safe principles. Besides,
performing ad-hoc on-site tests of such architectures proves
to be awkward, costly, and very time-consuming. In general
terms, the variable impact of the railway environment on
GNSS based-systems and its complex interactions with the
different control-command parts constitute a considerable
obstacle for defining a generic and systematic safety assess-
ment process that can be useful for the deployment and the
acceptance of such systems in railway CCS.
It follows that advanced safety and performance analysis
techniques need to be elaborated to foster the introduction
of GNSS-based solutions in railways and set the stage for
innovative, performing and safe railway operational modes.
2 VOLUME ,This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Open Journal of Intelligent Transportation Systems. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/OJITS.2023.3267142
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

--- Page 4 ---
The present paper focuses on the most mature GNSS-
based solution, which is based on the concept of virtual
balise [6] and the developed approach brings into play the
model-checking technique. Namely, it is a formal method
that offers significant advantages in terms of safety and
performance analysis of dynamic systems. Formal methods
are based on mathematical and logical foundations that
allow for rigorously describing the system behavior and
set a basis for automatic verification of a wide range of
settings. It is plain that such model-based approaches offer
substantial gains in terms of time and cost, particularly when
compared to on-site testing. In fact, the underlying idea
is to establish parameterizable models that can cope with
various operational configurations. Therefore, the analysis of
different settings can be performed at the cost of a minimal
adaptation effort.
The contribution discussed in this paper aims to apply
a comprehensive model-oriented approach that is agnostic
from the technical localization solution while considering
the main features pertaining to the use of GNSS-based
systems, in order to analyze and quantify safety-related
properties and operational settings. A particular focus is
made on the operating principles dedicated to virtual balise
implementation in the context of ERTMS/ETCS L3. Based
on formal behavioral models that are adaptable to different
systems’ features and different operational situations, the
approach is aimed to include the parameterization of the
model settings. This allows any GNSS-based localization
solution to be addressed, considering it as a “Black box”
and only requiring the characterization of its safety-related
performances. Enabling the models versatility and reusabil-
ity offers the possibility to fine-tune different operational
characteristics while ensuring operational safety. As will be
highlighted in Section II, to the best of our knowledge,
no such methodology has been proposed to set safe and
efficient configuration data, which are of crucial importance
for railway safety and signaling engineers. In fact, the
present work capitalizes on the preliminary work presented
in [10] and [11] while proposing several extensions and
useful quantitative results. Namely, [10] is mainly focused
on motivating the development of a modular approach, that
is based on formal models, towards evaluating safety prop-
erties in a railway signaling system that deploys a GNSS-
based localization function. The paper also discusses the
operational, functional and dysfunctional aspects that need
to be considered. Modeling the various GNSS environments
is also proposed, and a preliminary rough model of the train
movement is also sketched out. Then, [11] is mainly devoted
to explaining how safety features can be investigated on the
basis of some developed timed automata models, constituents
of the detailed approach. Some models emulating the reading
of physical balises and GNSS-based virtual balises and train
movement are provided. Then, the way safety properties can
be formalized by means of watchdogs is explained. The
paper also discusses the various parameterizations that can beperformed on the models. Now, in the present paper, several
amendments have been made to the preliminary models
established in [10] and [11], and some new modules have
been added to make our evaluation more realistic (as will be
discussed in the sequel). Moreover, the evaluation of safety
and operational features based on the various developed
models is discussed. Besides, as will be detailed later on
(cf. Section V), we show how the adopted reasoning can be
advantageously re-used to investigate different line layouts
while considering the different uncertainties that may impact
train localization and, hence, operational safety. For this to
be achieved, an ERTMS/ETCS L3 case study is described
and analyzed through three settings of parameters used to
tune the developed models.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.
Section II introduces the context and outlines the main
related works. The ‘virtual balise’ concept is presented in
Section III, in which some models to describe the uncer-
tainties related to the train localization based on the use of
virtual balise are also established. Section IV discusses the
global parametric model, encompassing all the established
models, which serves as a basis for our approach. In this
section, the various impacting parameters and the properties
to be investigated are also presented. In Section V, different
simulation scenarios are established accordingly. Then, the
simulation results are presented and discussed. Finally, some
concluding remarks as well as the perspectives of this work
are addressed in Section VI.
II. CONTEXT AND RELATED WORKS
In this section, we first describe how the localization function
is involved (among other functions) to ensure safe operation
of trains under ETCS. In this context, we specifically focus
on the operation under ETCS levels 2 and 3 for which
the use of GNSS-based localization solutions proves to be
promising. To understand the impact of using GNSS-based
localization in railways, we thereafter discuss the various
safety aspects related to the use of GNSS as a means
for the localization function. Finally, a brief review of the
existing works that deal with safety assessment of GNSS-
based systems in the railway domain is presented, with a
specific focus on the approaches using formal methods.
A. THE LOCALIZATION FUNCTION UNDER ETCS
OPERATION
ETCS is broken down into equipment embedded in trains
(ETCS On-board) and trackside equipment (ETCS Track-
side). In ETCS L2 and L3, the localization function is en-
sured by ETCS On-board. The latter relies on an embedded
localization unit, which has to estimate the train position
with some confidence interval. Note that, in the following,
the localization function is considered equivalent to the train
positioning. Moreover, ‘Train positioning’ and‘Train loca-
tion management’ are different though interrelated functions.
Indeed, the latter monitors the presence/absence of trains on
VOLUME , 3This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Open Journal of Intelligent Transportation Systems. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/OJITS.2023.3267142
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

--- Page 5 ---
Himrane et al. : Implementation of a Model-Oriented Approach for Supporting the Safe Integration of GNSS-Based Virtual Balises in ERTMS/ETCS Level 3
each part of the railway line, i.e. the ‘track occupancy’ , and
ensures the ‘safe train separation’ on a track. As explained
below, the track occupancy is determined differently in
ETCS L2 and L3; however, the safe train separation relies on
the same principle: ETCS Trackside regularly provides each
train with an up-to-date target point until which it is allowed
to proceed. The distance between the train front-end and its
allocated target point, associated with the permitted speed,
is called ‘Movement Authority’ (MA), while the target point
is called ‘End of Authority’ (EoA). MA data are sent by the
trackside sub-system through a radio communication link.
ETCS L2 uses the traditional train separation method
based on dividing the line into fixed block sections. The
block sections are delimited by physical devices (e.g., track
circuits, axle counters). Based on the block occupancy status
reported by the Trackside Train Detection devices (TTD),
the ETCS Trackside determines the ‘train location’ . With a
TTD-based reporting, the system exactly knows the segment
(or the segments, when the train is passing from one block to
the next block) in which the train lies. This segment includes
the train from its front-end (the head) to its rear-end (the
tail). However, ETCS Trackside cannot determine the precise
‘train position’ (of the train head) in a segment.
In ETCS L3, the train separation function is, instead, based
on the ‘train position’ . Initially, this information allows
ETCS On-board to supervise the train speed and braking
curve in order to stay behind the EoA as in the case of ETCS
L2. In ETCS L3, it makes also possible the track occupancy
to be established in a more precise way. For this purpose,
the Train Position Reports (TPR), produced on-board and
transmitted by radio to ETCS Trackside, must not only
include the train front-end position, but also the train rear-
end position. This latter can be estimated using an embedded
unit called Train Integrity Monitoring System (TIMS), which
is responsible for monitoring the train integrity, i.e., the po-
tential loss of wagons if a mechanical link is broken. Based
on TPR with the associated train integrity data, ETCS L3
no longer needs TTD-related physical equipment. Therefore,
both the Full Moving Block (FMB) and the Fixed Virtual
block (FVB) principles can be applied. In FVB, although
the blocks are fixed, they can be used for implementing an
FMB-like operation. Indeed, as they are only represented in
a logical form in the trackside databases, they can finely
discretize a railway line in small fixed sections by adapting
the digital track configuration. Nevertheless, under the FMB
operation, theoretically EoA can be issued in any point of
the railway line, while under the FVB operation, EoA must
correspond to some block extremity.
For lines on which a migration towards ETCS L3 is
foreseen, a transition phase with mixed traffic (train equipped
or not equipped with Moving Block system) is possible
by using hybrid implementations. In this case, the ETCS
Trackside should be able to manage both physical and logical
train separation. Namely, physical separation shall be based
on TTD, while logical separation on TPR. Thus, four typesof ETCS L3 have been defined: Hybrid FVB, Hybrid FMB,
FVB without TTD and, FMB without TTD. The develop-
ment of ETCS L3 is nowadays carried out according to two
related, though complementary, work-streams. The first is
led by the Shif2Rail partners and focuses on developing the
four MB variants. The second, led by EUG (ERTMS Users’
Group) [5], focuses on a specific variant: hybrid FVB, also
called hybrid Level 3 [12]. This last variant seems to be
the most advanced development phase and actual tests have
already been conducted on it such as those led in 2018 in
Germany within the DB Living Lab [13], or those led in
2017 on a test track at the ETCS National Integration Facility
(ENIF) provided by Network Rail (UK) [14].
Safety specification for ETCS sub-systems [9], [15] im-
poses very high safety requirements. The train localization
function has then to meet a Tolerable Hazard Rate (THR)
of 10-9per operating hour. This constraint has been resolved
in a satisfactory manner by a combination of balises3and
odometry systems. These interoperable components are to-
day used in ETCS L2 and will surely be used in ETCS L3, as
most railway actors still request them, especially due to the
absolute position references provided by the balises. Nev-
ertheless, deploying ‘physical balises’ (PB) on the track is
substantially costly. Therefore, GNSS-based ‘virtual balise’
(VB) systems are envisaged in ETCS L2 and L3 (their
principles will be explained in Section III).
The underlying idea behind using VB is to emulate the
behavior produced by PB without resorting to physical de-
vices (balises). In general, balises can be placed to coincide
with blocks’ limits. Hence, by using VB, it becomes possible
to virtually split the line into shorter sections without using
additional physical devices (cf. Figure 1). However, choosing
the location of the balises is an engineering matter since no
rule in the specifications addresses this aspect. Besides, when
upgrading existing lines toward ETCS L3 with the possible
use of VB, the presence of some existing PB and new
VB has also to be considered. The question of the gradual
migration of an existing line by using new artifacts, such
as VB, is of paramount importance. Indeed, the components
which are already implemented on the line have to coexist
with those to be deployed during the migration. This would
not have been the case if a completely new line is built.
However, in most cases, new constructions are avoided
because they induce unaffordable infrastructure costs and
can even be technically impossible due to geographical space
unavailability, especially in dense territories.
Finally, an interesting trade-off solution is to upgrade
existing lines that are operated with classic fixed blocks by
enabling the use of FVB, while using both PB and VB. That
is why the analysis process proposed in the present paper
will consider the presence of both types of balises along a
3Balises are passive electronic components that can be activated by an
electromagnetic field continuously emitted by the train. Once activated, the
balise sends a telegram containing information on its geographical position
to the ETCS On-board module.
4 VOLUME ,This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Open Journal of Intelligent Transportation Systems. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/OJITS.2023.3267142
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

--- Page 6 ---
FIGURE 1. Example of balise implantation in ETCS Trackside.
line. Such a process can advantageously serve as a guide
for railway signaling engineers to set a safe configuration of
virtual balises on a given railway track.
B. GNSS-RELATED SAFETY FACTORS
A GNSS system (such as Galileo or GPS) includes a constel-
lation of satellites in orbit, ground monitoring installations
and user receivers. The satellites transmit signals that allow a
receiver to estimate its position. This estimation is calculated
by triangulation based on the signal propagation delay from
the transmitters to the receiver. In the railway operation
environment, the presence of obstacles, such as vegetation
and buildings, can lead to signal perturbations that affect
the position calculation process. Moreover, another issue is
pertaining to the availability of the GNSS signals such as
for instance when train enters tunnels or in harsh environ-
ments. In most cases, GNSS receivers are implemented in
combined architectures in such a way that GNSS technology
is integrated with additional sensors/digital means, which
can compensate GNSS perturbations. Such a combined ar-
chitecture offers several advantages as discussed in [16].
Therefore, safety and performance features have to be as-
sociated with the calculated position, especially in safety-
critical applications [17]. Namely, “a measure of the trust that
can be placed in the correctness of the information supplied
by the navigation system” is defined as the ‘Integrity Risk’
(IR). It refers to the probability of providing localization
information out of some tolerance margin without warning
the user within a given period of time [18]. The estimation
ofIRis based on a set of parameters that are dependent on
the target application.
•The ‘Position Error’ (PE), which is the difference
between the estimated position and the actual position.
•The ‘Alert Limit’ (AL), which represents the largest
position error that allows for safe operation. The AL
defines the error tolerance that cannot be exceeded
without issuing a warning. Therefore, it is generally
defined as an application-dependent safety requirement.
However, since it is not possible to know the actual posi-
tion error in real time during the operation, a statistical bound
to the position error, called ‘Protection Level’ (PL), needs to
be computed in order to measure the risk that the alert limithas been exceeded. As the train position is constrained by
the track coordinates, only the one-dimensional component
of the PL, called ‘Along Track Protection Level’ (ATPL),
can also be determined on the basis of the track description
information.
The expected nominal operation mode implies to have
aPEsmaller than the calculated PLand a PLsmaller
than the AL(cf. Figure 2, case 1). Therefore, to allow
the use of GNSS-based systems for train localization, it
has to be proved that the delivered position information is
never (or sufficiently rarely, i.e., with a small acceptable
probability) declared reliable and available when the actual
PEexceeds ALwhile the estimated PLis smaller than AL(cf.
Figure 2, case 2). In aeronautics, the authorities have already
certified that an aircraft can realize a safety-critical APV
(Approach with Vertical Guidance) with GNSS, especially
with the EGNOS augmentation system [6]. An analogous
certification process is needed in railways to ensure the
required confidence level in terms of safety.
C. RELATED WORKS
In this section, we give a brief overview of the existing works
that tackle the safety issues related to the use of GNSS-
based localization systems in railways. With the localization
function being safety-critical, such systems must go through
a certification process to be adopted in railway CCS systems,
such as ERTMS. In Europe, such a process is controlled
by the ERA (European Union Agency for Railways4) and
national railway safety authorities (e.g., EPSF in France,
EBA in Germany). It results in an authorization for placing
in service or on the market.
In fact, most of the certification effort focuses on providing
a safety and quality set of evidences, which endeavors to
prove that the system fulfills the relevant safety require-
ments. Therefore, on the one hand, some existing works
have intended to define safety requirements and allocate
quantitative safety targets to the functional parts of satellite-
based localization systems [20], [21], especially in the case
of the Virtual Balise Transmission System [22]. On the other
hand, some studies have proposed means to demonstrate
safety performances of different technical architectures [23],
[24] and to qualify hazardous positioning errors w.r.t railway
safety criteria [25], [26]. Furthermore, we can also find
some contributions that establish links between aeronautical
and railway safety criteria [27], [28]. In order to assess
these criteria, on-site testing approaches have been used
in the aforementioned works, benefiting from their great
power of persuasion. However, the implementation of testing
approaches is both expensive and time-consuming. More-
over, the obtained results are strongly dependent on the
environmental testing conditions. Consequently, complemen-
tary ‘zero on-site testing’ approaches, based on models and
simulation, are needed to investigate different configurations
and environments at a much lower cost. In this context and
4https://www.era.europa.eu/
VOLUME , 5This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Open Journal of Intelligent Transportation Systems. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/OJITS.2023.3267142
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

--- Page 7 ---
Himrane et al. : Implementation of a Model-Oriented Approach for Supporting the Safe Integration of GNSS-Based Virtual Balises in ERTMS/ETCS Level 3
FIGURE 2. Illustration of the concepts related to the localization integrity risk using a 2-dimensional space [19].
in light of the strict safety requirements in the railway sector,
a long-standing effort considers the use of formal methods
and tools for the analysis of railway signaling systems [29]–
[40]. Specifically, the recent works in [41] and [42] have
presented a survey and a mapping study on various formal
methods and tools used in railways. It should be noted here
that a number of studies have addressed the assessment
of railway safety properties, while tackling different use
cases. In [43] and [44], the reliability of railway interlocking
systems is considered, while [45] deals with the analysis of
railway timetables. In [46], a moving block signaling system
endowed with autonomous driving is modeled and analyzed,
while considering various driving strategies. In [47]–[49],
the authors investigate specific MB scenarios by considering
the ETCS On-board interface with the train localization unit,
while abstracting away the specific localization functionali-
ties coming from balises or GNSS. In [50], the occupancy
of virtual tramway track sections at a simple junction was
modeled and analyzed, considering random intervals around
tram location continuously provided by means of a GNSS-
based system. However, to the best of our knowledge, no
study has provided comprehensive formal models that allow
for quantitative assessment of safety properties pertaining to
the use of GNSS-based localization systems in the railway
domain, in particular with the operating principles specific
to Virtual Balises.
In the following sections, we focus on the investigation
of the train localization process with VB while consider-
ing the localization errors that such balises can introduce.
In particular, we seek to finely and rigorously investigate
the localization uncertainties induced by the use of VB
in railway CCS, with the help of formal models. Such
models are built while making particular effort to ensurereusability, modularity, and parametrization as detailed in
[10], and models in [11] serve as a preliminary basis to
the models established in the present work, while showing
various extensions and some additional details. Namely, the
parameterization aspects intervene in these models at several
places, for instance when the mentioned uncertainties related
to the operational environment are characterized depending
on various distribution settings. Another aspect that will be
shown is related to the reusability of the elaborated models to
cope with different operational configurations. Having these
features associated with the formal models, we can assess
how well (in a probabilistic way) the safety requirements
are fulfilled for different railway operational context where
VB are employed for train localization.
III. BEHAVIORAL MODELS FOR THE VB-BASED
LOCALIZATION SYSTEM
A. THE LOCALIZATION PROCESS WITH VB
As explained in Section II, railway localization is fundamen-
tal for performing the safe control of train movement. Tradi-
tionally, trains use on-board odometry to continuously esti-
mate their position. Concretely, the odometer calculates the
‘traveled distance’ from a ‘reference position’ by monitoring
the number of wheels revolutions. The reference position is
acquired by means of physical balises installed along the
track (set in groups). These balises allow odometry errors
to be corrected punctually. Such errors are due to wheel
jamming and slipping phenomena and are accumulated as the
traveled distance increases until the next balise group is met.
In between two successive groups of balises, the localization
process involves a ‘confidence interval’ (cf. Figure 3.a)) that
is centered on the estimated train head position and whose
6 VOLUME ,This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Open Journal of Intelligent Transportation Systems. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/OJITS.2023.3267142
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

--- Page 8 ---
FIGURE 3. ‘Confidence interval’ and ‘expectation window’ concepts in ETCS.
calculation process must be designed to include the actual
train position with a minimal margin.
According to ERTMS specifications [51], the ‘distance
measured on-board’ can have an error that must not ex-
ceed±(5 + 5% ·s)meters, sbeing the estimated traveled
distance. Hence, if the actual train position is in front
(resp. in rear) of the estimated position, this latter is under-
estimated (resp. over-estimated). Consequently, the men-
tioned requirement can be expressed as follows: the ‘under-
reading amount’ (resp. the ‘over-reading amount’ ) shall be
at most 5 + 5% ·smeters. This threshold is a maximal
value for the ‘under/over-reading amount’ (illustrated in
Figure 3.a)). Note that this requirement specifically refers to
on-board localization errors, including odometry errors and
‘balise detection’ related errors [52].
As mentioned above, the traveled distance is calculated
w.r.t some reference position. Today, in ETCS L2, this ref-
erence position is provided by physical balises (PB) installed
on the track and is updated to the location of the last activated
balise. Moreover, by readjusting the estimated train position
with the balise position, the ‘over/under-reading amount’ is
reset. Yet, a ‘residual error’ still remains, corresponding to
the uncertainty related to the balise location itself. In ERTMS
specifications, this error is referred to as the QLOCACC
parameter, which is a fixed value (cf. Figure 3.a)).As mentioned earlier in the paper, some ongoing research
projects are investigating the possibility of replacing the
physical balises with virtual balises [6]. Concretely, each
of these VB corresponds to a reference position stored in
the ETCS On-board module. By means of the GNSS-based
localization unit, the on-board module launches the calcula-
tion of the train position in every interval where it expects to
encounter a virtual balise; such interval is called ‘expectation
window’ in ERTMS specifications (cf. Figure 3.b)). Namely,
when the traveled distance estimated on-board (including
associated uncertainties) reaches the expectation interval, the
ETCS on-board module continuously monitors whether the
GNSS-based position matches the position of the VB. As
soon as this matching occurs, the VB is activated (emulating
the activation of a PB), and its position is used as a new
reference position. Accordingly, a protection level (PL) (cf.
Subsection C) is associated with the GNSS-based position
at the time of the VB activation, and this PL serves as a
’residual error’ related to the location of VB.
It should be noticed that the value of the residual error in
the case of PB is fixed and bounded by 5meters, as required
in the ERTMS specifications. In contrast, the residual error
value related to VB activation is unknown and bounded by
the PL, which may exceed 5meters. Moreover, the PL may
vary from one balise to another, and from one passage to
VOLUME , 7This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Open Journal of Intelligent Transportation Systems. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/OJITS.2023.3267142
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

--- Page 9 ---
Himrane et al. : Implementation of a Model-Oriented Approach for Supporting the Safe Integration of GNSS-Based Virtual Balises in ERTMS/ETCS Level 3
another, depending on several parameters mainly related to
the operating environment. Consequently, as it is not possible
to predict with certainty the PL value that shall be used
for readjusting the train position estimated on-board, a new
uncertainty factor arises. Therefore, a new variable must be
accounted for when studying balise arrangements during the
design phase of a railway line.
For the safe configuration of balises, the process proposed
in the present paper allows for analyzing, globally on a
line, how likely the train position error ‘bound’ may exceed
some predetermined threshold. In the following section, we
will discuss the developed models involved in the perfor-
mance/safety analysis.
B. DEVELOPMENT OF THE FORMAL MODELS
B.1) Behavioral models
Our aim through this modeling phase is to set rigorous
models to describe the behavior of the localization function
presented previously. In fact, we do not seek to model
the position error at each time step. Instead, we focus our
modeling process on the maximum tolerated interval that has
to include the actual and estimated positions. This allows
us to adopt a safety-oriented point of view. It is worth
mentioning that this ‘global uncertainty on the train position’
will be determined while considering the various sources of
uncertainties.
These models will serve to check a number of properties
on this function while considering various configurations. In
this respect, our modeling process ensures modularity and
parameterization so as the generated models can be updated
to various settings. It is worth recalling that the results
obtained from the model-based approaches are obviously as
good as the elaborated models are realistic, i.e., reflect the
actual behavior faithfully [53]. Hence, the modeling activity
remains a crucial phase in these approaches and highly relies
on the user expertise, both in terms of modeling and system
comprehension [54], [55].
In our work, we mainly focus on the following features:
1) modelling the train dynamics as it moves. This allows
the travelled distance to be updated according to a set
of parameters.
2) modelling the evolution of the train position error
bound, i.e., the continuous evolution of the maximal
position error permitted according to the measured
travelled distance.
3) modelling the activation of physical and virtual balises.
4) updating the error bound when a PB or a VB is
encountered. Concretely, this induces a punctual down
jump, in nominal conditions, of the error bound due to
the resetting function, while the corresponding residual
error is kept.
FIGURE 4. High-level view of the global model.
To meet the requirements of our modeling process as
discussed above, we chose the UPPAAL model-checking5
tool employed in several works mentioned in Subsection C.
UPPAAL [56] allows for handling a network of parameter-
izable timed and probabilistic automata, hence making it
possible to establish modular and configurable models. First,
the behavioral modules in UPPAAL have to be established
as a number of parameterizable timed automaton templates.
Then, the actual behavioral model is generated as a product
of timed automaton models instantiated from these template
models. Moreover, the tool includes a number of model-
checking algorithms that allow the evaluation of various
types of properties expressed as temporal logic assertions.
If some property is not satisfied on the model, a counter-
example is generated showing a trace that violates the prop-
erty, which offers a valuable feature for debugging. Finally, it
is worth noting that UPPAAL also offers simulation facilities
that can be advantageously used for both modeling and
verification phases.
Figure 4 and Figure 5 show the main modules that have
been developed to describe the behavior of the localization
function. Besides these five modules, a module allowing
the initialization of PB and VB location on the track, and
another allowing the time to be elapsed have been developed.
Figure 4 exhibits a high-level view of the global model with
the shared data and the synchronization messages among
the interacting modules, while Figure 5 exhibits four detailed
automata along with the module variables and their role. The
PL (Protection Level) module is not represented here as it
5Model-checking is a formal method that allows for automatically
checking properties expressed as temporal logic formulas on state-transition
models.
8 VOLUME ,This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Open Journal of Intelligent Transportation Systems. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/OJITS.2023.3267142
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

--- Page 10 ---
is related to random variable generation according to some
stochastical distributions that depend on the surrounding en-
vironment encountered by the train (cf. Subsection IV.3), and
due to the consideration of different classes of environment
as explained in [10]. The main features of the four modules
are described below; for a deeper insight into the modules, all
the behavioral models are made available in a public GitHub
repository with many technical details6.
In the first module dedicated to translating the train
dynamics, a variable is set to represent the value of the
train acceleration. This variable allows us to represent the
variation of the train speed due to acceleration and braking.
From the acceleration, the instantaneous speed of the train
can be easily deduced using the integral function. Likewise,
the distance traveled by the train can be calculated from
the velocity. This module is built in such a way as to be
able to vary the speed according to the characteristics of the
different track areas, and according to the maximum speed
of the trains. The latter depends on the category of the trains
to be considered and their load.
The distance variable in the first module serves as an
input of the second module dedicated to the determination
of the localization error bound. Namely, the value of this
variable is used to model the acceptable error bound on
the traveled distance. For that to happen, we consider the
OdoError dynvariable in the second module to model the
odometry accumulated uncertainty. At each time step, the
value of OdoError dynis incremented according to the trav-
eled distance (while considering a rate of 5%) to represent
the maximal odometry error bound as stated in the ERTMS
specifications. In parallel to OdoError dyn, the maximal
residual error linked to the current reference position (i.e.,
thebalise activation uncertainty ) is also considered in our
model and noted BaliseError . Hence, the global uncertainty
on the train position can be represented as follows:
Global uncertainty on the train position =
balise activation uncertainty + 5%×distance
from the last reference position
Using the model variables, it leads to: PositionError =
BaliseError + OdoError dyn.
In the third and fourth modules, we model the balise
activation. In these modules, the actual relative train position,
i.e., the real traveled distance modeled with variable Pintis
taken as an input. This variable is only accessible because the
train dynamics is modeled. In reality, the on-board system
waits for the electromagnetic activation of PB or verifies
if the GNSS-based estimated position (in distance) matches
the VB position stored on-board. In the model, Pintis
compared to the location of the next expected balise. When
both values match, the position of the balise is retained as
the new reference position. Thus, the value of uncertainty on
6https://github.com/juliebeugin/ETCSL3Localizationthe position is recalculated, keeping only the value related
to the uncertainty at the detection time of the balise (max.
5meters for PB and PLmeters for VB).
B.2) Correctness and trustworthiness of the models
In order to ensure the model correctness and trustworthiness,
various aspects have been considered all along the model
development activities. For the sake of brevity, those aspects
are outlined hereunder according to three global consid-
erations, without discussing the technical details (formal
properties, etc.), in order to keep the content of this part
condensed. Yet, the reader can refer to our public Github
repository where all the models are made available with
relevant explanations:
Model construction process: A thorough analysis of the
mechanisms related to the introduction and activation of
virtual balises in the framework of GNSS-based railway
localization systems has been conducted. Then, the
appropriate abstraction level to establish the behavioral
models has been identified. The underlying idea was to
make a focus on the various artifacts that may impact
the uncertainties on the estimated train position, while
abstracting away the aspects which are irrelevant w.r.t.
to the conducted analysis.
Correctness of the models: A number of features on the
model, namely w.r.t the absence of deadlock , the live-
ness and the non-Zenoness , as well as the proper
reachability of the model states, have been verified.
Model validation: Various model-testing and simulations
have been conducted at each stage of the model devel-
opment and refinement activities. To this aim, numerous
nominal and abnormal scenarios have been executed,
and the models have been fine-tuned in light of the
obtained results.
As discussed above, the various sources of uncertainties
on the train position are considered in our models. In the
following section, we explain how the various parameters
that may impact the position error bound can be integrated
in our model. The impact of these parameters in terms of
performance and safety objectives will then be analyzed in
Section V.
IV. MODEL PARAMETERIZATION
In order to investigate globally on a line, the uncertainty on
the train position with the introduction of VB, the first step
is to identify the factors that can influence this uncertainty.
In particular, we mainly identify three relevant factors that
impact the train position error:
1) The ratio between the number of PB and VB, as the
use of VB introduces more uncertainties compared to
PB.
2) The space distance separating consecutive balises, as
this distance determines the odometry error accumula-
tion.
VOLUME , 9This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Open Journal of Intelligent Transportation Systems. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/OJITS.2023.3267142
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

--- Page 11 ---
Himrane et al. : Implementation of a Model-Oriented Approach for Supporting the Safe Integration of GNSS-Based Virtual Balises in ERTMS/ETCS Level 3
FIGURE 5. Modeling modules of the localization function [11].
3) The PL associated with each VB, since PL is used to
reset the position uncertainty.
Figure 6 presents the parameters that serve for expressing
the aforementioned influencing factors in the models de-
scribed in Subsection B. The associated UPPAAL variables
are detailed below. Note that the parameters pertaining to the
train dynamics (i.e., traction and braking characteristics) are
also represented as they influence the global behavior.
1) PB / VB configuration
Regarding the number of VB and PB, one can logically
admit that an infinite number of combinations is possible.
For the sake of simplicity, we choose to adopt regular
configurations (e.g. 1PB-2VB, 1PB-3VB, etc.). Should a
particular line balises layout needs to be analyzed, more
specific configurations can easily be considered.
2) Inter-balise distance
As for the space separating consecutive balises, a variable
distance dis used to set the different balise locations.
3) Protection Level (PL)The reset resulting from the detection of a VB is per-
formed using PL. Therefore, the PL evolution and its as-
sociated parameters must be integrated in our behavioral
model. Namely, we implement an UPPAAL module whose
objective is to generate the PL values depending on dif-
ferent environmental classes which, in turn, represent the
quality of the GNSS signal reception (cf. Figure 6). The
values of this variable are generated according to some
predefined probabilistic distributions, one distribution being
defined for each environmental class. It should be noticed
that the generation of PL values is “memoryless” . In other
terms, these values are solely dependent on the active PL
distribution related to the activated VB, independently of
the previous balises encountered. It is worth noticing that
characterizing the uncertainty on the PL values according
to the surrounding environment is a topical issue of the
scientific community specialized in GNSS-based localiza-
tion. Among other means, field experiments and existing
databases are used. In fact, presenting how the quality of
the GNSS reception can be characterized would require long
discussions, and cannot be done in the present paper as it
10 VOLUME ,This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Open Journal of Intelligent Transportation Systems. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/OJITS.2023.3267142
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

--- Page 12 ---
FIGURE 6. Identified parameters affecting the train position uncertainty [11].
is out of the scope of our contribution. Yet, the reader can
refer to the survey in [57] where some research works in
the literature, which are relevant to this topic are presented.
In the sequel of this paper, some distributions are chosen
only for the sake of illustrating our approach. Nevertheless,
different distributions can easily be considered by simply
adapting the model variables (e.g. type of distribution, mean
value, standard deviation), since a placeholder is present in
the model. This offers the possibility to refine the PL-related
probabilistic distributions according to the inputs coming
from ongoing research projects. We also assume that the
algorithms developed by GNSS practitioners to calculate
the PL values are correct, i.e. the determined value of PL
always bounds the position error for the different considered
operational contexts with a guaranteed localization integrity
risk (cf. Subsection B). To sum up, in our model, the PL
value is represented by a random variable which directly
depends on some predefined environmental classes.
For the sake of clarity and in order to generate the PL
values, in the next section we assume that the environmental
conditions are roughly the same all along the train run.
Thus, one single probabilistic distribution (here, a normal
distribution with positive values) is used to generate the PL
values for the different VB locations.
V. VERIFICATION PHASE
The developed models allow us to emulate the behavior
of the train localization when a train runs on a railway
line involving some given configuration of PB and VB.
Moreover, the models implement the various uncertainty
aspects pertaining to the train position. In the present section,
we will show how various safety and performance properties
can be checked based on our model. Namely, we will takeadvantage of the Statistical Model-Checking (SMC) facilities
of UPPAAL to check a number of features while considering
specific operational scenarios.
A. VERIFICATION PRINCIPLE
Unlike classic Model-Checking (MC), which issues a binary
result (whether the property is satisfied or not), SMC pro-
vides a quantitative result, namely how likely (probability
value) the examined property is satisfied by the model.
Furthermore, the generated result is associated with a con-
fidence interval. The SMC algorithm is, in fact, based on
the classical Monte Carlo simulation, i.e., using sampling.
Therefore, while the outcomes issued by SMC algorithms
offer a probabilistic characterization of some investigated
property, they are well considered as a formal technique in
the sense that they provide a quantification of the likelihood
associated with the fulfillment of such a property, as well
as the certainty/uncertainty associated with the issued result.
Such a qualification of the SMC outcome provides a valuable
characterization in terms of the confidence that one shall
associate with the obtained result. Besides, it is worth noting
that SMC algorithms are well adopted in the verification of
safety critical applications in diverse domains, as highlighted
in the survey conducted in [58].
In what follows, we will mainly analyze how likely
the uncertainty on the train position can exceed a certain
threshold during the whole run of the train along some given
lines while considering specific PB/VB arrangement. This
property has to be expressed as a temporal logic formula
to be analyzed by the model-checker. The aforementioned
feature can be formulated as follows:
Pr[<=bound ] (<> PositionError > threshold )(1)
where:
VOLUME , 11This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Open Journal of Intelligent Transportation Systems. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/OJITS.2023.3267142
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

--- Page 13 ---
Himrane et al. : Implementation of a Model-Oriented Approach for Supporting the Safe Integration of GNSS-Based Virtual Balises in ERTMS/ETCS Level 3
•bound denotes the time bound on the simulation proce-
dure,
•PositionError is the allowed position error for each
train,
•threshold is the monitored limit value for the allowed
error (e.g., 105m),
•<> is the eventually temporal operator. Namely, for φ
some given predicate, <> φ means that there exists
some state from now on that satisfies φ.
To evaluate different error limits, it is sufficient to adapt
the threshold value in the previous formula. Hence, for
each generated query (representing a different threshold),
the SMC tool executes an important number of runs on the
system model to explore the reachable states. At the end of
each run, the algorithm checks whether or not the query is
satisfied. This is, in fact, analogous to a Bernoulli problem
with a set of logical answers (true or false). The obtained
outcomes are then aggregated to quantitatively estimate the
probability of the property being satisfied (with a corre-
sponding confidence interval). Namely, the SMC algorithm
computes the number of runs needed in order to produce an
approximate interval [p−ϵ;p+ϵ]for the probability pwith
a confidence (1−α), where:
•ϵis the probability uncertainty.
•αis the probability of false negatives.
B. THE CONSIDERED CASE STUDY
As mentioned in Subsection A, using VB to implement the
train localization function under ETCS L3 can be envisaged
in two main situations:
1) The case of a new ERTMS L3 railway line,
2) The upgrade of an existing line (e.g. operated in
ERTMS L2) towards ERTMS L3.
In both situations, performance and safety targets have to
be evaluated. In our case study, we will consider Case 1),
i.e. the design of a new ERTMS L3 line to be operated with
FVB.
From an operational point of view, the pursued objective is
that the new ERTMS L3 line should provide at least the same
capacity that would have been obtained under ERTMS L2
operation (with PB exclusively). Obviously, a direct benefit
of ERTMS L3 over ERTMS L2 is that fewer PB shall be
deployed, since the used balises will be mostly virtual.
In this context, we assume that the configuration of
the ERTMS L2 line used as a comparison basis can be
summarized as follows:
•Only physical balises are used for odometry calibration,
•All the PB are equivalently spaced on the track, and the
distance separating two successive (group of) balises is
d= 2000 m.
Such an ERTMS L2 line configuration implies that the
global train position uncertainty varies between 5m(imme-
diately following the activation of a PB) and 105m(5+5% ·d
withd= 2000 m, right prior to the activation of a PB).We recall that the capacity of the ERTMS L2 line depends
on three main parameters: the maximum uncertainty value on
the train position, the braking distance of the trains, and the
length of the blocks. Since the braking characteristics of the
operated trains remain unchanged, only the uncertainty on
train position and the distance separating balises determine
the variation in terms of line capacity between the L2
reference line and the L3-FVB line. Accordingly, in our
case study we will mainly focus on the maximum error
bound on train position and the block length as comparative
parameters. In fact, on the one hand, the block length can
be directly compared, namely according to the distance
separating two successive (group of) balises. On the other
hand, the maximum train position uncertainty needs to be
analyzed in order to check if the bound (i.e., 105 m)
remains satisfied (with a tolerable confidence level) in the
new ERTMS L3 line, while using VB.
Through our case study, we seek to illustrate how to safely
address the position uncertainties under FVB operation by
means of formal verification using the developed models.
Considering the same speed, constant acceleration, and the
same dynamic characteristics for all trains in our case study,
the model managing the variation of each train dynamics
parameter is not considered here; this model has already
been investigated in [11]. Thus, in the present paper we
concentrate the analysis on the PL characterization related
to VB activation. Besides, the cumulative error due to
the traveled distance can be regarded as a constant when
considering the same size for each block section; this can
be the case for a new ERTMS L3 line operated with FVB,
ERTMS L2 lines being not necessarily equipped with block
sections sized identically. Therefore, the model part related
to the PL characterization will be analyzed in the sequel.
Using 3 possible settings related to the PL distribution,
the impact on train position uncertainty will be particularly
investigated. Namely, we will address the following question:
“How should the balises be arranged on the line in order
to guarantee that the uncertainty on the train estimated
position does not exceed a predetermined threshold?” . It
is worth highlighting that the aforementioned investigated
issue is given here for the sake of illustrating how safety
analyses can be conducted on the basis of our formal models;
in general, further analyses can be undertaken. Depending
on the investigated problem, the development of additional
behavioral modules can be required, yet the whole approach
remains the same.
C. ANALYSIS PHASE
As explained earlier in the paper, our analysis is performed
by means of the model-checking facilities offered by UP-
PAAL. As a matter of fact, we should indicate that we
used both the graphical TA models discussed in the previous
subsections, but also a number of textual TA models ( “.xta”
files) and “.q” query files that are generated automatically
by means of Python scripts we have developed. Indeed,
12 VOLUME ,This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Open Journal of Intelligent Transportation Systems. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/OJITS.2023.3267142
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

--- Page 14 ---
FIGURE 7. SMC Results on the Balise activation error bound following the PL characterization models A,B, and C.
FIGURE 8. Zone of interest with PL: Normal (10 : 3) ,α= 1E−5and
ϵ= 5E−6.
since we seek to investigate different track (PB/VB) con-
figurations, while considering various uncertainty levels, we
took advantage of the possibility offered by UPPAAL to
perform model-checking using command-lines on the basis
of TA models and query textual files. It is also worth
mentioning that depending on the available computational
capabilities, we can easily adapt the levels of accuracy and
confidence of the model-checking results (resp. ϵandα
statistical parameters), as well as the level of details in theinvestigated models. These aspects are further discussed in
the explanations provided with our models in the public
repository.
In the analyzed ERTMS L3-related case study, we choose
to employ only 10 % of PB for illustrating how the proba-
bilistic distributions related to different GNSS signal recep-
tion environments can vary in our models while maintaining
an accepted system residual risk. Accordingly, the balises
configuration of (1PB - 9VB) is adopted in the remainder of
our study. This means one (group of) PB while the 9 next
successive balises are virtual (VB), etc.
As stated before, for the sake of clarity, we assume that
the operational environment is invariable in one scenario, in
terms of GNSS reception quality, all along the considered
line. Hence, the same probabilistic distribution is used to
characterize the PL values in each scenario. Namely, we aim
to study the impact of three illustrative normal distributions
on the VB separation distance (cf. Table 1).
Note here that, for the sake of obtaining realistic PL
values, we define a minimum acceptable PL value equal to
3mfor each distribution. Hence, if the generated PL value
is smaller than this bound, a new value is generated until
VOLUME , 13This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Open Journal of Intelligent Transportation Systems. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/OJITS.2023.3267142
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

--- Page 15 ---
Himrane et al. : Implementation of a Model-Oriented Approach for Supporting the Safe Integration of GNSS-Based Virtual Balises in ERTMS/ETCS Level 3
TABLE 1. Parameters related to PL
PL DistributionMean Standard deviation
(in meters) (in meters)
A 10 5
B 10 3
C 5 3
obtaining an accepted PL value. Such a minimum setting
can be adapted to represent different PL distributions.
We recall that the results sought via our analysis intend to
provide indicators regarding the physical and virtual balises
safe configuration along the new line. In this context, we
assume the distance separating successive balises (denoted
asd′) to be constant. Moreover, since the OdoError dyn
variable (i.e., the odometer accumulated error) component
of the PositionError variable (i.e. the allowed train position
error) only depends on the traveled distance from the last
balise (which can be either a PB or VB), one can easily infer
the maximum value of OdoError dynfrom d′. In contrast,
theBaliseError variable (resulting from the activation of a
VB) depends on the various PL values and represents the
uncertain part of the PositionError variable. Hence, such a
variation needs to be finely investigated. This can be done
by adapting and formally checking the property expressed
in formula (1).
For each threshold value (e.g., from 1to35meters), the
SMC algorithm handles the associated query and estimates
the probability that the BaliseError variable exceeds the
investigated threshold. The obtained results are processed
to obtain the charts represented in Figure 7. The results
pertaining to the maximum balise error are depicted via the
orange plots, which show the relation between the various
error thresholds and the probability that these limits are
exceeded by the balises activation error bound.
D. RESULTS INTERPRETATION
We recall that, in contrast with the case of PB where the
fixed value of 5mbounds the value of the BaliseError
variable, no maximum value is defined for the PL associated
with the activation of a VB. Indeed, large PL values can be
reached, especially in unfavorable GNSS reception condi-
tions. Instead, an Alert Limit (AL) is used as an upper bound
on the accepted PL values. If the estimated PL is lower than
the value of AL, the PL value is accepted and associated
with a ‘confidence level’ . On the contrary, if the estimated
PL exceeds AL, the GNSS position is deemed unavailable
and, hence, rejected by the on-board system.
In our context, we consider this ‘target confidence level’ as
an input parameter to our analysis. In fact, such probabilistic
threshold stands for an accepted residual risk (according to
the safety targets). For instance, let us assume that the risk
of PL exceeding the balise error bound must be smaller than
10−5with a confidence of 0.99999 . Considering this target
probability (i.e., 10−5), particular zones of interest (i.e.,uncertainty value corresponding to the target probability) are
identified according to the results obtained previously. These
zones (illustrated with red boxes in Figure 7) require an in-
depth exploration. Accordingly, the SMC tool parameters
are further adapted as follows: α= 1−0.99999 and
2×ϵ= 10−5).
For instance, the interest zone corresponding to the
setting of the parameters related to a PL distribution
Normal (10 : 3) (Setting B) is zoomed in and presented in
Figure 8. The other PL distributions are addressed similarly.
Having obtained the BaliseError values associated with
the investigated PL distributions, the second part of the
study focuses on the Global train position uncertainty , as
this parameter is key for determining the maximum distance
between consecutive balises, and accordingly the size of the
FVB. To do so, let us consider the following:
MaxAllowedError = MaxOdoError dyn + BaliseError ,
where:
•MaxAllowedError denotes the target bound on the train
position uncertainty (i.e., 105m),
•MaxOdoError dyn = 5%×d′
max,
•d′
max : maximum allowed distance between consecutive
balises.
Therefore, it is straightforward to infer d′
max as in re-
lation (2) below, and the obtained results are reported in
Table 2, where all distances are indicated in meters (m):
d′
max=1
5%×(MaxAllowedError −BaliseError )(2)
TABLE 2. Results
PL distribution BaliseError d′
max PB ratio
(mean (m) : std(m)) (m) (m) L2 vs. L3
Setting A (10:5) 37 1360 14.7 %
Setting B (10:3) 27 1560 12.8 %
Setting C (5:3) 22.5 1650 12 %
In the last column of the table, we compare the number
of PB needed in the new L3 FVB line respectively to their
number in the reference ERTMS L2 line. One can notice that
the number of PB is reduced by more than 85% in the three
investigated scenarios. Indeed, even if the balises are closer
to each other in the new line, only one out of ten balises
is a physical balise. One can also notice that the lower the
uncertainty on the value of PL is, the more the balises can
be spaced out on the line, which means fewer balises to be
deployed (e.g., 12% for PL Normal (5 : 3) vs. 14.7% for
PLNormal (10 : 5) ). It is therefore relevant to note that
the obtained results depend highly on the PL distributions
adopted as input parameters.
Moreover, since the FVB lengths ( d′
max) are smaller than
the block length of the reference ERTMS L2 line (2km),
the line capacity shall be increased. Besides, it should
be noted that such d′
max values stand for the maximum
distance separating successive balises. Hence, the actual
14 VOLUME ,This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Open Journal of Intelligent Transportation Systems. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/OJITS.2023.3267142
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

--- Page 16 ---
balises separation distance to be adopted can be smaller
than the calculated d′
max value. In particular, the increase
of the balises number is particularly relevant since 90%
of the balises are virtual. As a result, less odometry error
accumulation and even shorter FVB can be obtained, thus
making it possible for further increasing the line capacity.
Nevertheless, a physical limit for line capacity increase is
related to the braking capabilities of the operated trains.
Finally, it is worth noting that an analogous reasoning
can be adopted to investigate different line layouts and PL
distributions, so as to determine optimal cost/benefit ratio,
while keeping control on the related risks.
E. DISCUSSION ON OPERATIONAL ENGINEERING
RULES
For the sake of the transferability of our approach, this
subsection is dedicated to discussing the implication of the
obtained results, as well as the limitations of the analysis
in the context of future research and innovation projects.
Indeed, beyond the methodological aspects, some operational
questions can arise when employing the proposed approach,
as will be discussed in what follows.
Regarding the balise location along the track, we adopted
the following generic rule: we assume that there is one
balise (physical or virtual) by block section and balises are
placed at the beginning of each block. Indeed, there is no
standard regarding installation engineering rules for balises,
and no guidelines regarding these aspects can be found in
the scientific or technical literature. Also, based on some
discussions with railway experts, we could infer that balises
were today placed in a very heterogeneous way. The location
of balises can be chosen for historical reasons related to the
line, for topographical reasons, due to possible interference
with other balises or conductive materials in the vicinity,
or also for some maintenance considerations often related
to the inspection of other trackside equipment in parallel.
Indeed, for practical purposes, it is better to regroup all
equipment in an easily accessible area where all devices can
be inspected without moving monitoring/repair apparatuses
from one place to another. Moreover, “beaconage plans” do
exist especially in the case of new lines, but they are naturally
not shared for security reasons and are the properties of the
suppliers and the organization that operates the railway line.
Therefore, they cannot be analyzed to infer some generic
engineering rules.
Nowadays, requirements on physical balises exist in
ETCS [59], and are referred to as FFFIS (Form-Fit Func-
tional Interface Specification), which are concretely technical
requirements on the balises. These specifications include the
following installation requirement types for such devices:
tolerances for balise installation and mounting on the track,
balise installation in narrow curves, the distance between
consecutive balises in a Balise Group (BG), the grouped data
of balises in a BG providing the reference position to the
train. However, it can be noticed that they only refer to localinstallation rules and not to global rules related to a line, and
operating performances are not considered. The contribution
discussed in the present paper therefore ambitions to help
provide a practical answer to this global aspect.
Besides, considering Virtual Balises (VB), allows some
local physical installation constraints to be overlooked. How-
ever, it should be noted that the use of GNSS technologies for
ensuring the train localization function based on VB induces
some other considerations of VB placing, i.e. they have to be
found in locations where GNSS signal reception conditions
are optimal or, at least, associated with well-controlled error
models. These optimal places have to be determined based
on tests and analyses that do need to be performed with the
help of GNSS experts. Consequently, a VB can be placed
further in a block section rather than at its beginning.
VI. CONCLUSION AND PERSPECTIVES
Satellite technologies are considered as a strategic facility
in the rise of advanced railway CCS, particularly ERTMS.
Bringing into play GNSS-based solutions to fulfill the rail-
way localization function would lead to a significant break-
through in terms of railway operation and asset management.
In fact, allowing the train localization to be realized on-
board rather than by means of trackside equipment, GNSS-
based positioning systems enable reducing the equipment
along the track with direct savings in terms of infrastructure
installation and maintenance costs. Moreover, a substantial
capacity gain is expected since efficient operation modes
can be implemented, such as FMB, FVB, or virtual cou-
pling [60], [61]. Besides, thanks to the benefits brought by
the deployment of GNSS-based localization solutions, the
economic viability of certain regional railway lines can be
restored, hence preventing their closure.
In this paper, we address the safety of the train local-
ization function relying on Virtual Balises as a substitute
for physical ones. In particular, a special focus is made on
the analysis of the position uncertainty sources related to
VB detection. The analysis approach is based on formal
models that were elaborated to mimic the behavior of the
localization function. These models rely on the rigor and
expressiveness of automata-based formalisms and are mod-
ular and configurable, making it possible to address a variety
of railway line configurations. Thus, the process intends
to assist and guide the railway signaling practitioners for
the safe configuration of virtual balises on a railway track.
To implement the approach, a case study is considered in
this paper and addresses the layout of virtual and physical
balises along a new ERTMS L3 line operating according
to the FVB principle. Specific parameter settings used in
the VB detection process are investigated while fixing other
identified parameters in order to illustrate our approach.
However, adapting the model-oriented approach to cope with
real line characteristics is fairly easy, making the proposed
formal models highly re-usable.
VOLUME , 15This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Open Journal of Intelligent Transportation Systems. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/OJITS.2023.3267142
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

--- Page 17 ---
Himrane et al. : Implementation of a Model-Oriented Approach for Supporting the Safe Integration of GNSS-Based Virtual Balises in ERTMS/ETCS Level 3
In fact, the present contribution falls within the general
context of i)reducing the costly and time-consuming railway
on-site tests, and ii)adopting highly recommended formal
models and approaches for safety studies, as stated in EN
50128 railway safety standard. Our aim is to bring model-
based approaches and formal verification techniques into
play, to evaluate safety and performance properties related
to the use of GNSS-based train positioning solutions. The
outcomes of such analysis can be advantageously used by
railway experts in both the engineering and safety demon-
stration phases.
In the present work, we mainly focused on the uncertain-
ties related to the ‘protection level’ of the GNSS-based sys-
tem in order to provide at least the same capacity that would
have been obtained under ERTMS L2 operation, by using
formal verification methods that are highly recommended
in safety analyses. In future works, we intend to consider
specific hazardous scenarios that can arise, such as the train
collisions, by considering the localization ‘integrity risk’
related to a given GNSS-based system. Some comprehensive
safety indicators can then be determined to such scenarios.
In so doing, the outcomes of our study can be integrated to
characterize the likelihood of the initiating events related to
the localization function, in the scope of these scenarios.
Finally, it should be noted that a number of issues still
need to be addressed to help implement formal models and
verification techniques in evaluating the safety of GNSS-
based localization function in railways. In particular, a fine
characterization of the rail environmental conditions in terms
of GNSS reception quality remains a key element condition-
ing the adoption of GNSS-based train localization. This can
be obtained by means of measurement campaigns. In fact,
such a characterization allows for establishing realistic mod-
els that describe the behavior of the on-board localization
function in a trustworthy way. Moreover, we are currently
extending our models to tackle various scenarios involving
several trains, while considering the case of operation under
full moving block. In future work, we intend to develop
further extension to tackle the case of operation under virtual
coupling.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research has received funding from the Shift2Rail Joint
Undertaking (JU) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020
research and innovation program under Grant Agreement N.
101015416 (PERFORMINGRAIL). The JU receives support
from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and
innovation program and the Shift2Rail JU members other
than the Union.
The information and views set out in this document are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
official opinion of Shift2Rail JU. The JU does not guarantee
the accuracy of the data included in this article. Neither
the JU nor any person acting on the JU’s behalf may beheld responsible for the use which may be made of the
information contained therein.
REFERENCES
[1] P. Griffe, “Automation will Enhance Quality and Security of Meteor
14th Line of Paris Metro,” in IFAC Transportation Systems, 30(8):
1163–1168 , Chania, Greece, 1997.
[2] J.-L. Boulanger and M. Gallardo, “Validation and verification of
METEOR safety software,” in VIIth International Conference on
Computers in Railways , Bologna, Italy, 2000, Sept.
[3] J. Pachl, Railway Operation and Control (4th ed.) . Mountlake Terrace,
USA: VTD Rail Publishing, 2018.
[4] M. Ghazel, “Formalizing a subset of ERTMS/ETCS specifications
for verification purposes,” Transportation Research Part C: Emerging
Technologies , vol. 42, pp. 60–75, 2014.
[5] N. Furness, H. Van Houten, L. Arenas, and M. Bartholomeus, “ERTMS
Level 3: the Game-Changer,” IRSE–Institute of Railway Signal Engi-
neers , pp. 2–9, 2017, April.
[6] F. Rispoli, G. Siciliano, and C. Brenna, “GNSS for ERTMS train
localization, a step-change technology and new business model,” Inside
GNSS , pp. 48–54, 2017.
[7] Shift2Rail, IP2 projects (Innovation Programme): https://shift2rail.org/
research-development/ip2, Accessed on 2022/09/01.
[8] J. Marais, J. Beugin, and M. Berbineau, “A Survey of GNSS-Based
Research and Developments for the European Railway Signaling,”
IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems , vol. 18,
no. 10, pp. 2602–2618, 2017.
[9] TSI CCS (EU) 2016/919 regulation, Technical Specification for Inter-
operability relating to the ‘Control-Command and Signalling’ subsys-
tems of the rail system in the European Union . European Commission
regulation, 2016, 27th May.
[10] O. Himrane, J. Beugin, and M. Ghazel, “Towards a model-based
safety assessment of railway operation using GNSS localization,” in
ESREL 2020 and PSAM 15, 30th European Safety and Reliability
Conference and 15th Probabilistic Safety Assessment and Management
Conference , Venice, Italy, 2020, Nov.
[11] ——, “Toward formal safety and performance evaluation of GNSS-
based railway localisation function,” in CTS 2021, 16th IFAC Sympo-
sium on Control in Transportation Systems , Lille, France, 2021, June.
[12] EEIG-EUG, Hybrid ERTMS/ETCS Level 3 . European Economic
Interest Grouping - ERTMS Users’ Group, reference 16E042, version
1D, 2020.
[13] Deutsche Bahn, “Demonstration der ETCS Level 3 Technologie
im Living Lab der DB Netz,” https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=
FjKnugbmrP4 - German and English languages, Accessed 2022-09-
01, 2018, Sept.
[14] D. Hansen, M. Leuschel, P. K ¨orner, S. Krings, T. Naulin, N. Nayeri,
D. Schneider, and F. Showron, “Validation and real-life demonstration
of ETCS hybrid level 3 principles using a formal B model,” Interna-
tional Journal of Software Tools for Technology Transfer , vol. 22, pp.
315–332, 2020.
[15] Subset 088, ETCS Application Levels 1 and 2 - Safety Analysis .
UNISIG, Union Industry of Signalling, issue 3.6.0, 2016-06-20, 2016.
[16] C. Legrand, J. Beugin, J. Marais, B. Conrard, E.-M. El-Koursi, and
M. Berbineau, “From extended integrity monitoring to the safety eval-
uation of satellite-based localisation system,” Reliability Engineering
and System Safety , vol. 155, pp. 105–114, 2016.
[17] N. Kubo, M. Higuchi, T. Takasu, and H. Yamamoto, “Performance
evaluation of GNSS-based railway applications,” in International As-
sociation of Institutes of Navigation World Congress (IAIN) , Prague,
Czech Republic, 2015, Oct.
[18] ICAO, International Standards and Recommended Practices, Annex
10 to the Convention on International Civil Aviation, Volume 1: Radio
Navigation Aids (7th ed.) . International Civil Aviation Organization,
2018, July.
[19] J. Marais, J. Beugin, F. Rispoli, P. Gurnik, and A. B. Toma, State of
the art of EGNSS projects for the rail application . Delivrable 5.1
of the STARS project - Satellite Technology for Advanced Railway
Signalling, H2020 European programme, 2017.
[20] A. Filip, S. Sabina, and F. Rispoli, “A framework for certifica-
tion of train location determination system based on GNSS for
16 VOLUME ,This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Open Journal of Intelligent Transportation Systems. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/OJITS.2023.3267142
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

--- Page 18 ---
ERTMS/ETCS,” Journal of Transport Development and Integration ,
vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 284–297, 2018.
[21] A. Filip, F. Rispoli, and R. Capua, “A safety regulatory framework for
certification and authorization process of selfdriving cars: Experience
from european railways,” in ESREL 2020 and PSAM 15 - 30th
European Safety and Reliability Conference and 15th Probabilistic
Safety Assessment and Management Conference , Venice, Italy, 2020,
Nov.
[22] C. Wullems, F. Sperandio, M. Basso, S. Sturaro, and S. Sabina, “A Pre-
liminary Apportionment of Safety Targets for Virtual Balise Detection
using GNSS in Future Evolutions of ERTMS.” in 16th International
Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems Telecommunications
(ITST) , Lisboa, Portugal, 2018, Oct.
[23] D. Lu, D. Tang, and D. Spiegel, “Hazard Rate Estimation for GNSS-
Based Train Localization Using Model-Based Approach,” Chinese
Journal of Electronics , vol. 29, no. 1, 2020.
[24] T. P. K. Nguyen, J. Beugin, and J. Marais, “Method for evaluating an
extended fault tree to analyse the dependability of complex systems:
Application to a satellite-based railway system,” Reliability Engineer-
ing and System Safety , vol. 133, pp. 300–313, 2015.
[25] J. Beugin, C. Legrand, J. Marais, M. Berbineau, and E.-M. El-Koursi,
“Safety appraisal of GNSS-based localization systems used in train
spacing control,” IEEE Access , vol. 6, pp. 9898–9916, 2018.
[26] J. Goya, G. De Miguel, S. Arrizabalaga, L. Zamora-Cadenas, I. Adin,
and J. Mendizabal, “Methodology and Key Performance Indicators
(KPIs) for Railway On-Board Positioning Systems,” IEEE Transac-
tions on Intelligent Transportation Systems , vol. 19, no. 12, pp. 4035–
4042, 2018.
[27] D. Lu and E. Schnieder, “Performance evaluation of GNSS for
train localization,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation
Systems , vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 1054–1059, 2015.
[28] J. Beugin and J. Marais, “Simulation-based evaluation of dependability
and safety properties of satellite technologies for railway localization,”
Transportation Research Part C (Emerging Technologies) , vol. 22, pp.
42–57, 2012.
[29] D. Basile, M. H. Ter Beek, A. Fantechi, S. Gnesi, F. Mazzanti,
A. Piattino, D. Trentini, and A. Ferrari, “On the industrial uptake of
formal methods in the railway domain: a survey with stakeholders,”
in14th IFM 2018, International Conference on Integrated Formal
Methods , Maynooth, Ireland, 2018, Sept.
[30] M. H. Ter Beek, A. Bor ¨alv, A. Fantechi, A. Ferrari, S. Gnesi,
C. L ¨ofving, and F. Mazzanti, “Adopting formal methods in an indus-
trial setting: The railways case,” in 3rd FM 2019, Formal Methods-The
Next 30 Years , Porto, Portugal, 2019, Oct.
[31] M. H. Ter Beek, S. Gnesi, and A. Knapp, “Formal methods for trans-
port systems,” International Journal on Software Tools for Technology
Transfer , vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 237–241, 2018.
[32] J.-L. Boulanger, Formal methods applied to complex systems: Im-
plementation of the B method . Hoboken, NJ, USA: Computer
Engineering Series, Wiley, 2014.
[33] A. Fantechi, W. Fokkink, and A. Morzenti, Chapter 4: Some Trends
in Formal Methods Applications to Railway Signaling . Wiley-IEEE
Computer Society, 2012, pp. 61–84.
[34] A. Fantechi, “Twenty-five years of formal methods and railways:
What next?” in SEFM 2013, International Conference on Software
Engineering and Formal Methods , Madrid, Spain, 2014, Sept.
[35] A. Fantechi, A. Ferrari, and S. Gnesi, “Formal methods and safety
certification: Challenges in the railways domain,” in 7th ISoLA 2016,
Leveraging Applications of Formal Methods, Verification and Valida-
tion: Discussion, Dissemination, Applications , Corfu, Greece, 2016,
Oct.
[36] A. Ferrari, A. Fantechi, S. Gnesi, and G. Magnani, “Model-based
development and formal methods in the railway industry,” IEEE
Software , vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 28–34, 2013.
[37] A. Ferrari, F. Mazzanti, D. Basile, M. H. Ter Beek, and A. Fantechi,
“Comparing formal tools for system design: a judgment study,” in
ICSE’20: IEEE/ACM 42nd International Conference on Software En-
gineering, Association for Computing Machinery , Seoul, South Korea,
2020.
[38] F. Mazzanti and A. Ferrari, “Ten diverse formal models for a CBTC
automatic train supervision system,” Electronic Proceedings in Theo-
retical Computer Science , vol. 268, pp. 104–149, 2018.
[39] F. Mazzanti, A. Ferrari, and G. O. Spagnolo, “Towards formal methods
diversity in railways: an experience report with seven frameworks,”Journal on Software Tools for Technology Transfer , vol. 20, no. 3, pp.
263–288, 2018.
[40] A. Baouya, O. Ait Mohamed, D. Bennouar, and S. Ouchani, “Safety
analysis of train control system based on model-driven design method-
ology,” Computers in Industry , vol. 105, pp. 1–16, 2019.
[41] A. Ferrari, M. H. Ter Beek, F. Mazzanti, D. Basile, A. Fantechi,
S. Gnesi, A. Piattino, and D. Trentini, “Survey on formal methods
and tools in railways: The ASTRail approach,” in RSSRail 2019: In-
ternational Conference on Reliability, Safety, and Security of Railway
Systems , Lille, France, 2019, June.
[42] A. Ferrari and M. H. Ter Beek, Formal Methods in Railways: a
Systematic Mapping Study . ACM Computing Surveys, 2022.
[43] Q. Cappart, C. Limbr ´ee, P. Schaus, J. Quilbeuf, L.-M. Traonouez, and
A. Legay, “Verification of interlocking systems using statistical model
checking,” in IEEE 18th International Symposium on High Assurance
Systems Engineering (HASE) , Singapore, 2017.
[44] P. L. Laursen, V . Trinh, and A. E. Haxthausen, “Formal modelling
and verification of a distributed railway interlocking system using
UPPAAL.” in ISoLA 2020, 9th International Conference on Leveraging
Applications of Formal Methods, Verification and Validation: Applica-
tions, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 12478 , Rhodes, Greece,
2020, Oct.
[45] A. E. Haxthausen and K. Hede, “Formal verification of railway timeta-
bles - using the UPPAAL model checker,” From Software Engineering
to Formal Methods and Tools, and Back: Essays Dedicated to Stefania
Gnesi on the Occasion of Her 65th Birthday , pp. 433–448, 2019.
[46] D. Basile, M. H. Ter Beek, and A. Legay, “Strategy synthesis for
autonomous driving in a moving block railway system with UPPAAL
Stratego,” in FORTE 2020, 40th International Conference on Formal
Techniques for Distributed Objects, Components, and Systems, Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, 12136 , Valletta, Malta, 2020, June.
[47] D. Basile, M. H. Ter Beek, and V . Ciancia, “On the industrial uptake
of formal methods in the railway domain: a survey with stakeholders,”
inISoLA 2018, 8th International Conference on the Leveraging Appli-
cations of Formal Methods, Verification and Validation: Verification,
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 11245 , Limassol, Cyprus, 2018,
Nov.
[48] D. Basile, M. H. Ter Beek, A. Ferrari, and A. Legay, “Modelling and
analysing ERTMS L3 moving block railway signalling with Simulink
and UPPAAL SMC,” in FMICS 2019, 24th International Conference
on Formal Methods for Industrial Critical Systems, Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, 11687 , Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2019, Aug.
[49] ——, “Exploring the ERTMS/ETCS full moving block specification:
an experience with formal methods,” International Journal on Software
Tools for Technology Transfer , vol. 24, pp. 351–370, 2022.
[50] D. Basile, A. Fantechi, L. Rucher, and G. Mand `o, “Analysing an
autonomous tramway positioning system with the UPPAAL statistical
model checker,” Formal Aspects of Computing , vol. 33, pp. 957–987,
2021.
[51] Subset 041, Performance Requirements for Interoperability . UNISIG,
Union Industry of Signalling, issue 3.2.0, 2015-12-17, 2015.
[52] L. Lo Presti and S. Sabina, GNSS for rail transportation, challenges
and opportunities . PoliTO Springer Series, 2018.
[53] M. Ghazel and E.-M. El-Koursi, “Two-half-barrier level crossings
versus four-half-barrier level crossings: A comparative risk analy-
sis study,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems ,
vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 1123–1133, 2014.
[54] P. Arcaini, J. Kofro ˇn, and P. Je ˇzek, “Validation of the hybrid
ERTMS/ETCS level 3 using SPIN,” International Journal on Software
Tools for Technology Transfer , vol. 22, pp. 265–279, 2020.
[55] S. Fotso, M. Frappier, R. Laleau, and A. Mammar, “Modeling the
hybrid ERTMS/ETCS level 3 standard using a formal requirements
engineering approach,” International Journal on Software Tools for
Technology Transfer , vol. 22, pp. 349–363, 2020.
[56] A. David, K. G. Larsen, A. Legay, M. Miku ˇcionis, and
D. Bøgsted Poulsen, “UPPAAL SMC tutorial,” in Technical report of
Aalborg University, Denmark, and INRIA/IRISA lab in Rennes, France ,
2018.
[57] N. Zhu, J. Marais, D. B ´etaille, and M. Berbineau, “GNSS position
integrity in urban environments: a review of literature,” IEEE Trans-
actions on Intelligent Transportation Systems , vol. 19, no. 9, pp. 2762–
2778, 2018.
VOLUME , 17This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Open Journal of Intelligent Transportation Systems. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/OJITS.2023.3267142
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

--- Page 19 ---
Himrane et al. : Implementation of a Model-Oriented Approach for Supporting the Safe Integration of GNSS-Based Virtual Balises in ERTMS/ETCS Level 3
[58] A. Legay, B. Delahaye, and S. Bensalem, “Statistical model checking:
An overview,” in First International Conference RV 201, Runtime
Verification , St Julians, Malta, 2010, Nov.
[59] Subset 036, FFFIS for Eurobalise . Form-Fit Functional Interface
Specification of UNISIG, Union Industry of Signalling, issue 3.1.0,
2015-12-17, 2015.
[60] C. Di Meo, M. Di Vaio, F. Flammini, R. Nardone, S. Santini, and
V . Vittorini, “ERTMS/ETCS Virtual Coupling: Proof of concept and
numerical analysis,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation
Systems , vol. 21, no. 6, pp. 2545–2556, 2020.
[61] J. Xun, Y . Li, R. Liu, Y . Li, and Y . Liu, “A survey on control methods
for virtual coupling in railway operation,” IEEE Open Journal of
Intelligent Transportation Systems , vol. 3, pp. 838–855, 2022.
OUAIL HIMRANE graduated as an engineer in
Industrial Risk Management from the National
Polytechnic School of Algiers, Algeria, in 2017.
He continued his education at the ´Ecole Nor-
male Sup ´erieure Paris-Saclay in France, where
he earned a M.S. degree in Complex Systems
Engineering with a focus on Critical Systems
Conception and Control, in 2018. He then joined
the ESTAS laboratory (Evaluation of Automated
Transport Systems and their Safety) of Gustave
Eiffel University to pursue a Ph.D. thesis.
In 2022, he received his Ph.D. from University of Lille for his thesis on
‘Safety and Operational Performance Evaluation of GNSS-based Railway
Localization Systems Using a Formal Model-based Approach.’ Currently,
Ouail is a post-doctoral researcher at IRT Railenium, where his research
focuses on the safety assurance of AI/ML systems for use in autonomous
trains.
JULIE BEUGIN received the engineering degree
from INSA Hauts-de-France (National Institute of
Applied Sciences) in 2002, the master’s degree
in automation engineering from Polytechnic Uni-
versity of Hauts-de-France in 2002, and the PhD
degree in automation and computing sciences in
2006.
Since 2007, she has been with Gustave Eiffel
University as a researcher. Her research interest in
the ESTAS laboratory deals with dependability and
safety evaluation of complex guided transportation
systems. Part of her activities addresses RAMS demonstration issues of
GNSS-based solutions embedded in train control applications. She partici-
pated in the GaLoROI, ERSAT-GGC, STARS European projects. She has
secondment agreements with Railenium to participate to projects in her
research fields and with Certifer to realize ISA missions.
MOHAMED GHAZEL is a research director with
the University Gustave Eiffel – COSYS depart-
ment (previously at IFSTTAR), and is the Director
of the ESTAS laboratory. He received the Master
and Ph.D. degrees in Automatic Control and Indus-
trial Computer Sciences from The ´Ecole Centrale
de Lille in 2002 and 2005, respectively; and the
HDR (Habilitation `a Diriger des Recherches) from
University Lille Nord de France in 2014.
His research mainly focuses on the engineering,
safety and interoperability of transportation sys-
tems using discrete event models and formal methods. He is co-author of
more than 100 papers in international journals, chapters and conference
proceedings. Dr. Ghazel is a member of the IFAC technical committees
TC 7.4 on Transportation Systems and TC 9.2 on Social Impact of
Automation, and has been involved in several French national and European
research projects. He acts as an expert for the European Commission in
the framework of innovation programs since 2016. He is also a lecturer in
several universities and engineering schools in the fields of discrete event
systems, system engineering and dependability.
18 VOLUME ,This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Open Journal of Intelligent Transportation Systems. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/OJITS.2023.3267142
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
