--- Page 1 ---
Model-based partition scheduling 
of integrated modular avionics 
systems using genetic algorithm
Jichen Chen1, Zhengjun Zhai1, Pujie Han2 & Min Huang2
This paper proposes a model-based method for partition optimization in Integrated Modular Avionics 
(IMA) systems that comply with the ARINC 653 standard. It is a complex combinatorial optimization 
problem to schedule a variety of real-time partitions to achieve maximum processor utilization in an 
IMA system. Our approach effectively utilizes timed automata in UPPAAL to address the modeling 
challenges posed by the ARINC 653 features, including two-level scheduling, multi-core processors, 
and both strictly and loosely periodic partitions. A parallel genetic algorithm is employed to explore 
the scheduling parameter space of the IMA model, accelerating the computationally expensive 
model-based analysis through parallelization and achieving an optimal solution more efficiently than 
traditional analytical methods. Furthermore, we propose a compositional framework that allows 
for the independent verification of each partition while aggregating local results to derive global 
schedulability properties, thereby mitigating the state space explosion commonly encountered 
in model checking. Experimental results demonstrate that our method achie ves lower processor 
occupancy and improved optimization performance compared to traditional techniques, thereby 
enhancing both the practical applicability of partition scheduling in IMA systems and the overall 
efficiency of real-time system design.
Keywords Partition scheduling, Integrated modular avionics, Timed automata, UPPAAL, Genetic algorithm
The rapid advances in microprocessor technology and large-scale integrated circuits have significantly 
influenced the evolution of avionics systems. Modern commercial aircraft widely apply the Integrated Modular 
Avionics (IMA) architecture, which utilizes a limited number of general-purpose processor modules in place of 
a multitude of dedicated controllers1. This transition enables the software implementation of a greater number 
of real-time avionics functionalities running on processors2. Nonetheless, this approach results in the loss of 
physical isolation between avionics applications, thereby increasing the risk of fault propagation and system 
failures3. To address these challenges, the IMA systems employ partition scheduling to orchestrate the execution 
of diverse applications on a shared processor. The partitions are activated cyclically, based on a predefined 
scheduling table where each application operates exclusively within its designated partition, thus guaranteeing 
temporal isolation between applications4. Consequently, the partition scheduling largely determines both the 
temporal resource allocation and processor utilization in an IMA system.
As aircraft systems become more complex and mission-critical functions are increasingly consolidated 
into shared hardware platforms, the need for accurate and efficient partition scheduling has become more 
urgent. Ensuring that all partitions execute correctly without temporal interference is vital for flight safety and 
certification.
The goal of the partition scheduling problem in IMA systems is to acquire an optimal partition scheduling 
table in terms of processor utilization while guaranteeing the schedulability of all the partitions. Some studies 
simplify the system model by linearizing the schedulability constraints, solving the complex avionics scheduling 
problem based on classic mathematical optimization theories, such as linear programming5, mixed-integer 
optimization6–9, and geometric programming10. Unfortunately, the worst-case assumptions of such simplified 
systems provide conservative schedulability conditions and aggravate the waste of processor time.
However, these techniques often require restrictive assumptions to make the problem analytically tractable. 
This leads to overly conservative results that waste processor time and hinder the system’s overall performance. 
Moreover, these methods lack the expressiveness needed to capture the full semantics of two-level scheduling, 
preemption, and mixed-periodic partitions present in real IMA systems.
1School of Computer Science, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an 710072, Shaanxi, China. 2College 
of Software Engineering, Zhengzhou University of Light Industry, Zhengzhou 450002, Henan, China. email: 
zhaizjun@nwpu.edu.cn; huangmin@zzuli.edu.cn
OPEN
Scientific Reports  |        (2025) 15:31342 1 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-16745-4
www.nature.com/scientificreports


--- Page 2 ---
In contrast to traditional analytic scheduling methods, Model checking is a promising formal method that 
fully leverages the powerful expressiveness of formal models, enabling precise modeling of avionics systems 
and automated schedulability analysis. The formal model of Timed Automata (TA)11 is representative for its 
rigorous syntax and temporal semantics, making it suited for describing the temporal behaviors of complex IMA 
systems. By exploring the state space of the TA model, the widely used model checker UPPAAL12 can verify the 
schedulability property of the system in temporal logic expressions. The related work13–20 demonstrates highly 
precise schedulability bounds of the system model in UPPAAL.
Nevertheless, there are two main challenges in applying model checking to the partition scheduling of IMA 
systems. First, classic model checking is confronted with the state space explosion problem when handling 
complex system models. The model checker encounters a sharp exponential increase in the processing time 
and memory as more concurrent components are integrated into the system model. Second, the nature of the 
partition scheduling in an IMA system is a nonlinear non-convex optimization problem10, but model checking 
is a verification technique that does not easily describe or solve the optimization problem, which will lead to an 
inefficient exhaustive search for the optimal scheduling table in the system model.
These challenges point to a crucial gap in the current research landscape: the need for an integrated method 
that combines the accuracy and rigor of formal verification with the flexibility and efficiency of heuristic 
optimization. Bridging this gap can result in better scheduling quality, higher processor utilization, and greater 
system scalability – all of which are essential in modern avionics.
This paper proposes a model-based method of partition scheduling for IMA systems, which are modeled as 
timed automata in the model checker UPPAAL. The main contributions of this paper include: 
 1. Novel Model-Based Partition Optimization : The method introduces a novel model-based partition optimi -
zation technique for IMA systems compliant with the ARINC 653 avionics standard, effectively handling 
two-level scheduler, multicore processor, and both strictly and loosely periodic partitions. Unlike traditional 
analytical methods, this approach is more precise for system integrators as it leverages the powerful mode -
ling capabilities of Timed automata in UPPAAL.
 2. Parallel Genetic Algorithm for Efficient Optimization : The method incorporates a parallel genetic algorithm to 
explore the scheduling parameter space of the IMA model. This algorithm enables parallel processing of each 
partition and invokes the improved genetic operators during the evolution, accelerating the computationally 
expensive model-based analysis through parallelization and achieving an optimal solution more efficiently 
than traditional analytical methods.
 3. Compositional Verification Framework : A new compositional verification framework is proposed that allows 
independent verification of each partition while combining local results to derive the global schedulability 
property. This innovative design significantly mitigates the state space explosion problem commonly en -
countered in model checking, enhancing the scalability and efficiency of the verification process.
Related work
The model-based approaches in related work primarily focus on two areas: schedulability analysis and 
scheduling system optimization. The schedulability analysis involves determining whether a system model with 
deterministic constraints (i.e., no unknowns) can meet its scheduling requirements. By contrast, the scheduling 
system optimization addresses models with unknown variables or parameters, seeking the optimal or feasible 
solution within the system’s schedulability boundaries.
Schedulability analysis using model checking, particularly with Timed Automata (TA) and its extensions 
such as stopwatch automata, has been extensively researched since the 2000s due to its expressiveness and 
effectiveness in verifying real-time systems under strict timing constraints. Fersman et al.21 proposed a model 
of task automata, TA extended with real-time tasks triggered by events, for schedulability analysis of a single-
processor real-time system , and implemented the verification tool TIMES based on UPPAAL. David et al.22 
developed a model-based framework utilizing UPPAAL for schedulability analysis of embedded real-time 
systems, incorporating multi-processor configurations, task dependencies, and various scheduling policies. 
They proved that the schedulability can be checked for a subclass of timed automata but will be undecidable 
if the system model covers the execution time uncertainty and preemptive scheduling. However, the recent 
support for timed automata in UPPAAL leads to an efficient approximate analysis that has proved adequate on 
several concrete industries cases.
The approaches of scheduling system optimization typically rely on accurate and reliable schedulability 
analyses as their foundation. Boudjadar et al.13–15 proposed a compositional framework of parameterized 
stopwatch automata for analyzing hierarchical scheduling systems, and applied it to the schedulability analysis 
of an avionics system based on UPPAAL. They built and analyzed the model of each partition independently, 
estimating and optimizing its scheduling requirement by using Statistical Model Checking (SMC). Nevertheless, 
the combination of local optimization of individual partitions does not guarantee a globally optimal solution10. 
As a result, the scheduling parameters for each partition cannot be selected independently but jointly optimized.
Abdeddaïm et al.23,24 presented an efficient shortest path algorithm for timed automata and stopwatch automata 
to find optimal schedules for the classical job-shop problem. They also used CTL model checking in UPPAAL to 
test the feasibility of a task set and its schedulability with Preemptive Fixed Priority (PFP) and Earliest Deadline 
First (EDF) policies. Le et al.25 applied the TA formalism on a case study of heterogeneous communication 
systems, verifying the schedulability using UPPAAL, thereby exhaustively analyzing the propertys of the system 
for every point in a grid of the design parameters. Glonina et al.26 proposed a general stopwatch automata-based 
model of an IMA system, performing schedulability analysis of this general model instead of the corresponding 
concrete model, which is more efficient than model checking. This approach mandates the manual verification 
of a uncertain number of the correctness requirements to ensure the traces equivalence between models and 
Scientific Reports  |        (2025) 15:31342 2 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-16745-4www.nature.com/scientificreports/

--- Page 3 ---
stipulates that the system models must be deterministic. Sun et al.27 performed a component-based analysis 
of hierarchical scheduling systems using linear hybrid automata to improve the scalability of model checking. 
They also tentatively explored a grid of the design parameters and repeatedly tested the schedulability of the 
corresponding model, obtaining better resource utilization than analytical methods.
To further enhance the optimization of design parameters in system models, the Parametric Timed 
Automaton (PTA)28 and its IMITATOR tool29 were designed for parametric schedulability regions of complex 
real-time systems. Sun et al.30,31 applied PTA and IMITATOR to the parametric schedulability analysis of fixed-
priority scheduling on a single-processor and distributed system, acquiring the smaller schedulability region 
of design parameters. André32 presented a PTA-based schedulability analysis of a simple real-time system on a 
single-processor, finding the feasible parameter zones via IMITATOR. This work was subsequently extended to a 
launcher flight control system to automatically synthesize the main parameters of this single-processor system33. 
However, the optimization problem of partition scheduling in the IMA system addressed in our work involves 
determining an optimal partition scheduling table characterized by an uncertain number of time windows 
(parameters), rendering the problem unsuitable for direct modeling and analyzing using PTA.
Obviously, IMITATOR excels at handling systems with uncertain parameters by computing symbolically 
schedulable regions, making it particularly suitable for early design space exploration. This advantage builds 
on the inverse approach of parametric timed automata, which is able to synthesize parameter regions that 
preserve system behavior based on a given estimate34. Its modeling expressiveness has been further enhanced by 
extensions that support parameter updates in clock distribution35. Recently, minimum time synthesis techniques 
were introduced to optimize parameter values for improved timing efficiency36,37. While these advances have 
significantly enhanced the modeling capabilities and analytical depth of the tool, some challenges remain when 
applied to the combinatorial scheduling structures in this paper. For example, in IMA systems, the number 
and configuration of partitioned time windows are often unknown and need to be optimized. Capturing this 
variability directly in PTA models is inherently complex, especially in the presence of mixed partition cycles and 
multicore architectures.
In contrast, UPPAAL uses non-parametric timed automata, providing an efficient support for verifying 
schedulability under fixed parameters. In38, a genetic algorithm was employed to explore the scheduling 
parameter space of an IMA system, invoking UPPAAL to verify the schedulability of each candidate solution. 
This approach relied on conventional genetic operators, whose configurations had a significant influence on 
the optimization outcomes. To improve the operators’ configuration, a Q-learning mechanism was further 
introduced in39, enabling the adaptive configuration of genetic operators based on the search history. However, 
these studies did not effectively incorporate domain-specific knowledge to guide the design of genetic operators, 
which limited the search efficiency for large systems. Additionally, the generation of scheduling tables for mix-
periodic partitions was not considered, potentially making the approaches impractical in a real IMA system and 
leading to inefficient processor utilization.
In recent years, a number of scheduling design and configuration approaches have been proposed for IMA 
systems. Cheptsov and Khoroshilov40 proposed a robust resource partitioning method for ARINC 653 RTOSs 
using static Memory Management Unit(MMU) configuration. Zuepke et al.41 presented a unified AUTOSAR-
OS and ARINC 653 kernel to combine avionics safety with the resource-efficiency of automotive systems. Lukic 
et al.42 proposed an automated approach for generating and verifying ARINC 653 configuration files, which 
reduces manual errors and improves safety assurance. In parallel, Zhang et al.43 applied refinement-based formal 
specification to analyze the behavior of ARINC 653 systems on multicore architectures. These studies further 
support the integration of formal methods into IMA system design and configuration.
In this paper, we explore how model-based methods can be employed to solve the optimization problem 
for IMA partition scheduling systems, aiming to find the optimal partition scheduling table with respect to 
processor utilization.
Preliminaries
This section introduces the definition of timed automata, including its syntax, the extension of stopwatches and 
a simple example in the UPPAAL tool, which helps us understand the model of timed automata intuitively.
Definition of timed automata
Timed Automata are formal models that extend traditional finite-state automata by incorporating the notion of 
time. They are particularly useful for modeling systems that exhibit both discrete (event-driven) and continuous 
(time-driven) behaviors. A timed automaton operates in a state space where transitions between states can be 
triggered by both the occurrence of events and the expiration of time intervals.
A timed automaton11 can be formally defined as a tuple A=⟨L,Σ,X ,E,I,l 0,F⟩ where: 
 1. L is a finite set of locations. Each location represents a set of states of the system being modeled.
 2. Σ is a finite set of actions that can trigger transitions between locations.
 3. X is a finite set of clock variables. These variables are used to measure the passage of time and can be reset to 
zero at specific transitions.
 4. E is a set of edges between locations. Each edge e∈E representing a set of transitions is a tuple ⟨l ,g ,a ,µ ,l′⟩ 
where:
• l, l′∈L are the source and target locations, respectively.
• g is a guard condition over the clock variables X. It is a linear constraint that specifies when a transition can 
occur (, i.e. what time constraints must be met).
Scientific Reports  |        (2025) 15:31342 3 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-16745-4www.nature.com/scientificreports/

--- Page 4 ---
• a∈Σ∪ϵ is the action associated with the transitions. If a=ϵ, the transition is classified as spontaneous 
and internal, thereby indicating that it is neither triggered by nor results in any external event.
• µ is a clock reset function that specifies which clocks should be reset to zero upon taking the transitions.
 5. I is an invariant function that maps each location to a linear constraint (invariant) that must be held contin -
uously at the location.
 6. l0 is an initial location. It defines the starting point of the timed automaton’s execution.
 7. F (optional) is the set of accepting (or final) locations, which mark successful termination or reachability of 
desired states in the modeled system.
A timed automaton evolves over time by advancing its clock variables continuously and making transitions 
based on the expiration of time intervals (as specified by guard conditions) and the occurrence of actions. This 
combination of discrete and continuous behaviors makes timed automata a powerful tool for modeling and 
verifying real-time systems.
In the context of timed automata, stopwatches are a special type of clock variables that can be paused and 
resumed, unlike a regular clock that continuously measures time. Specifically, a stopwatch’s timing can be halted 
and restarted based on changes in the system’s state. This feature makes it particularly useful for modeling and 
analyzing certain systems, such as preemptive scheduling systems.
The primary purpose of using a stopwatch in timed automata is to provide more precise control and 
description of system behavior. It allows for more accurate modeling of processes that start and pause, such as 
simulating the time consumption of a task when it is interrupted and then resumed. In practical applications, a 
stopwatch can help timed automata achieve stricter time constraints and stronger expressiveness.
Timed automata in UPPAAL
UPPAAL is an integrated tool designed for modeling and verifying timed automata, implementing symbolic model 
checking for Timed Computation Tree Logic (TCTL) expressions. The tool supports graphical representation 
of timed automata, facilitating intuitive and efficient system modeling. Each individual automaton structure is 
referred to as a template44.
Figure  1 presents a simple timed automaton template that includes the four types of locations defined 
by UPPAAL. The double circular InitialLocation  serves as the starting position of the system. The circular 
NormalLocation  represents ordinary states, illustrating the operational states of the system within a time interval. 
The UrgentLocation , marked by a “U” symbol, defines urgent states where UPPAAL disallows the passage of 
time. The committed locations, denoted by a “C” symbol in CommittedLocation , not only freeze the passage 
of time but also require that the subsequent transition must originate from one of them, which is useful for 
establishing atomic operations or conditional branching structures.
The linear constraints such as i≤5 and i′== 0  act as invariants for their respective locations, defining 
the conditions when the system resides in such a location. UPPAAL utilizes invariants to support stopwatch 
variables, as illustrated by the invariant i′== 0  at the NormalLocation , indicating that the derivative of the clock 
variable i is zero, thus preventing any changes to i at this location.
The edges connecting locations are annotated with four types of specifications: selection , guard , channel , 
and update . The selection  annotation t:type  binds a nondeterministic value from the type  to the identifier t, 
thereby reducing the number of edges between identical locations. The linear constraint i≥5 serves as a guard  
for this edge, enabling the transition only when the condition is satisfied. The notation channels[ t] represents 
the external actions of a timed automaton, where the suffixes “!” and “?” indicate output and input channels  
respectively; an edge marked with an output channel c! synchronizes with another edge labeled with an input 
channel c?; in cases where an edge lacks an explicit channel, the transition is executed asynchronously within 
the automaton. The expression i=0 represents an update  operation associated with the edge, allowing for the 
resetting of clocks like i and modification of integer variable values during transitions.
UPPAAL uses the TCTL formula A[]φ to describe safety properties of timed automata. In this formula, “ A” 
represents All (all paths), “[]” represents Globally(All states on the path), and φ is a state formula that defines 
the desired states without considering the behavior of the model. UPPAAL verifies a safety property by exploring 
the reachability of its faulty states within the symbolic state space of the model, thereby determining whether the 
model satisfies the safety property.
However, it has been proved that the reachability problem is undecidable for the verification of timed 
automata including stopwatches (stopwatch automata)45. As a result, UPPAAL offers an approximate reachability 
algorithm for stopwatch automata. This algorithm performs only reachability analysis and yields an over-
approximation of the reachable state-space: If UPPAAL indicates that a particular state is not reachable, it is 
Figure 1 . A template of timed automata in UPPAAL. 
Scientific Reports  |        (2025) 15:31342 4 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-16745-4www.nature.com/scientificreports/

--- Page 5 ---
definitively unreachable. Conversely, if UPPAAL returns the result “may (may not) be satisfied” , this suggests that 
the identified trace may be spurious, indicating uncertainty regarding the satisfaction of the specified property.
The over-approximation is not precise but still suitable for safety property-checking like the step of 
schedulability verification in this paper. In our stopwatch automata model, an Unschedulable  location is defined 
for error states that any task misses the deadline. Thus the schedulability verification is also a reachability problem 
of the error states. If we obtain the result “Satisfied (unreachable)” from UPPAAL, it means the error states 
are definitely unreachable and the system is absolutely schedulable. Therefore, we can acquire the approximate 
schedulability bounds of the system based on the positive results of model checking.
Furthermore, in a partitioned system, multiple tasks are encapsulated within a partition automaton. The 
partition scheduling is modeled at a higher level using another timed automaton that cyclically activates 
each partition according to the scheduling table. This hierarchical modeling reflects the two-level scheduling 
mechanism defined in ARINC 653.
Problem description
This section first provides the formal definition of the IMA scheduling system and subsequently describes its 
partition scheduling as an optimization problem.
System definition
According to the ARINC 653 standard4, we consider an IMA operating system running on a single-core or 
multi-core processor with the core set C. As shown in Fig.  2, it is a two-layer partitioned scheduling system that 
consists of the global and local layer. In the global layer, partitions are activated by a Time Division Multiplexing 
(TDM) global scheduler across all processor cores synchronously46. For each partition in the local layer, there 
is a local scheduler employing the preemptive Fixed Priority (FP) policy to schedule the execution of internal 
real-time tasks.
The system is divided into n temporal partitions Ω= {P i|i=1 ,2,...,n }, where Pi denotes the ith 
partition of the system. The temporal partitions are scheduled by the TDM global scheduler repeatedly every 
major time frame M in accordance with a partition scheduling table S={W i|i=1,2,...,n }, where 
Wi={
wi
k|k=1,2,...,ω i}
 is the set of Pi’s partition time windows (the time slices of Pi). The kth partition 
time window of Pi is defined as wi
k=⟨
oi
k,di
k⟩
, where oi
k represents the offset from the start of the major 
time frame, and di
k>0 denotes the window’s duration. The time windows of partitions are non-overlapping, 
Figure 2 . The partition scheduling system in IMA architecture. 
Scientific Reports  |        (2025) 15:31342 5 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-16745-4www.nature.com/scientificreports/

--- Page 6 ---
thus maintaining the absolute temporal isolation between partitions. For any two partition time windows 
wi
k=⟨
oi
k,di
k⟩
 and wj
l=⟨
oj
l,dj
l⟩
 if i ̸=j or k ̸=l then we have oi
k+di
k≤oj
l or oj
l+dj
l≤oi
k. There 
exists the context-switching overhead between partitions. It involves saving and restoring processor state and 
switching between partitions, mainly depending on the implementation of related hardware. Since the ARINC 
653-compliant system requires a predictable temporal behavior, we assume the context-switching overhead to 
be a system-level constant v.
For any partition Pi, there is a real-time task set Γi={
τi
j|j=1,2,...,m i}
, where the tasks within 
Pi can only be scheduled or executed within the partition time windows of Wi. The task scheduling policy 
within each partition is independent of the system’s partition scheduling strategy. A task τi
j is defined as a tuple ⟨
Ti
j,Ii
j,Ei
j,Gi
j,Di
j,Ri
j,Ci
j⟩
. Ti
j is the period of task, Ii
j is the initial offset, Ei
j is the minimum execution time 
in a period, Gi
j means the maximum, Di
j denotes the relative deadline, Ri
j denotes the priority, and Ci
j∈C 
represents the processor core that τi
j is bound.
Each task considers a flexible execution interval, defined by the minimum and maximum execution times 
(Ei
j, Gi
j), reflecting potential runtime variations due to conditional execution paths, cache behavior, memory 
contention and other hardware-level fluctuations. Additionally, the processor affinity Ci
j clearly associates each 
task with a specific processing core, which is critical for accurately modeling task execution behaviors and 
interference patterns in multicore avionics platforms. This precise characterization of task parameters provides a 
rigorous foundation for evaluating partition schedulability and optimizing overall processor utilization.
In this system , the scheduling table S stipulates the time allocation to all the partitions. The ARINC 653 
standard4 defines a pair of scheduling parameters ⟨pi,bi⟩ as the periodic time demand of a partition Pi. 
The parameter pi denotes a partition period and bi is the budget every pi. Thus the major time frame M, the 
hyper-period of all partitions, is typically defined as the least common multiple of all partition periods. The 
schedulability condition of the system is guaranteed if and only if the time allocation always satisfies the time 
demand of each partition, where all the internal tasks meet their deadlines.
In the scheduling table S, there are two types of temporal partitions that conform to the periodic time 
demand47. The first is strictly periodic partitions that support the strict periodicity of tasks in the partition. 
As illustrated in Fig.  3a, in strictly periodic partitions, there is only one continuous time window within each 
period, and the offset of each window is identical. The second is loosely periodic partitions, providing a “best-
effort” periodic time service. Although a loosely periodic partition Pi still achieves its periodic time demand 
⟨pi,bi⟩, it allows for a certain amount of jitter of the windows. Additionally, each period may contain multiple 
time windows. For example, in Fig.  3b, a loosely periodic partition Pi has one window in the first period but two 
in the second, where di
1=di
2+di
3 and oi
1 ̸=oi
2.
The ARINC 653 standard defines a partition scheduling mechanism that allocates fixed-duration time 
windows to each partition at regular intervals. From the perspective of hierarchical scheduling48, this behavior is 
functionally equivalent to a periodic server, where the partition receives a fixed execution budget every period and 
unused time does not carry over. Compared to more flexible server strategies such as deferrable servers (which 
allow unused capacity to be deferred within the same period) or sporadic servers (which support event-driven 
activations with minimum inter-arrival constraints), ARINC 653 enforces strict periodicity and deterministic 
execution slots. These constraints enhance analyzability and isolation, which are critical in avionics applications. 
Although only periodic partition behavior is considered in this work, the modeling framework can be extended 
to support other server types by modifying partition activation and budget replenishment logic.
Partition scheduling optimization problem
The partition scheduling optimization problem of an IMA system can be defined as follows: Given the above 
partition scheduling system Ω= {P i|i=1 ,2,...,n }, the problem is to find a partition scheduling table 
S={W i|i=1,2,...,n } such that all the tasks τi
j in any partition Pi satisfy their deadline constraints, while 
minimizing the processor occupancy:
 Umin= min{n∑
i=1ωi∑
k=1di
k+v
M}
 (1)
where v represents the overhead for each partition context switch.
Owing to the unknown number ωi of partition time windows, it is difficult to solve the objective function in 
Eq. ( 1). Consider a balance between the temporal supply of the partition time windows Wi in schedule S and 
the demand for the periodic scheduling parameters ⟨pi,bi⟩. We use the scheduling parameters ⟨pi,bi⟩as the 
unknown variables instead of the scheduling table S.
Since the major time frame M is the least common multiple of all partition periods pi, we assume that 
M=kipi,ki∈N+. Thus, it holds that
 ωi∑
k=1di
k=kibi (2)
Let ci
j be the number of context switches of the partition Pi during the jth period of M. We define the processor 
occupancy:
Scientific Reports  |        (2025) 15:31342 6 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-16745-4www.nature.com/scientificreports/

--- Page 7 ---
 U=n∑
i=1ωi∑
k=1di
k+v
M
=n∑
i=11
kipi(
kibi+ki∑
j=1ci
jv)
=n∑
i=11
pi(
bi+ki∑
j=1ci
j
kiv)
=n∑
i=1bi+civ
pi (3)
where ci is the average number of context switches for the partition Pi.
Therefore, the partition scheduling optimization problem involves finding a 2n-dimensional vector 
x=( x1,x2,...,x 2n)T∈R2n
+ build the periodic scheduling parameters ⟨pi,bi⟩ of the partition Pi, such that 
all the tasks τi
j in Pi satisfy their deadline constraints, while minimizing the processor occupancy:
 Umin= min{n∑
i=1bi+civ
pi}
 (4)
Since the vector x of unknown variables describes the temporal demand of all the partitions, we call x the 
demand vector of the system.
Optimization method
To address the optimization problem defined in “ Problem description ” , this work proposes a model-based 
partition scheduling framework that integrates heuristic optimization and formal verification. The goal is 
to construct a feasible and efficient partition scheduling table under multiple system-level constraints, such 
as partition types, processor binding, and execution time bounds. The proposed method formulates the 
scheduling table generation as a combinatorial optimization problem, where candidate solutions are encoded as 
scheduling parameters. A genetic algorithm is used to iteratively explore the solution space, guided by a fitness 
function derived from the schedulability evaluation. The verification of schedulability is performed through 
Figure 3 . An example of two types of temporal partitions. 
Scientific Reports  |        (2025) 15:31342 7 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-16745-4www.nature.com/scientificreports/

--- Page 8 ---
compositional model checking, where each partition is independently modeled and analyzed using UPPAAL. 
The overall mechanism is illustrated in Fig.  4.
The IMA partition scheduling system is modeled as timed automaton templates in UPPAAL. The users of 
this optimizer, IMA integrators, employing the UPPAAL templates M along with the system configuration 
as input, start the optimization process at generation g=1 and terminate at g=G to identify the optimal 
partition scheduling table Sopt. The optimizer invokes a parallel genetic algorithm to explore the scheduling 
parameter space of the IMA model. The scheduling parameters of the system are encoded as an individual 
vector in polar coordinates, which can be translated by a periodic demand decoder into a demand vector. For 
each individual I in the population βg,g∈N+ at the gth generation, a candidate partition scheduling table S 
is generated according to its demand vector x. By applying a compositional approach, the optimizer checks 
the schedulability properties of both the strictly and loosely periodic partitions in an IMA system. Each of the 
partitions is processed independently by model checking during the evolution. A fitness function evaluates every 
individual in a population on the basis of all the schedulability conclusions of a system, finally outputting the 
optimal solutions or providing the fitness values for the next generation.
The optimizer consists of the following components: 
 (1) Parallel genetic algorithm The optimizer employs a parallel genetic algorithm that explores the solu -
tion space of the system to find an optimal partition scheduling table. The genetic algorithm random -
ly initializes the first generation of a population β1={
I1
k|k=1,2,...,K}
 with K individual vectors 
I1
k=(
α(1,k )
1 ,α(1,k )
2 ,...,α(1,k )
2n)T
. A constant G is predefined as a stopping criterion, indicating the max -
imum number of generations in the genetic algorithm. For each generation g∈{1,2,...,G }, genetic op -
erators are invoked to recombine and mutate individuals in the population, generating the next generation 
of the population βg+1. The individuals in a population are evaluated simultaneously via model checking. 
Finally, after G generations of evolution, the optimizer selects the optimal individual vector and its partition 
scheduling table Sopt with the minimum processor occupancy Umin.
Figure 4 . Data flow of the model-based optimizer for the partition scheduling problem. 
Scientific Reports  |        (2025) 15:31342 8 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-16745-4www.nature.com/scientificreports/

--- Page 9 ---
 (2) Periodic demand decoder The period demand decoder realizes the transformation from the individual vec -
tor I=(α1,α2,...,α 2n)T to the demand vector x=( x1,x2,...,x 2n)T. In the optimizer, the parallel 
genetic algorithm manipulates the encoded individual vectors instead of the demand vectors. A demand 
vector is encoded into an individual vector in polar coordinates according to the rules: 
 α2i−1= arctan( x2i/x2i−1),α2i=√
x2i−12+x2i2 (5)
  which helps extract the similarities from selected individuals in the recombination operation of the genetic 
algorithm. This encoding approach enhances the search efficiency by improving the survival rate of offspring 
individuals in the evolution. The design of the genetic operators is presented in “ Design of the genetic opera -
tors”.
 (3) Scheduling table generator The scheduling table generator produces a partition scheduling table 
S={W i|i=1,2,...,n } based on the demand vector x, handling two types of temporal partitions: the 
strictly periodic partitions, ensuring strict periodicity of the time slots for each partition, and the loosely 
periodic partitions, providing a “best-effort” periodic time service. Different generation methods are em -
ployed for the two types of partitions. The strictly periodic partitions are first settled by using mixed integer 
optimization. Subsequently, the loosely periodic partitions are scheduled in order of their jitter constraints. 
The method of how to generate the scheduling table is detailed in “ Generation of partition scheduling table ”.
 (4) Compositional model checking We apply a compositional approach to the schedulability verification of the 
system model in timed automata, which is equipped with an input partition scheduling table S. Since the 
n partitions in the system are totally isolated, their temporal behaviors can be checked simultaneously and 
thus their schedulability properties are concluded independently of each other. Finally, the global sched -
ulability is derived from the n local positive results of all the partitions, thereby alleviating the state space 
explosion of verifying a monolithic system model. We present the modeling framework of a system and its 
compositional approach in “ Formal model of IMA scheduling systems ”.
 (5) Fitness function The fitness function is based on the results of model checking, evaluating the fitness value 
of an individual vector I corresponding to a partition scheduling table S. The fitness values guide the ge -
netic algorithm in exploring the solution space of the system’s partition scheduling table. A higher fitness 
value of an individual indicates its higher quality, increasing the probability of its features being retained in 
the next generation. The fitness values are assigned according to the number of schedulable partitions and 
processor utilization. Specifically, individuals with more schedulable partitions receive higher fitness values. 
For individuals with the same number of schedulable partitions, those who have lower processor occupancy 
are assigned higher fitness values. The fitness function for individual I is defined as follows: 
 f(I)=rN+r(
1−n∑
i=1ωi∑
k=1di
k+v
M)
 (6)
  where r is a user-defined scaling factor (e.g. 100) that allows us to proportionally convert the decimal form of 
fitness values into integers, N denotes the number of the partitions that go through the schedulability verifi -
cation via model checking and ∑n
i=1∑wi
k=1di
k+v
M represents the processor utilization of the system.
Algorithm 1 provides the pseudo-code for the model-based optimization method. As shown in Algorithm 1, the 
users input the set of timed automation templates including system configuration, finally obtaining the optimal 
scheduling table of the system.
Scientific Reports  |        (2025) 15:31342 9 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-16745-4www.nature.com/scientificreports/

--- Page 10 ---
Input: M,thetemplates ofsyste mm odel
Output: Sout,theoutput partitio nscheduling table
1:Initializ eap opulation β1=/braceleftbigg/parenleftBig
α(1,k)
1,α(1,k)
2,···,α(1,k)
2n/parenrightBigT
|k=1,2,···,K/bracerightbigg
2:forg=1 toGdo
3: fork=1 toKpar-do
4: Generate demand vectorxg
k=/parenleftBig
x(g,k)
1,x(g,k)
2,···,x(g,k)
2n/parenrightBigT
bydeco ding the
individual Ig
k=/parenleftBig
α(g,k)
1,α(g,k)
2,···,α(g,k)
2n/parenrightBigT
inβg={Ig
1,Ig
2,···,Ig
K}
5: Generate scheduling table Sg
kbased onthedemand vector xg
k
6: fori=1tonpar-do
7: Instan tiate themodelMiofpartition Pibyimporting Sg
kintoM
8: Perform modelchecking ofMifortheschedulabilit yofPi
9: end for
10: Evaluate theﬁtness f(Ig
k)based ontheschedulabili tyofnpartitions
11: end for
12: ifg<Gthen
13: ˆβg←selectionO perator (βg)
14: ¯βg←recombinationO perator/parenleftBig
ˆβg/parenrightBig
15: βg+1←mutationO perator¯βg/parenrightbig
16: end if
17:end for
18:return thepartition scheduling table Soutwith thebestﬁtness value.
Algorithm 1 . Model-based optimization of partition scheduling
The optimizer begins by randomly initializing a population in Line 1.
Lines 2 to 17 delineate the iterative process of the genetic algorithm across G generations. For each generation, 
the algorithm concurrently evaluates all K individuals in the population by utilizing the keyword “par-do” from 
Line 3 to Line 11. Each partition is further processed in parallel (Lines 6 to 9) through model checking in 
UPPAAL, which represents the most computationally intensive operation during the evolution. This substantial 
degree of parallelization effectively reduces the model size during the model checking phase, thereby alleviating 
the state space explosion typically associated with schedulability verification.
Line 10 gathers the schedulability results of n partitions in the kth individual Ig
k and subsequently assesses 
the fitness value of Ig
k.
Lines 12 to 16 detail the reproductive operations within the genetic algorithm for generation 1 through 
G−1. The population βg undergoes selection, recombination, and mutation processes to generate the 
subsequent population βg+1.
Ultimately, the optimizer outputs the optimal partition scheduling table Sopt, which encapsulates the highest 
fitness value identified throughout the evolutionary process.
Design of the genetic operators
In the genetic algorithm, a population βg={Ig
k|k=1,2,...,K } is processed by the three genetic operators: 
selection, recombination and mutation operator in sequence, finally producing the next generation of the 
population βg+1={
Ig+1
k |k=1,2,...,K}
.
Selection operator
The selection operator is to fetch K pairs of individuals from the population βg according to the fitness 
evaluation of all the individuals. During the evolution, it is highly probable to generate low-fitness individuals, 
such as invalid demand vectors whose processor occupancy exceed 100%. Therefore, we adopt an exponential 
ranking selection operator, which applies higher selective pressure and has a stronger tendency to choose better 
individuals from the population, while maintaining a certain standard deviation of the fitness distribution after 
selection.
In the exponential ranking selection, the K individuals in βg are first ranked based on the fitness values from 
the worst (rank 1) to the best (rank K). The probability ρi of selecting the ith individual is calculated using the 
following formula20:
 ρi=cK−i
∑K
k=1cK−k (7)
Scientific Reports  |        (2025) 15:31342 10 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-16745-4www.nature.com/scientificreports/

--- Page 11 ---
where c∈(0,1) adjusts the selective pressure of the operation. A smaller c increases the selective pressure, 
making the best-fit individuals more likely to be selected. The K pairs of individuals selected by the operator will 
be used as K pairs of parents to generate the offspring population βg+1.
Recombination operator
The recombination operator is to extract the similarities from selected individuals during the evolution49. We 
use the individual vectors in polar coordinates instead of the demand vectors to recombine the information from 
parents about the period pi and budget bi for each partition Pi(i=1 ,2,...,n ), which retains similarity in the 
utilization ratio ui=bi/pi.
Let Ig
1=(
α(g,1)
1 ,α(g,1)
2 ,...,α(g,1)
2n)T
 and Ig
2=(
α(g,2)
1 ,α(g,2)
2 ,...,α(g,2)
2n)T
 be a pair of selected 
individuals as parents at the gth generation. An intermediate recombination operator is utilized to generate an 
offspring individual ¯Ig+1
1=(
¯α(g+1,1)
1 ,¯α(g+1,1)
2 ,...,¯α(g+1,1)
2n)T
 using the following rule:
 ¯α(g+1,1)
k =α(g,1)
k+λk(
α(g,2)
k−α(g,1)
k)
,k=1,2,..., 2n (8)
where λk∼U(−d, 1+d) denotes a scaling factor selected uniformly at random over an interval [−d, 1+ d] 
for each parameter.
Figure  5 shows an example of such a recombination operation. Let x=( x1,x2,...,x 2n)T and 
y=( y1,y2,...,y 2n)T be the demand vector of two parent individuals Ig
1 and Ig
2 respectively. Consider the 
partition Pi. Its period pi is depicted as X-axis and its budget bi as Y-axis. Based on the encoding rules in 
Eq. ( 5), the individual parameters α(g,1)
2i−1 =θx= arctan ( x2i/x2i−1), α(g,2)
2i−1 =θy= arctan ( y2i/y2i−1) 
are slope angles and α(g,1)
2i=lx=√
x2i−12+x2i2, α(g,2)
2i=ly=√
y2i−12+y2i2 are Euclidean distance. 
As shown in Fig.  5, the gray sector is the value range of the offspring generated by the parent individuals. 
They combine similar features and generate a child individual ¯Ig+1
1 whose demand vector is decoded into 
z=( z1,z2,...,z 2n)T.
Mutation operator
The mutation operator provides random genetic variation to keep a certain degree of population diversity. Assume 
that our mutation operator acquires an offspring individual ¯Ig+1
1=(
¯α(g+1,1)
1 ,¯α(g+1,1)
2 ,...,¯α(g+1,1)
2n)T
 after 
a recombination operation. A new individual Ig+1
1=(
α(g+1,1)
1 ,α(g+1,1)
2 ,...,α(g+1,1)
2n)T
 is computed 
according to
 α(g+1,1)
k =¯α(g+1,1)
k +ξ[k/2]∆k,k=1,2,...,2n (9)
Figure 5 . An example of a recombination and mutation operation. 
Scientific Reports  |        (2025) 15:31342 11 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-16745-4www.nature.com/scientificreports/

--- Page 12 ---
where ξ⌈k/2⌉∼B(1,1/n)  is a mutation decision sampled from a Bernoulli distribution B(1,  1/ n) and 
∆k∼N(0,σ k) is a random sample from a normal distribution N(0,σ k).
The two parameters of a partition P⌈k/2⌉ are chosen with the probability 1/ n for mutation operation. Each 
of the variables is mutated independently with the offset ∆k. Hence at least one partition is commonly mutated 
and prefers small offset during mutation to avoid a large number of invalid or non-schedulable time demands.
Figure  5 also depicts the offspring demand vector z′ of a partition Pi after mutating the individual of z. The 
probability density contours of normal distribution N(0,σ k) in polar coordinates are deformed to ovoid lines 
(taper at the origin) in cartesian coordinate system.
Generation of partition scheduling table
According to the demand vector x of an offspring individual, the scheduling table generator produces a partition 
scheduling table S={W i|i=1,2,...,n }, handling both the strictly and loosely periodic partitions. We use 
different generation methods for them. First, the strictly periodic partitions are settled by using mixed integer 
optimization. Subsequently, the loosely periodic partitions are scheduled in order of the upper bounds of their 
jitters.
Scheduling strictly periodic partitions
We consider the set of strictly periodic partitions Ω1={P i|i=1 ,2,...,n 1} in the system. Let 
Wi={
wi
k|k=1,2,...,ω i}
 be the set of Pi’s partition time windows and wi
k=⟨
oi
k,di
k⟩
 the k-th window. 
For each strictly periodic partition Pi, there is only one window ⟨
oi
k,di
k⟩
 within the kth period of a major time 
frame M. Each window of Pi has the same offset oi from the start of its period and the identical duration di. 
Thus, the scheduling tables Si={W i} of Pi are generated based on this periodic time window ⟨oi,d i⟩.
Considering the periodic time demand ⟨pi,bi⟩ in the demand vector x, we acquire the duration di=bi, and 
the offset oi∈O is determined by the following linear programming method.
Assume that two different partitions Pi and Pj have the strictly periodic time window ⟨oi,d i⟩ and ⟨oj,dj⟩ 
respectively. Since any two different partitions must be non-overlapping on the same processor, we can obtain 
the following inequality according to the conditions in50:
 di≤(oj−oi) mod gi,j≤gi,j−dj (10)
where pi (pj) is the period of Pi (Pj), and gi,j is the greatest common factor of the periods pi and pj.
On the basis of the above non-overlapping conditions, we can describe all the strictly periodic partitions’ 
constraints as the following inequalities:
 ∀i, j∈[1,n1],i̸=j, i < j :
0≤oi≤pi−di,
0≤oj≤pj−dj,
di≤(oj−oi) mod gi,j≤gi,j−dj. (11)
To simplify the inequality constraints, the Eq. ( 10) is linearized as
 di≤(oj−oi)−gi,j×ei,j≤gi,j−dj (12)
where ei,j=⌊oj−oi
gi,j⌋ and we have
 ⌊
di−pi
gi,j⌋
≤ei,j≤⌊
pj−dj
gi,j⌋
 (13)
Hence the inequality Eq. ( 11) can be described as the simpler linear inequalities:
 ∀i, j∈[1,n1],i̸=j, i < j :
0≤oi≤pi−di,
0≤oj≤pj−dj,
di≤(oj−oi)−gi,j×ei,j≤gi,j−dj⌊
di−pi
gi,j⌋
≤ei,j≤⌊
pj−dj
gi,j⌋
. (14)
A valid partition schedule S should satisfy the linear constraints in Eq. ( 14). We adopt the following objective 
function
 f(O)=n1∑
i=1oi (15)
Scientific Reports  |        (2025) 15:31342 12 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-16745-4www.nature.com/scientificreports/

--- Page 13 ---
where the unknown variable vector O=⟨o1,o2,...,o n1⟩ contains all the offsets of partition windows in the 
partition schedule. The objective function f(O) is the sum of the offsets of all strictly periodic partitions, thus 
preferring partition time windows at lower offsets in the scheduling table S.
Finally, given the unknown variable vector O=⟨o1,o2,...,o n1⟩, the linear programming model is 
formulated as:
 Minimize f(O)=n1∑
i=1oi
subject to
∀i, j∈[1,n1],i̸=j, i < j :
0≤oi≤pi−di,
0≤oj≤pj−dj,
di≤(oj−oi)−gi,j×ei,j≤gi,j−dj⌊
di−pi
gi,j⌋
≤ei,j≤⌊
pj−dj
gi,j⌋
. (16)
where oi and oj are the offsets of any strictly periodic partitions Pi and Pj respectively, di and dj are the duration 
of Pi and Pj respectively, pi and pj denote the periods of Pi and Pj respectively, gi,j is the least common 
multiple of the periods pi and pj, and ei,j=⌊
oi−oj
gi,j⌋
 is a constructed unknown variable for linearizing the 
schedulability constraints.
Scheduling loosely periodic partitions
Assume that there are n2=n−n1 loosely periodic partitions in the system. Given the set of loosely periodic 
partitions Ω2={P i|i=n1+1 ,n1+2 ,...,n }, the n2 partitions from Pn1+1 to Pn are arranged in 
ascending order of the upper bounds of their jitter.
For any scheduling table S={W i|i=1,2,...,n } (in “ Related work ”), we define a partition window list as 
L={⟨ρk,⟨ok,dk⟩⟩ |k=1,2,...,ω ;ρk∈ {P 1,P2,..., Pn};ok=o1,o2,...,o ω;dk=d1,d2,...,d ω} 
where ω is the number of partition time windows in S,⟨ok,dk⟩ is the k-th window in the list, and ρk is the 
partition of ⟨ok,dk⟩. In the list L, partition time windows are sorted in ascending order of the offsets ok, 
satisfying the inequality o1<o 1+d1≤o2<o 2+d2≤··· oω<oω+dω.
After building the scheduling table S(st)=∪n1
i=1Si for strictly periodic partitions, the time windows of 
loosely periodic partitions are generated by performing the following steps (outlined in Fig. 6): 
 (1) The schedulability variable SCHED  is first set to T rue . The partition window list L is initialized as 
L=L1∪ {⟨_, ⟨0,0⟩⟩,⟨_,⟨M,0⟩⟩} , where ⟨0,0⟩ and ⟨M,0⟩ are two auxiliary time windows with 
length 0, the placeholder “ ” indicates that the time window does not belong to any partition, M rep-
resents the major time frame, and L1 is the partition window list of S(st). Note that L always keeps the 
ascending order of its time window offsets. Hence the order of elements from L1 is still preserved in L. 
Two auxiliary windows ⟨0,0⟩ and ⟨M,0⟩ is settled at the first and last position of L respectively.
 (2) For each partition Pi∈Ω2, the steps (3) to (12) are performed to create all the partition time windows in 
Wi.
 (3) For each period in the major time frame M (M/p i periods), perform the steps (4) to (11) so as to satisfy 
the periodic budget.
 (4) For the jth period (j=0 ,1, ...,M
pi−1), we define a current offset variable o=jpi and a current 
budget variable b=bi.
 (5) Repeat the steps (6) to (9) if the current budget satisfies b>0 and the schedulability variable 
SCHED =True .
 (6) Search L for available time slots, looking for two adjacent partition time windows ⟨ok,dk⟩ and 
⟨ok+1,dk+1⟩ such that ⟨ρk,⟨ok,dk⟩⟩,⟨ρk+1,⟨ok+1,dk+1⟩⟩ ∈ L  and ok≤o<o k+1.
 (7) If such windows are not found in (6), we will update the schedulability variable SCHED =False  and 
go to step (5), otherwise we should proceed to perform the following steps (8) and (9).
 (8) Update the current offset o=max(o, o k+dk) and define the current available duration a=ok+1−o. 
Add a new window ⟨o,min(a, b )⟩ to the partition Pi by inserting the element ⟨P i,⟨o,min(a, b )⟩⟩ into 
L.
 (9) Update the current budget b=max (b−a,0). Update the current offset o: if a>b , then o=o+b; 
Otherwise, update o=ok+1+dk+1. Return to step (5).
 (10) If o>(j+ 1) pi, we update the schedulability variable SCHED =False .
 (11) Update j to the next period. If j<M
pi−1, we will return to step (3).
 (12) Otherwise, we will explore the next partition Pi+1 and return to step (2).
 (13) Perform L=L\ {⟨_ ,⟨0,0⟩⟩,⟨_,⟨M,0⟩⟩ }  that removes the auxiliary time windows. Calculate the 
partition scheduling table S based on L.
 (14) Return the partition scheduling table S and the schedulability variable SCHED .
Scientific Reports  |        (2025) 15:31342 13 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-16745-4www.nature.com/scientificreports/

--- Page 14 ---
Finally, the schedulability variable SCHED  indicates whether the system is schedulable in S. The partition 
scheduling table S is successfully generated if SCHED =True , providing precisely periodic time slots for 
the strictly periodic partitions in Ω1={P i|i=1 ,2,...,n 1} and only periodic time supply for the loosely 
periodic partitions in Ω2={P i|i=n1+1 ,n1+2 ,...,n }. For loosely periodic partitions, the generation 
algorithm provides a “best-effort” scheduling service. Therefore, the time windows of a loosely periodic partition 
may not strictly meet its timing demand, and the final schedulability variable, SCHED , is returned as False to 
alert the user in this case.
Figure 6 . Flowchart of generating partition scheduling table for loosely periodic partitions. 
Scientific Reports  |        (2025) 15:31342 14 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-16745-4www.nature.com/scientificreports/

--- Page 15 ---
Formal model of IMA scheduling systems
The partition scheduling system of IMA is modeled as a set of timed automata in UPPAAL. This section first 
outlines the layered structure of the formal models and then presents the major templates of the model.
Layered structure of the IMA scheduling model
The compositionality in model checking requires the optimizer to handle each partition’s verification 
independently, combining the local results to derive a global schedulability conclusion. Thus the formal model 
of the IMA scheduling system should support the independent description and verification for each partition.
To apply compositional model checking, we employ timed automaton models to delineate the task 
execution behaviors within each partition. As illustrated in Fig.   7, there is a set of timed automaton templates 
M={P ,R,T} that consists of a partition scheduler P, task scheduler R and task template T. The templates 
in M are created to model the generic behavior of a partition. A scheduling table S from the above parallel 
genetic algorithm is divided into n sets of partition time windows Wi for corresponding partition Pi. Each Wi 
of the scheduling table S can be independently imported into the template set M, establishing the instance 
model of the partition Pi. Finally, n instance models M1,...,Mn are constructed simultaneously. Each of 
them representing a distinct partition undergoes an independent model checking and provides a compositional 
schedulability conclusion.
The template P describes scheduling actions for a partition, R delineates scheduling behavior for the internal 
tasks within a partition, and T characterizes the behavior of a real-time task within the partition. The three types 
of models interact with each other via a few scheduling command/status channels, ensuring the cohesion of 
each component in the model. By importing the scheduling configuration into the corresponding templates, the 
instance model M i of a partition Pi is created as follows: 
 (1) The partition scheduler P is instantiated with the partition time window set Wi of Pi from the scheduling 
table S, generating the partition scheduler model Qi.
 (2) The task scheduling policy Ri within partition Pi is embedded into the task scheduler R, building the task 
scheduler model Ri. The configuration of Ri determines the order of the ready queues and preemptive 
options.
 (3) The behavioral configuration Ti
j of task τi
j within partition Pi is integrated into the task template T, pro -
ducing the task model Ti
j. The configuration Ti
j is implemented as a data structure that covers the main 
features of τi
j such as the task period, minimum and maximum execution time, deadline, priority, and core 
affinity.
By combining all the instance models Qi, Ri and Ti
j within the partition Pi, we acquire the partition model 
Mi=Qi||Ri||∪mi
j=1Ti
j that describes the behavior of the partition. The templates of timed automata are 
implemented in UPPAAL. We now discuss the templates of the partition scheduler, task scheduler and task 
template in detail.
Partition scheduler
The model of the partition scheduler template provides Time Division Multiplexing (TDM) scheduling services 
for a partition Pi. The model activates this partition only within the partition time windows of Si every major 
time frame.
The partition scheduling table S is recorded in an array of structures Sct, which specifies the time window(s) 
for each partition on the processor, ensuring that no partition exceeds its allotted time. Each element of the array 
represents a partition time window including three integer fields: part, off, and dura , where part is the partition 
Figure 7 . Modeling framework of IMA partition scheduling. 
Scientific Reports  |        (2025) 15:31342 15 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-16745-4www.nature.com/scientificreports/

--- Page 16 ---
identifier, offset  is the window’s offset, and dura  denotes its duration. The model defines two functions with a 
parameter w: winBegin  and winEnd  that return the start and end time of the wth window respectively according 
to the partition schedule table Sct. The major time frame is defined as an integer constant M. Since the partition 
scheduler is a time-driven model, a clock variable t is created to measure time within each M, thereby controlling 
partition scheduling actions.
As depicted in Fig.  8, the template of partition scheduler is comprised of three locations: Start , Outside  and 
Inside . The initial location Start  constructs a conditional control structure to determine the partition state at the 
start of each major time frame: if there is a time window of the partition that starts at the beginning of a major 
time frame, the model transitions to the Inside  location; otherwise, it moves to the Outside  location. The Inside  
and Outside  locations represent the states in the partition and out of it, respectively. Subsequently, the model 
decides whether the current state is at Inside  or Outside  location in accordance with the value of clock t. On 
entering a new partition time window, the model immediately moves to Inside  and notifies the task schedulers 
of the partition via a broadcast channel enter . By contrast, after leaving the current time window, the model 
transitions to Outside  and employs a broadcast channel exit to notify the task schedulers, which block all the 
tasks executing within the partition.
Task scheduler
In an IMA system, each processor core activates the partition Pi synchronously and meanwhile enables the 
task scheduler of Pi. As illustrated in Fig. 9, the task scheduler template describes how to schedule the tasks of 
Pi, based on preemptive Fixed-Priority (FP) policy. The task scheduler model acquires the current state of the 
partition Pi from its partition scheduler model through two channels enter  and exit. In addition, two channels 
ready  and finish  are used as scheduling commands to control the tasks of Pi.
The task scheduler template declares an integer variable running  to keep the task running on the processor 
core and defines a ready queue rq that stores all ready tasks in descending order of priority. rq is associated with 
four functions: enque  inserts a new task identifiers into rq in the priority order; deque  deletes the first element 
from rq; front  and rqLen  return the first task and the length of rq, respectively.
Figure 9 . Template of task scheduler. 
Figure 8 . Template of partition scheduler. 
Scientific Reports  |        (2025) 15:31342 16 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-16745-4www.nature.com/scientificreports/

--- Page 17 ---
There are two major locations, WaitPartition  and InPartition , in the template. WaitPartition  is the initial 
location. The model at WaitPartition  is out of the partition and will not react to any new ready commands to 
schedule tasks to run. In contrast, the state of InPartition  means the current time is within the partition, tasks 
can be scheduled onto the processor.
A task is bound to the processor core rid according to the processor affinity property of the task. A newly ready 
task transfers a ready  command to its task scheduler model. The task scheduler always assigns the processor to 
the highest-priority task in rq. When a new task with higher priority than the first element in rq becomes ready, 
the task scheduler places the task into rq, halts the currently running task via the resetRunning  function, and 
assigns the newly selected task for execution by updating the running  variable. When a task finishes its execution 
on the processor, it also conveys a finish  command to its task scheduler. The first element in rq will be scheduled 
if the ready queue is not empty.
Task template
The task template in Fig.  10 describes the temporal behavior of a real-time task τi
j. This template defines two 
clock variables t and x. The clock t measures the time within each task period and detects whether the response 
time satisfies the deadline. The clock x calculates the execution time of the task occupying the processor core 
within the current period. The clock x is active only while the task is running. It can be suspended by setting its 
derivative value x′ to zero when the task is not executing on the processor core.
There are three basic locations WaitInitialOffset , Ready  and WaitNextPeriod  in the task template. It starts 
at WaitInitialOffset  and stays for the initial offset Ii
j of the task τi
j. Subsequently, the task becomes ready, 
making the model move to the Ready  location and emitting a ready  notification. The model stays at Ready  for 
an undetermined time between the best-case execution time Ei
j and the worst Gi
j, which is returned by the 
function BCET  and WCET  respectively. When the task finishes its execution in this period, its model sends a 
message to the task scheduler via the finish  channel, meanwhile transitioning to WaitNextPeriod . The model 
should return to the initial location WaitInitialOffset  and repeat the above actions in the next period.
We define a special location Unschedulable  that means the task τi
j misses its deadline Di
j. A Boolean variable 
deadlineMissed  should be assigned true once any task model enters the Unschedulable  location. Thus, we check 
the schedulability of the system by verifying the following temporal property in UPPAAL:
 A[]not deadlineMissed  (17)
which denotes that any of the task models will never reach the deadlineMissed  states in all paths.
Although the current evaluation focuses on periodic tasks, the proposed task modeling approach can be 
extended to handle non-periodic (e.g., sporadic or aperiodic) tasks as well. In all cases, deadline guarantees are 
enforced by modeling relative deadline constraints using timed automata: each task includes a clock that tracks 
its execution time, and a violation leads to a transition into an “Unschedulable” state, which is excluded by the 
model checker during verification.
Experiments
In this section, we apply the model-based method to the partition scheduling of two IMA systems. An 
experimental platform is built on a cluster computing environment. We first attempt to optimize the partition 
scheduling of a simple avionics system, which shows the capability of our model-based method to find the 
globally optimal solution. Subsequently, a more complex avionics workload is scheduled by the model-based 
method to acquire a feasible scheduling table within acceptable time and memory constraints. The traditional 
analytical methods and classical genetic algorithm are also compared with our methods in the experiments.
Experimental platform
The optimizer is implemented in Python and deployed in a cluster computing environment, whose highly 
parallelization speeds up the model-based analysis as well as the search for the optimal solutions.
Figure 10 . Task template. 
Scientific Reports  |        (2025) 15:31342 17 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-16745-4www.nature.com/scientificreports/

--- Page 18 ---
Table  1 shows the configuration of the cluster computing environment. In the cluster, there are four nodes 
that interact with each other via 40Gbps InfiniBand connections. To support the parallel model checking and 
genetic evolution, the cluster is equipped with 32×4 = 128  processor cores. Each node is a workstation 
allocated 512GB of dedicated memory and shares 16TB of disk space.
The software configuration is built on the Ubuntu Linux operating system, utilizing the Message Passing 
Interface (MPI) protocol to partition and aggregate data across computing nodes in the cluster. The MPI protocol 
services are implemented using the mpi4py and Open MPI library. The model checker UPPAAL of the optimizer 
is the 64-bit Linux version.
Experiment on a simple avionics system
The first experiment is to perform the optimal scheduling for the avionics task sets in51. As shown in Table   2, 
there are two partitions in this simple avionics system, where the time unit is 1ms. We generate the partition 
scheduling table by using the following four methods.
 (1) Exhaustive search (ES): In51, the schedulability of the system was determined using response time anal -
ysis. The method involved testing all possible integer combinations of partition periods within the range 
[40,2000]. For each combination, a binary search strategy was employed to find the minimum partition 
budget from the highest to the lowest priority partition. Although exhaustive search can find the global 
optimal solution, it is only practical for simple systems. Its effectiveness decreases significantly as the pa -
rameter space and system complexity increase.
 (2) Geometric programming: In10, Geometric Programming (GP) was used to model and solve the optimi -
zation problem of partitioned scheduling systems. This method is suitable for addressing nonlinear and 
non-convex optimization problems but is limited to handling simple sets of periodic tasks with fixed exe -
cution times. For this study, a GP optimization program for the avionics system was implemented using the 
Python library GPkit 1.1.
 (3) Basic genetic algorithm: Two genetic algorithms were utilized as follows. The Basic Genetic Algorithm52 
and the Breeder Genetic Algorithm (BGA)53, referred to as “GA1” and “GA2, ” respectively. Both algorithms 
used binary encoding for individuals. In GA1, the crossover probability for each bit was set at 0.5 and the 
mutation probability at 0.2. In GA2, the proportion of truncation selection T% was set to 50 %, the weight 
constraint for the intermediate recombination operator was 0.5, the standard deviation for the Gaussian 
mutation operator was 10, and the mutation probability was 0.2.PartitionTask set
Task Period WCET Deadline Priority Core
P1τ1
1 1600 80 1000 4 0
τ1
2 2400 120 2000 3 0
τ1
3 3200 160 3000 2 0
τ1
4 4800 240 4000 1 0
P2τ2
1 1600 80 1000 4 1
τ2
2 2400 120 2000 3 1
τ2
3 3200 160 3000 2 1
τ2
4 4800 240 4000 1 1
Table 2 . Task sets in experiment 1. Configuration Hardware/software information
Nodes 4 workstations
Processors AMD Ryzen Threadripper 7970X 4.0GHz
Number of cores 32 cores / processor
Memory 512GB / node
Disk size 16TB
Interaction 40Gbps QDR InfiniBand
OS Ubuntu Server 22.04.4
UPPAAL 64-bit Linux version 4.1.25
Python Python 3.12.3
Libraries OpenMPI 4.1.6, mpi4py 3.1.6
Table 1 . The configuration of the cluster in experiments. 
Scientific Reports  |        (2025) 15:31342 18 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-16745-4www.nature.com/scientificreports/

--- Page 19 ---
 (4) Model-based method in this paper (MBGA in short): When scheduling with the proposed method, in -
dividuals are also binary encoded. The base of the exponential ranking selection is set to c=0 .8, and 
the constraint factor for recombination is d=0 .5. The standard deviation of the mutation is defined as 
σ2i−1=π/32,σ 2i= 2000 .
Table  3 summarizes the results of Experiment 1. The MBGA method found the same global optimal solution 
as the exhaustive search with a minimal processor occupancy 45.1%. However, the two traditional genetic 
algorithms only identified two local optimal solutions, associated with higher processor occupancy 59.5% and 
47.5%, respectively. When compared to the optimization approach based on formal models, the geometric 
programming method–using a less precise analytical model of resource supply and demand–produced a 
schedulable solution, but with a significantly higher occupancy of 67.8%, wasting the processor time severely.
Figure  11 depicts the changes of the processor occupancy and cumulative processing time in Experiment 1. 
Clearly, GA1 prematurely converged to a local optimum with the processor occupancy 59.5% after approximately 
50 generations. By contrast, GA2 was also stuck in a local optimum for a long period of 152 generations. However, 
at the 167th generation, a random mutation enabled it to discover an individual with lower processor utilization. 
Following this, GA2 conducted local searches based on this individual, making slight progress, but soon reached 
a stable state again and ultimately converged to a local optimum with the processor occupancy 47.5%. Conversely, 
MBGA consistently identified better solutions throughout the optimization process, eventually converging to 
the global optimum.
Experiment on a concrete avionics system
Experiment 2 tackles the partition scheduling problem for the complex IMA task set outlined in Table  454. 
This ARINC 653 partition scheduling might seem like a simple task scheduling problem, but it is actually a 
complex combinatorial optimization challenge. For a single hosted application and its corresponding partition, 
the optimal scheduling parameters, such as the partition period and execution budget, can be determined using 
exact model-based schedulability verification. However, finding a globally optimal set of partition scheduling 
parameters is often intractable because the combination of local optimization of individual partitions does not 
guarantee a globally optimal solution10. Consequently, the scheduling parameters for each partition cannot be 
selected independently; instead they must be jointly optimized. A brute-force search of the solution space would 
only be practical when certain parameters are fixed and/or the number of applications is small. In concrete 
IMA projects, the solution space is typically too large for such a search to be feasible. Thus, this experiment 
compares the optimization of the MBGA method with the empirical scheduling scheme detailed in54. The 
context-switching overhead between system partitions is set at 0.2ms.
The detailed experimental configuration is as follows: 
 (1) Empirical scheduling
Figure 11 . Evolution of the processor occupancy and processing time in experiment 1. Method Demand vector Processor occupancy Optimal
ES (1600,341,1600,341) 45.1% ✓
GP (483, 137, 488, 152) 67.8%
GA 1 (630, 170, 1260, 350) 59.5%
GA 2 (1200, 280, 800, 160) 47.5%
MBGA (1600,341,1600,341) 45.1% ✓
Table 3 . Scheduling results in experiment 1. 
Scientific Reports  |        (2025) 15:31342 19 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-16745-4www.nature.com/scientificreports/

--- Page 20 ---
 First, all partition periods are defined as 25 ms, which is the shortest task period within the partitions and the 
greatest common divisor of most task periods. Each partition is allocated a 5ms time window within every 
partition period. A partition schedule is created based on this, using the shared partition period as the major 
time frame 25 ms. Within each major time frame, the five partition time windows are arranged sequentially 
according to priority. A context-switching overhead of 0.2ms is inserted at the beginning of each partition 
time window, reducing each window’s length to 4.8ms.
 (2) MBGA method
 Considering the large parameter space and the extended processing time per generation, the MBGA method 
is configured with a new population size 256 and a maximum iteration count 200 generations. The operator 
configurations from Experiment 2 are retained, with the base of the exponential ranking selection operator 
c=0.8, the constraint factor of the recombination operator d=0.5 and standard deviation of the mutation 
σ2i−1=π/32,σ 2i= 100.
Table  5 demonstrates the results of Experiment 2. Owing to the large unknown parameter space and high 
processor load, the concrete avionics system presented greater challenges in identifying solutions that met the 
system’s schedulability constraints compared to Experiment 1. The traditional empirical scheduling approach Method Demand vector Processor occupancy
Empirical (25, 4.8, 25, 4.8, 25, 4.8, 25, 4.8, 25, 4.8) 100%
MBGA (25, 4.9, 25, 4.7, 25, 3.4, 25, 4.5, 50, 4.5) 83%
Table 5 . Scheduling results in experiment 2. PartitionTask set
Task Period Initial offset BCET WCET Deadline Priority Core
P1τ1
1 25 2 0.9 1.5 25 5 0
τ1
2 50 3 0.2 0.4 50 4 0
τ1
3 50 3 2.7 4.2 50 3 0
τ1
4 50 0 0.1 0.2 50 2 0
τ1
5 120 0 0.7 1.1 120 1 0
P2τ2
1 50 0 1.9 3.0 50 5 1
τ2
2 50 2 0.7 1.1 50 4 1
τ3
2 100 0 0.1 0.2 100 3 1
τ4
2 100 10 1.0 1.6 100 2 1
P3τ3
1 25 0 0.5 0.8 25 5 2
τ3
2 50 0 0.7 1.1 50 4 2
τ3
3 50 0 1.0 1.6 50 3 2
τ3
4 100 11 0.8 1.3 100 2 2
P4τ4
1 25 3 0.7 1.2 25 5 3
τ4
2 50 5 1.2 1.9 50 4 3
τ4
3 50 25 0.1 0.2 50 3 3
τ4
4 100 11 0.7 1.1 100 2 3
τ5
4 200 13 3.7 5.8 200 1 3
P5τ5
1 50 0 0.7 1.1 50 6 0
τ5
2 50 2 1.2 1.9 50 5 0
τ5
3 200 0 0.6 0.9 200 4 0
τ5
4 200 14 1.5 2.4 200 3 0
Table 4 . Task set in experiment 2. 
Scientific Reports  |        (2025) 15:31342 20 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-16745-4www.nature.com/scientificreports/

--- Page 21 ---
consumed all processor time but still failed to generate a schedulable table. The counterexample produced by 
UPPAAL during schedulability verification revealed that task τ1
3 missed its deadline in the instant of 50.2 ms.
By contrast, the MBGA method utilizes genetic algorithm to explore the solution space of the scheduling 
table, iteratively creating and invoking a substantial number of parallel UPPAAL verifier processes to improve 
processing efficiency. It was executed for a total of 200 generations, lasting 26 hours and 23 minutes, finally 
selecting the best individual with a lower processor occupancy 83% .
Comparison experiment with parameter synthesis
IMITATOR29 is a powerful tool to perform automated parameter synthesis for concurrent timed systems in 
PTA. The tool computes constraint sets over parameters that ensure the system satisfies some properties. It is a 
straightforward way to apply automated parameter synthesis of IMITATOR to gain the feasible parameter regions 
that guarantee the schedulability property of systems. To do so, we extended the experimental comparison and 
tried to apply the state-of-the-art parametric model checker IMITATOR 3.3 to the same set of benchmark tasks 
used in our framework. We built a functionally equivalent model in IMITATOR PTA and ran it under the same 
experimental conditions.
However, the parameter synthesis using IMITATOR is shown computationally infeasible due to the tool’s 
reliance on rational-valued parameters. In our tests, although IMITATOR can quickly verify the schedulability 
of models with fixed parameters, it is computationally infeasible when used for parameter synthesis. In fact, 
IMITATOR cannot terminate even when the parameter domain is restricted to a very narrow range. Using the 
simple system model from Experiment 1, we constrained the partition budget to a small interval of length 1 (e.g., 
[1000,1001]). Despite this, IMITATOR still failed to terminate after more than three weeks (over 504 hours) of 
continuous execution.
This result highlights the computational challenges of applying automated parameter synthesis methods to 
complex high-dimensional scheduling problems and reinforces the efficiency advantage of our approach, which 
uses fixed-valued parameters to complete an efficient exploration, while IMITATOR performs symbolic analysis 
on infinite rational parameter space.
Discussion
The comparative experiment indicates that formal models, which describe system behavior directly, offer greater 
expressiveness and accuracy compared to analytical models. Consequently, the optimization results obtained 
through formal methods (GA, ES, and MBGA) are generally superior to those derived from analytical models 
(GP).
Among the two optimization methods based on analytical models, GP employs a relatively conservative 
approximation of the resource demand-supply relationship to satisfy the mathematical requirements of 
geometric programming, resulting in more pessimistic optimization outcomes.
Within the three optimization methods based on formal models, GA benefits from the precise description 
of system behavior provided by formal models, enabling the discovery of several locally optimal solutions with 
low processor utilization. However, due to the low search efficiency of its operators, considerable processor time 
is still wasted. In contrast, MBGA employs specialized evolutionary operators and an adaptive mechanism for 
operator configuration, allowing more accurate exploration of the system’s schedulability boundaries. In the 
comparative experiment, MBGA consistently found the same global optimal solutions as ES.
To ensure that each generated schedule remains feasible with respect to ARINC 653 constraints, the proposed 
framework integrates UPPAAL model checking into the MBGA evaluation loop. Each candidate chromosome, 
representing a scheduling table, is encoded into a timed automata model and verified for schedulability before 
being accepted for fitness calculation. This built-in verification step guarantees that the optimization process 
respects all timing and structural constraints defined by the IMA architecture.
Additionally, our experimental results indicate that MBGA maintains structural stability across multiple 
runs. Despite random initialization, the final schedules produced for the same task set showed consistent 
processor occupancy rates and similar time window distributions, indicating robustness in the search behavior. 
This characteristic is particularly important in safety-critical systems, where deterministic or near-deterministic 
scheduling structures are often preferred.
The performance of MBGA was also evaluated under scenarios of increased system complexity. Taking 
the complex avionics system optimized in Experiment 2 as an example, with a large parameter space (10 
dimensions), higher task load (57.07%), and complex communication and interaction relationships among 
tasks, exhaustive search is no longer feasible for such a vast parameter space. Nevertheless, the MBGA proposed 
in this paper is still able to find partition scheduling tables with lower processor utilization, demonstrating 
excellent optimization performance and applicability.
To further compare MBGA with state-of-the-art tools, we constructed a functionally equivalent IMITATOR 
model and applied it to the same benchmark task set. However, due to the lack of parallelization support and the 
computational complexity of symbolic region exploration, the model failed to terminate even after several weeks 
of execution on a high-performance cluster. This observation highlights the current limitations of parametric 
model checkers like IMITATOR in solving large-scale scheduling optimization problems, and reinforces the 
practicality of our UPPAAL-based GA-accelerated approach for scalable partition scheduling.
To improve computational efficiency, the proposed method already incorporates several domain-specific 
strategies. The recombination and mutation operators are designed based on the proportional relationship 
between partition parameters, which enhances convergence efficiency over traditional genetic algorithms. In 
addition, the initial parameter search space is constrained using design patterns derived from the ARINC 653 
standard, such as common ratios between partition and task periods.
Scientific Reports  |        (2025) 15:31342 21 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-16745-4www.nature.com/scientificreports/

--- Page 22 ---
Moreover, in avionics engineering, scheduling tables are typically synthesized during the early design 
phase and remain relatively fixed throughout the aircraft’s operational lifecycle to ensure system determinism 
and certification compliance. Considering that aircraft development often spans several years, a design-time 
computation cost of several days is acceptable when it enables formally verified, globally optimized scheduling 
solutions.
Computational complexity analysis
As shown in Algorithm 1, the computational complexity of the proposed algorithm MBGA is primarily 
associated with the four following components: the population size K, the number of generations G, the number 
of partitions N in the system, and the average time required for verifying the schedulability of each partition 
using UPPAAL, denoted as T. Since all the partitions of each individual in a population are processed parallel, 
the total computational complexity of the algorithm can be approximated as O(G ·T).
In each generation, MBGA evaluates the entire population to guide the search toward feasible and optimal 
scheduling tables. The most time-consuming part is the schedulability verification process for each candidate 
chromosome. This process requires transforming the chromosome into a timed automata model and invoking 
UPPAAL to check whether all tasks meet their deadline constraints under the ARINC 653 standard.
Although model checking introduces a non-negligible cost compared to traditional optimization methods, 
the use of compositional modeling in UPPAAL helps mitigate the state-space explosion problem, particularly for 
systems with moderate task counts per partition. Moreover, MBGA avoids exhaustive enumeration of possible 
parameters by using stochastic search operators to efficiently explore the scheduling space.
Scalability evaluation
The scalability of the proposed model-based optimization method is primarily achieved through the use of 
parallelization at two levels.
During the optimization process, fitness evaluations—responsible for assessing each candidate partition 
scheduling table—are distributed across parallel computing resources. Since each evaluation is independent, 
this design allows efficient utilization of available cores or nodes, preventing processing time from increasing 
significantly even with larger population sizes.
Our compositional verification framework further improves scalability by enabling partition-level 
schedulability checks to be conducted in parallel. This strategy effectively mitigates the computational burden 
associated with increasing the number of partitions in the system.
However, the scalability of symbolic model checking within each partition remains a limiting factor. As the 
number of concurrent tasks in a partition increases, the complexity of the underlying timed automata model 
grows exponentially.
To examine this limitation, we conducted a scalability experiment that handled a single partition including 
the first k tasks from the online task dataset rand0000.stg of STG site55, incrementally adding tasks from 1 up 
to all 50 tasks. As shown in Fig.  12, computation time increases steeply with the number of tasks, indicating 
the exponentially growing computational demands of symbolic model checking. When the task count exceeds 
16, the processing time on our workstation surpasses 531 hours (over three weeks), rendering the approach 
impractical for high-density partitions. This result demonstrates a significant scalability bottleneck in model-
based analysis.
Conclusions
This paper proposes a model-based method for partition scheduling in IMA systems using timed automata 
in UPPAAL. We conclude that this method provides precise schedulability bounds and feasible partition 
scheduling tables with lower processor occupancy compared to traditional analytical methods and classic 
Figure 12 . Computation time versus number of tasks, revealing the scalability limitations of model-based 
analysis for high-density partitions. 
Scientific Reports  |        (2025) 15:31342 22 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-16745-4www.nature.com/scientificreports/

--- Page 23 ---
random search algorithms. The method also applies compositional verification for both strictly and loosely 
periodic partitions and improves the parallel genetic algorithm to efficiently explore the scheduling parameter 
space, thereby mitigating state space explosion in model checking. The experiments show that this method 
enhances the performance and efficiency of partition scheduling in IMA systems. The future studies include 
extending the framework to cover more platform features like shared resource contention and integrate mixed-
criticality concepts within the ARINC 653-compliant systems while maintaining scalability.
Data availability
All data generated or analyzed during this study are included in this published article.
Received: 25 December 2024; Accepted: 19 August 2025
References
 1. Lukić, B., Ahlbrecht, A., Friedrich, S., Durak, U.: State-of-the-art technologies for integrated modular avionics and the way ahead. 
In 2023 IEEE/AIAA 42nd Digital Avionics Systems Conference (DASC) , pp. 1–10 (2023). IEEE
 2. Wang, H. & Niu, W . A review on key technologies of the distributed integrated modular avionics system. Int. J. Wireless Inf. Netw.  
25, 358–369 (2018).
 3. Bieber, P ., Boniol, F., Boyer, M., Noulard, E., & Pagetti, C. New challenges for future avionic architectures. Aerospace Lab  4, 1 
(2012).
 4. Committee, A. E. ARINC Specification 653P1-5 Avionics Application Software Standard Interface Part 1 - Required Services 
(2019).
 5. Kim, J.-E., Abdelzaher, T., & Sha, L. Schedulability bound for integrated modular avionics partitions. In 2015 Design, Automation 
and Test in Europe Conference and Exhibition (DATE) , pp. 37–42 (2015). IEEE.
 6. Annighöfer, B. & Kleemann, E. Large-scale model-based avionics architecture optimization methods and case study. IEEE Trans. 
Aerosp. Electron. Syst.  55(6), 3424–3441 (2019).
 7. Blikstad, M., Karlsson, E., Lööw, T. & Rönnberg, E. An optimisation approach for pre-runtime scheduling of tasks and 
communication in an integrated modular avionic system. Optim. Eng.  19, 977–1004 (2018).
 8. Craciunas, S. S. & Oliver, R. S. Combined task-and network-level scheduling for distributed time-triggered systems. Real-Time 
Syst.  52, 161–200 (2016).
 9. Chen, J., Du, C., Xie, F. & Y ang, Z. Schedulability analysis of non-preemptive strictly periodic tasks in multi-core real-time systems. 
Real-Time Syst.  52, 239–271 (2016).
 10. Y oon, M.-K., Kim, J.-E., Bradford, R., & Sha, L. Holistic design parameter optimization of multiple periodic resources in hierarchical 
scheduling. In 2013 Design, Automation and Test in Europe Conference and Exhibition (DATE) , pp. 1313–1318 (2013). IEEE.
 11. Alur, R. & Dill, D. L. A theory of timed automata. Theoret. Comput. Sci.  126(2), 183–235 (1994).
 12. UPPAAL Home. (accessed on 15 June 2024). http://www.uppaal.org/ .
 13. Boudjadar, J., Larsen, K. G., Kim, J. H., & Nyman, U. Compositional schedulability analysis of an avionics system using UPPAAL. 
In International Conference on Advanced Aspects of Software Engineering , pp. 140–147 (2014). CEUR Workshop Proceedings.
 14. Kim, J. H., Boudjadar, A., Nyman, U., Mikučionis, M., Larsen, K. G., Skou, A., Lee, I., & Thi Xuan Phan, L. Quantitative 
schedulability analysis of continuous probability tasks in a hierarchical context. In Proceedings of the 18th International ACM 
SIGSOFT Symposium on Component-Based Software Engineering , pp. 91–100 (2015).
 15. Boudjadar, A. et al. Statistical and exact schedulability analysis of hierarchical scheduling systems. Sci. Comput. Program.  127, 
103–130 (2016).
 16. Kim, J. H. et al. Optimizing the resource requirements of hierarchical scheduling systems. Acm Sigbed Rev.  13(3), 41–48 (2016).
 17. Ahn, S. J., Hwang, D. Y ., Kang, M. & Choi, J.-Y . Hierarchical system schedulability analysis framework using UPPAAL. IEICE 
Trans. Inf. Syst.  99(8), 2172–2176 (2016).
 18. Han, P ., Zhai, Z., Nielsen, B., & Nyman, U. A modeling framework for schedulability analysis of distributed avionics systems. arXiv 
preprint arXiv:1803.11050  (2018).
 19. Singh, A., D’Souza, M., & Ebrahim, A. Conformance testing of ARINC 653 compliance for a safety critical rtos using UPPAAL 
model checker. In Proceedings of the 36th Annual ACM Symposium on Applied Computing , pp. 1807–1814 (2021).
 20. Han, P ., Zhai, Z., Nielsen, B. & Nyman, U. Model-based optimization of ARINC-653 partition scheduling. Int. J. Softw. Tools 
Technol. Transfer  23(5), 721–740 (2021).
 21. Fersman, E., Krcal, P ., Pettersson, P . & Yi, W . Task automata: Schedulability, decidability and undecidability. Inf. Comput.  205(8), 
1149–1172 (2007).
 22. David, A., Rasmussen, J. I., Larsen, K. G., & Skou, A. Model-based framework for schedulability analysis using uppaal 4.1. Model-
Based Design for Embedded Systems (2018).
 23. Abdeddaïm, Y ., Asarin, E. & Maler, O. Scheduling with timed automata. Theoret. Comput. Sci.  354(2), 272–300 (2006).
 24. Abdeddaïm, Y ., & Maler, O. Preemptive job-shop scheduling using stopwatch automata. In Tools and Algorithms for the Construction 
and Analysis of Systems (TACAS 2002) . Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 2280, pp. 113–126 (2002).
 25. Le, T. T. H., Palopoli, L., Passerone, R. & Ramadian, Y . Timed-automata based schedulability analysis for distributed firm real-time 
systems: A case study. Int. J. Softw. Tools Technol. Transfer  15, 211–228 (2013).
 26. Glonina, A. & Bahmurov, A. Stopwatch automata-based model for efficient schedulability analysis of modular computer systems. 
In Parallel Computing Technologies  (ed. Malyshkin, V .) 289–300 (Springer, Cham, 2017).
 27. Sun, Y ., Lipari, G., Soulat, R., Fribourg, L., & Markey, N. Component-based analysis of hierarchical scheduling using linear hybrid 
automata. In 2014 IEEE 20th International Conference on Embedded and Real-Time Computing Systems and Applications , pp. 1–10 
(2014). ISSN: 2325-1301.
 28. Cimatti, A., Palopoli, L., & Ramadian, Y . Symbolic computation of schedulability regions using parametric timed automata. In 
Proceedings of the 2008 Real-Time Systems Symposium (RTSS 2008) , pp. 80–91 (2008). IEEE.
 29. André, E. Imitator 3: Synthesis of timing parameters beyond decidability. In Computer Aided Verification: 33rd International 
Conference, CA V 2021, Virtual Event, July 20 23, 2021, Proceedings, Part I , pp. 552–565. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg (2021).  h t t p s : 
/ / d o i . o r g / 1 0 . 1 0 0 7 / 9 7 8 - 3 - 0 3 0 - 8 1 6 8 5 - 8 _ 2 6     .   
 30. Sun, Y ., Lipari, G., André, E., & Fribourg, L. Toward parametric timed interfaces for real-time components. In André, E., Frehse, 
G. (eds.) Proceedings 1st International Workshop on Synthesis of Continuous Parameters, Grenoble, France , 6th April 2014 (2014).
 31. Sun, Y ., Soulat, R., Lipari, G., André, É. & Fribourg, L. Parametric schedulability analysis of fixed priority real-time distributed 
systems. In Formal Techniques for Safety-Critical Systems  (eds Artho, C. & Ölveczky, P . C.) 212–228 (Springer, Cham, 2014).
 32. André, E. A unified formalism for monoprocessor schedulability analysis under uncertainty. In Proceedings of the International 
Workshop on Formal Methods for Industrial Critical Systems and Automated Verification of Critical Systems (FMICS-A VoCS 2017) , 
pp. 96–112 (2017).
Scientific Reports  |        (2025) 15:31342 23 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-16745-4www.nature.com/scientificreports/

--- Page 24 ---
 33. André, E., Coquard, E., Fribourg, L., Jerray, J. & Lesens, D. Parametric schedulability analysis of a launcher flight control system 
under reactivity constraints. Fund. Inform.  182(1), 1–24 (2021).
 34. André, Chatain, T., Encrenaz, E., & Fribourg, L. An inverse method for parametric timed automata. In Formal Modeling and 
Analysis of Timed Systems (FORMATS 2009). Lecture Notes in Computer Science , vol. 5813, pp. 226–241. Springer,  ( 2 0 0 9 ) .   h t t p s : / / d 
o i . o r g / 1 0 . 1 0 0 7 / 9 7 8 - 3 - 6 4 2 - 0 4 3 6 8 - 0 _ 1 7     .   
 35. André, Lime, D., & Ramparison, M. Timed automata with parametric updates. In Proceedings of the 18th International Conference 
on Application of Concurrency to System Design (ACSD) , pp. 53–62. IEEE, (2018). https://doi.org/10 .1109/ACSD.2018.000- 2.
 36. André, Bloemen, V ., Petrucci, L., & Pol, J. Minimal-time synthesis for parametric timed automata. In Tools and Algorithms for the 
Construction and Analysis of Systems (TACAS 2019), Part II. Lecture Notes in Computer Science , vol. 11428, pp. 211–228. Springer, 
(2019). https://doi.or g/10.1007/978-3-030- 17465-1_12 .
 37. Ramparison, M. Parametric verification to ensure safe behaviour of connected devices. In Presented at the 5th International 
Workshop on the Advancements in Model Driven Engineering & Software Engineering (AMDE 2024), Leuven, Belgium, October 28 
30, 2024  Procedia Computer Science, vol. 251, pp. 502–507. Elsevier, (2024). https://do i.org/10.1016/j.proc s.2024.11.139 .
 38. Han, P ., Zhai, Z. & Zhang, L. A Model-Based Approach to Optimizing Partition Scheduling of Integrated Modular Avionics 
Systems. Electronics 9(8), 1281. https://doi.org/10.3390/ electronics9081281  (2020).
 39. Han, P ., Hu, W ., Zhai, Z., & Huang, M. A model-based optimization method of arinc 653 multicore partition scheduling. Aerospace  
11, 11. https://doi.org/10 .3390/aerospace11110 915 (2024).
 40. Cheptsov, V ., & Khoroshilov, A. Robust resource partitioning approach for arinc 653 rtos. Technical report, arXiv preprint 
arXiv:2312.01436 . https://arxiv. org/abs/2312.01436  (2023).
 41. Zuepke, A., Krause, A. R., M ller, W ., Nowak, N., & Pellerin, S. Autobest: A united autosar-os and arinc 653 kernel. In: ERTS 
Embedded Real-Time Software and Systems (2015). RealTime-at-Work, INRIA.  h t t p s :   /  / w w  w . q u e s  t - l  f s .  u   n i - h  a n n o  v e  r  . d  e /  e n / r e  s e  a r 
c  h / p u b l  i c a  t i o  n s / d e   t a i  l s  / fi   s - d   e t a i  l  s / p u b  l / 9  c ff   7  2 6 1 - 6  6 7 5 -  4 f 5 8 - a a 4  c - e 0 d c f 2 b 6  b 7 e 3 .
 42. Lukic, D., Friedrich, R. & Durak, U. A streamlined approach toward automated generation and verification of arinc 653 
configurations. J. Aerosp. Inf. Syst.  https:// doi.org/10.2514/1.I011439  (2024).
 43. Zhang, Y ., Chen, Z., Chen, Q., & Yi, W . Refinement-based specification and analysis of multi-core arinc 653 systems. Proceedings 
of the ACM on Programming Languages 7(OOPSLA), 222. https: //doi.org/10.1145/3617183  (2023).
 44. Behrmann, G., David, A., Larsen, K.G.: A tutorial on UPPAAL. In: Formal Methods for the Design of Real-time Systems, pp. 
200–236 (2004). Springer
 45. Cassez, F., & Larsen, K. The impressive power of stopwatches. In International Conference on Concurrency Theory , pp. 138–152 
(2000). Springer.
 46. VanderLeest, S.H., & Matthews, D. C. Incremental assurance of multicore integrated modular avionics (ima). In 2021 IEEE/AIAA 
40th Digital Avionics Systems Conference (DASC) , pp. 1–9 (2021). IEEE.
 47. Chen, J., Du, C. & Han, P . Scheduling independent partitions in integrated modular avionics systems. PLoS ONE  11(12), 0168064 
(2016).
 48. Lipari, G., & Bini, E. A methodology for designing hierarchical scheduling systems. J. Embedded Comput.  1(2), 257–269 (2005).
 49. Beyer, H.-G. An alternative explanation for the manner in which genetic algorithms operate. Biosystems  41(1), 1–15 (1997).
 50. Korst, J., Aarts, E., Lenstra, J.K., & Wessels, J. Periodic Multiprocessor Scheduling. In: Aarts, E.H.L., Leeuwen, J., Rem, M. (eds.) 
Parle 91 Parallel Architectures and Languages Europe. Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pp. 166–178. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg 
(1991). https: //doi.org/10.1007/97 8-3-662-25209-3_12 .
 51. Davis, R., & Burns, A. An investigation into server parameter selection for hierarchical fixed priority pre-emptive systems. In 16th 
International Conference on Real-Time and Network Systems (RTNS 2008)  (2008).
 52. Michalewicz, Z. Evolutionary Computation 1: Basic Algorithms and Operators  (CRC Press, New Y ork, 2018).
 53. Mühlenbein, H., & Schlierkamp-Voosen, D. Predictive models for the breeder genetic algorithm i. continuous parameter 
optimization. Evol. Comput.  1(1), 25–49 (1993).
 54. Carnevali, L., Pinzuti, A. & Vicario, E. Compositional verification for hierarchical scheduling of real-time systems. IEEE Trans. 
Softw. Eng.  39(5), 638–657 (2012).
 55. Standard Task Graph Set. https://www. kasahara.cs.waseda.a c.jp/schedule/ .
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Brian Nielsen and Ulrik Nyman of Aalborg University for their great help on 
technical support for the model checker UPPAAL.
Author contributions
Conceptualization, J.C.; methodology, J.C.; software, P .H. and M.H.; validation, J.C.; formal analysis, J.C.; in -
vestigation, J.C.; resources, J.C.; data curation, J.C.; writing original draft preparation, J.C.; writing, review and 
editing, J.C.; visualization, J.C.; supervision, Z.Z.; project administration, P .H.; funding acquisition, P .H. and 
M.H. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding
This research was funded by the Industrial Science and Technology Research Project of Henan Province under 
grant number 222102210024 and the Doctoral Fund Project of Zhengzhou University of Light Industry under 
grant number 2021BSJJ028.
Declarations
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Correspondence  and requests for materials should be addressed to Z.Z. or M.H.
Reprints and permissions information  is available at www.nature.com/reprints .
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
Scientific Reports  |        (2025) 15:31342 24 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-16745-4www.nature.com/scientificreports/

--- Page 25 ---
Open Access   This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 
4.0 International License, which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and reproduction in 
any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide 
a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if you modified the licensed material. Y ou do not have 
permission under this licence to share adapted material derived from this article or parts of it. The images or 
other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated 
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence 
and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to 
obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit  h t t p : / / c r  e a t i v e c o m m o 
n s . o r g / l i c e n s e s / b y - n c - n d / 4 . 0 /     .  
© The Author(s) 2025 
Scientific Reports  |        (2025) 15:31342 25 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-16745-4www.nature.com/scientificreports/
