--- Page 1 ---
Computer Communications 212 (2023) 390–406
Available online 26 October 2023
0140-3664/© 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-
nc-nd/4.0/ ).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Computer Communications
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/comcom
Verification of a multi-connectivity protocol for Tactile Internet applications
Delia Rico∗, María-del-Mar Gallardo, Pedro Merino
ITIS Software, University of Malaga, Malaga, Spain
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Multi-connectivity
Tactile internet
Transport protocol
Formal verification
Statistical Model Checking ( smc)A B S T R A C T
Tactile Internet refers to a network that enables real-time, high-reliability haptic communication and control
between humans, machines, and objects over the Internet. Tactile Internet applications include the remote
control of drones, cars or industrial tele-operation. In this context, the Multi-connection Tactile Internet
Protocol (MTIP) is a novel multipath transport protocol designed to support the requirements of Tactile
Internet applications in large, private mobile networks. The objective of this paper is to analyze and
verify the correctness and performance of the MTIP protocol to ensure that the protocol functions correctly
under different network scenarios and it is ready to meet the performance requirements of Tactile Internet
applications. For that purpose, a two-step approach is employed to analyze and verify MTIP. In the first step,
a formal model of MTIP is developed using timed automata and the uppaal tool is utilized to verify correctness
properties represented as temporal formulas. In the second step, the performance of the protocol is analyzed
using the statistical model checking features of uppaal (uppaal smc ) in scenarios that are difficult and expensive
to reproduce in a real network. The results indicate that MTIP’s model meets the specified temporal properties,
and the performance evaluation showcases the potential and trade-off of using multiple paths to enhance the
communication. Based on the analysis and verification results, the paper emphasizes the readiness of MTIP for
real-world deployment and highlights its potential benefits for enhancing the performance of Tactile Internet
applications.
1. Introduction
Tactile Internet (TI) refers to the network that allows humans to
interact remotely with other humans or with machines in real-time
transmission of haptic information (touch, actuation, motion, vibration,
forces, surface texture, temperature, etc.). The new applications over
the Tactile Internet include high-precision teleoperation; robots, cars,
industrial equipment, drones; advanced interpersonal communications
such as holograms; and immersive virtual reality. The mobile nature
of the devices involved at the end points makes wireless communica-
tions, and particularly 5G mobile networks, a key part of the required
infrastructure.
To support TI, current mobile networks and their end-to-end trans-
port protocols should evolve to meet very tight requirements in terms
of latency and reliability. For instance, as detailed in [ 1], immersive
virtual reality requires end-to-end latency below 5 ms, and haptic
feedback requires that this parameter be even closer to 1 ms. The
required reliability for live haptic-enabled applications is usually above
99.999%.
Recent efforts in the design of 5G networks have addressed these
requirements with the definition of support for Ultra-Reliable Low
Latency Communications (URLLC). The URLLC features affect many
∗Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: deliarico@uma.es (D. Rico), mdgallardo@uma.es (M. Gallardo), pmerino@uma.es (P. Merino).components in the end-to-end path, including the radio segment, the
transport and the 5G core. However, such improvements are not di-
rectly exposed to the applications on the end devices, where the classic
TCP/IP stack is still the main interface with the 5G network.
Despite continuous improvements, the foundations and services
offered by the popular TCP and UDP transport protocols were defined
more than 40 years ago, when application domains like Tactile Inter-
net were still very far from being conceived. For instance, TCP was
designed to offer 100% reliability, causing long latencies depending
on the quality of the path between the end-points (mainly addressing
packet loss and reordering). Such quality issues could appear occasion-
ally even over the best 5G network due to handovers, interference,
network overload, etc. In such situations having an extra delay to
achieve full reliability is not acceptable for many applications. On the
opposite side, UDP does not add any specific quality mechanism to
the underlying path, and thus does not provide any improvement of
reliability.
Variants of the classic TCP/IP protocols that provide contributions
that come closer to the Tactile Internet requirements are the Real-
time Transport Protocol (RTP) and extensions like the Multipath RTP
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.comcom.2023.10.013
Received 22 June 2023; Received in revised form 13 September 2023; Accepted 18 October 2023

--- Page 2 ---
Computer Communications 212 (2023) 390–406
391D. Rico et al.
(MPRTP) [2]. However, these protocols are focused on providing ser-
vice for real-time multimedia with typically large amounts of data,
instead of controlling limited-size packets with very strict constrained
deadlines as in TI remote operations and sensing.
To address this gap between the features offered by mobile networks
like 5G and the requirements of Tactile Internet applications, we pre-
sented in [3,4] the Multi-connection Tactile Internet Protocol (MTIP).
MTIP is a multi-connectivity transport protocol that works under the
following realistic and novel scenario to support TI applications over
mobile networks.
The first assumption is partial reliability in TI. In general, TI ap-
plications require a set of packets to arrive on time, allowing some
packet loss at the application layer if the packets miss their dead-
line. Hence, the transport protocol should be time sensitive aware but
could also allow some packet loss. The second assumption is multi-
connectivity . We expect new devices connected to mobile networks to
be multi-homed and to connect to several mobile networks at the same
time. Such multi-connectivity could include variants, such as several
technologies (4G and 5G), potentially with several mobile operators,
and be available with standard multiple Subscriber Identity Modules
(multi-SIM) or with virtual SIMs (eSIMs). The final assumption is large,
private networks . Many TI use cases, such as remote control of indus-
trial machinery or manufacturing, are typically set in private network
environments. Such networks provide specific mechanisms like security
methods (e.g., GTP tunnels [5]) or synchronization (e.g., Precision Time
Protocol (PTP) [6]), among others, that are available for the protocols
and applications running on the network.
In this scenario, the Multi-connection Tactile Internet Protocol
(MTIP) [3] is a novel transport protocol offers programmable quality
to applications that need a dynamic compromise between latency, reli-
ability, throughput and jitter, among other parameters. MTIP combines
the management of multiple sublinks with context awareness to provide
controller-to-device communication of sequenced time-sensitive pack-
ets with high (but partial) reliability and low latency. A sublink is an
end-to-end connection between interfaces of multi-homed endpoints.
The use of multiple interfaces allows sending several copies of the
messages using the selection of the best subset of sublinks at the time
of sending. Due to the importance of latency in TI applications, MTIP
is deadline-aware and uses timestamps to discard expired data that is
no longer useful according to application preferences. By using these
timestamps, as well as sequence numbers, MTIP is able to control data
exchanges and duplicate packets without flow control or congestion
control, which may add undesired latency.
One challenge at this stage is to guarantee the correctness and
performance of the algorithms to send and receive packets in MTIP
at an early stage. Following the huge amount of work done in formal
modeling and verification of communication protocols [7,8], we ad-
dress the automated analysis of correctness and statistical performance.
In that direction, we already did initial modeling and verification
work of MTIP with the tool spinin [3]. spinis very efficient to verify
the absence of deadlocks and non-progress loops, as well as complex
properties described with Linear Temporal Logic ( ltl). We produced
models good enough to provide evidence of correctness; however, the
resulting models had some shortcuts due to the lack of mechanisms to
model time with promela (spin’s input language). In addition, we need
to go a step further and conduct a performance evaluation based on
the formal model, which enable us to have a more diverse and cost-
effective evaluation compared to a real implementation. These aspects
are discussed in Section 6. These are the main motivations behind this
paper, where we present progress in the analysis and verification of
MTIP using the tool uppaal .uppaal supports modeling of time and can be
used to check correctness properties like deadlock and those described
with tctl(Timed Computation Tree Logic). Moreover, the tool also
supports stochastic timed automata to analyze performance-related
properties.We anticipate that the uppaal model requires decisions to make it
verifiable with standard computing resources to avoid the state explo-
sion problem. For instance, we need to reduce the number of distinct
data to be sent over MTIP to a minimum following the ideas of G.
Holzmann [9] and P. Wolper [10]. We also need to limit the number of
sublinks and the range of sequence numbers and timestamps preserving
correctness. These abstraction decisions are discussed in Section 5.
In summary, the contributions of the paper with respect to [3] are
the following:
1.New property-oriented definition of MTIP: We designed the
MTIP protocol as a new transport protocol to exploit multi-
connectivity over the Internet considering partial reliability of
time-sensitive traffic as the main driver. In this paper, we de-
scribe the protocol functionalities by means of the desirable
correctness and performance properties it should meet.
2.New formal model: We build a new formal model of MTIP in
order to use the correctness and performance analysis features
ofuppaal . Compared with our previous spinmodel, we now
make use of timed automata to reflect the use of time in the
protocol. A major contribution of this paper is how to model
sequence numbers, timestamps and multiple sublinks to be able
to evaluate the properties while keeping the size of the model
verifiable.
3.Automated verification of correctness: We use uppaal support
to check basic correctness, such as the absence of deadlocks,
and specific correctness properties of MTIP described with the
temporal logic tctl.
4.Performance evaluation: We use the uppaal Statistical Model
Checking ( smc) feature to provide estimations of the statistical
performance of the protocol with different sublink configura-
tions and probability of losing or delaying packets.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents
related work on Tactile Internet applications and protocols, and formal
verification. Section 3 describes some relevant background information
on the formal modeling and verification tool uppaal . Section 4 pro-
vides an overview of MTIP’s requirements, general architecture, and
data management procedures. Then, Section 5 presents the modeling
abstraction decisions taken for the model, while Section 6 completes
the description of the model, presents the formal verification and
the analysis of performance properties carried out in uppaal . Finally,
Section 7 contains conclusions and future work.
2. Related work
2.1. Tactile internet applications and protocols
Tactile Internet (TI) applications are described by the IEEE Tactile
Internet Standards Working Group [1] as applications for the remote
control and manipulation of real or virtual devices such as drones, in-
dustrial robots, vehicles, etc. Ultimately, TI applications define critical
use cases with strict requirements in terms of several Key Performance
Indicators (KPIs) [11]. Typical TI demands range from requiring less
than 10 ms latency to demanding more than 99.999% reliability,
usually simultaneously. However, these are not the only objective KPIs,
since TI use cases can have strict requirements in terms of specific
indicators, depending on the application. For instance, the remote
operation of industrial machinery usually requires low levels of jitter,
and remote driving needs bigger service area dimensions. Some ranges
of specific requirements for the remote control of TI applications are
shown in Table 1. They are defined not only by the IEEE but also
by additional international standardization organizations, such as the
3GPP, through 3GPP Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) [12] and service
requirements for the 5G systems [13,14].
Regarding network protocols, and specifically transport protocols,
real-time protocols like RTP have been typically used for remote control

--- Page 3 ---
Computer Communications 212 (2023) 390–406
392D. Rico et al.
Table 1
Tactile Internet application KPIs and considerations.
TI application Latency Reliability Other considerations
Industrial operation 1–10 ms (highly dynamic)
1–100 ms (dynamic)99.99%–99.9999% Packet size: Small (40–250 bytes)
Data rate: Low (1–10 Mbps)
Service area: Small (Few hundred meters)
Other key aspects: Low Jitter (1–100 us)
Remote driving 0.5–2 ms (life-critical)
5–10 ms (dynamic)99.9%–99.999% Packet size: Medium (50–1000 bytes)
Data rate: Medium (1–25 Mbps)
Service area: High (Some Kms)
Other key aspects: Wireless links
Drone control 0.5–2 ms (kinesthetic)
10 ms (tactile)99.9%–99.999% Packet size: Small (40–250 bytes)
Data rate: Low (1–10 Mbps)
Service area: High (Some Kms)
Other key aspects: Wireless links
Remote surgery 5–10 ms 99.9999% Packet size: Medium (50–1000 bytes)
Data rate: Low ( ∼1 Mbps)
Service area: High (Some Kms)
Other key aspects: High availability (99.999%)
applications [15,16]. However, it is arguable that the characteristics
of remote control data for TI applications differ from the peculiarities
of multimedia real-time streams, since the remote control packets are
usually small and are sent at lower data rates that may allow avoiding
flow control and retransmissions in order to reduce latency. That is why
some extensions of transport protocols like Smoothed SCTP [17], and
novel protocols like IRTP [18] or ETP [19], have been developed for the
remote control operation use case, among others [20]. However, these
protocols do not take advantage of one highly relevant trend of novel
networks, namely the availability of multiple paths [21,22]. Protocols
like Multipath TCP (MPTCP) [23] or Multipath QUIC (MPQUIC) [24]
have addressed the fact that there are more multi-homed networks
and devices that can highly benefit from protocols that support this
operation. Although these protocols to exploit multiple paths are not
within the scope of TI teleoperation, they highlight the importance and
potential of the use of multiple paths to enhance communications. A
multipath extension that may be more relevant to the scope of TI is
Multipath RTP (MPRTP) [2]. Nevertheless, like RTP, current work in
respect to MPRTP is still focused on high bit-rate streaming multimedia
content between endpoints.
Compared to these protocols, the Multi-connection Tactile Internet
Protocol takes advantage of the availability of multiple paths, providing
mechanisms based on the duplication of packets. At the same time, it
is aware of TI specific requirements, using application preferences and
network status measurements in order to adapt to the deadlines of the
different applications in a lightweight manner. In Section 4, we provide
more details about MTIP.
2.2. Modeling and analysis of communication protocols
The formal modeling and verification of protocols is a powerful
tool. It allows verifying properties and performing in-depth analysis of
the correct operation of protocols. Its potential is shown by multiple
studies in the literature that have used model-based automated analysis
to validate correctness properties of different well known protocols
and algorithms, from the more traditional, such as BGP [25] and
CSMA [26], to novel ones, such as the 5G-AKA Protocol [27].
spin, the tool used in our previous work in [3], is a model checker
for the logical verification of concurrent software, initially defined by
G. Holzmann [9]. Since its origin, it has been used in a number of
academic and industrial applications and protocols [28–31]. However,
even if spinis a powerful tool to check the correctness of a model, spin
does not support any performance evaluation. uppaal is also a model
checking tool to analyze real-time systems modeled as networks of
timed automata [32]. Like spin,uppaal has been used to analyze both
traditional and novel communication protocols. Examples include the
work of Saini et al. [33] evaluating the Stream Control TransmissionProtocol; Rashid et al. [34], verifying the ZigBee protocol routing capa-
bilities; and Wu et al. [35], analyzing the design of a protocol for drone
flight control. It is also used for real-time performance analysis, such
as the case of Wang et al. [36] evaluating the real-time performance of
Time-Sensitive Networking Traffic Shapers.
Many communication protocols display some probabilistic behavior
and are subject to a stochastic nature, so some additional statistical
performance evaluation should be done. uppaal smc (Statistical Model
Checking) combines model checking with testing techniques for the
purpose of also analyzing the performance of the models [37]. Ex-
amples of the use of uppaal smc are the work of Houimli et al. [38]
with a performance analysis of an Internet of Things protocol; Höfner
et al. [39], which utilizes statistical model checking to evaluate wireless
mesh routing protocols; and Naeem et al. [40], which presents a per-
formance analysis of cyber–physical systems and their energy-related
behavior.
In this work, we use the model checker uppaal and our previous
knowledge of modeling MTIP with the spintool [3] to create a new
model of MTIP that allows us to verify not only correctness but also
performance aspects of the protocol.
3. The uppaal tool for modeling and analysis
In this section, we summarize the main features of uppaal to model
and analyze the MTIP protocol.
uppaal is a toolbox for the verification of real-time systems jointly
developed by Uppsala University and Aalborg University [32,41]. up-
paalis a model checker able to automatically analyze complex properties
on concurrent software such as communication protocols.
As is usual in model checkers, uppaal has two inputs: an abstract
model of the system to be analyzed, described as a network of timed
automata, and the desirable properties, specified using a subset of the
timed computational tree logic tctl.uppaal can simulate the model,
which is useful to observe if its behavior corresponds to the expected
one. In addition, the tool can also verify the model against the specified
properties, producing a counter-example when a malfunction is found.
uppaal ’s verification engine is based on the implicit storage of all state
space produced by the model of the system under analysis.
Model checkers, in general, are specially good at finding hidden
errors in concurrent systems. This is why the input modeling languages
of these tools, as the networks of timed automata managed by uppaal ,
are designed to support concurrency and non-determinism.
Although uppaal suffers from the well-known state explosion prob-
lem, which occurs when the model analyzed produces too many states,
the tool is, in fact, a very efficient model checker able to handle
complex systems like the MTIP protocol presented in this paper.
Anuppaal model is a network of the so-called timed automata which
execute in parallel, communicate and synchronize each other via global

--- Page 4 ---
Computer Communications 212 (2023) 390–406
393D. Rico et al.
Fig. 1. The simple Lamp example in uppaal .
shared variables and synchronous channels Channels may also be de-
clared as broadcast to distribute a message to more than one automaton.
In this Section, we briefly describe the main elements of uppaal
needed to understand the paper. To clarify the presentation, we use
a simple model of a lamp in uppaal extracted from [ 41], shown in
Fig. 1, and the Sender process of MTIP protocol shown in Fig. 11 in
Section 6.
The model of the Lamp in Fig. 1 contains a network of two timed
automata: the Lamp on the left, and the lamp User on the right. In
this system, the User presses the Lamp button to turn it onoroff,
depending on the Lamp state. The more interesting case occurs when
theLamp isonat alow intensity and the User presses the button.
Then, if the Lamp has been onfor less than 5time units, the Lamp
increases its intensity to bright . Otherwise, it turns off. Variable𝑦is
a clock used to record time, as explained later. Each timed automaton is
composed of locations (the automaton states) and transitions. Locations
are written as circles in the automata (for instance, the nodes labeled
with off,low andbright in Fig. 1 are the locations of the Lamp
automaton). Initial locations are represented with a double circle. Each
automaton must only have one initial location. For instance, location
off is the initial location of automaton Lamp . Transitions between
locations are represented by means of arrows which can be decorated
with different elements as described below.
Timed automata can also have global and local variables to store
the automata network configuration. Besides the discrete variables
common in computational systems, the timed automata ofuppaal may
also contain the so-called clock variables, which are dense and real-
valued variables whose values evolve linearly with time. For instance,
variable yin the Lamp automaton of Fig. 1 is a clock used to record
the time passed at location low. Similarly, variable clockTime of
automaton Sender of Fig. 11 is a global clock used to register the
global time. Locations can have invariants which are Boolean expres-
sions that have to be true while the automaton is at the corresponding
location. When the invariant of a location is true (that is, no condition
is imposed to stay in the location) then no Boolean expression is
written next to the location as occurs in the three locations of the
automaton Lamp . Otherwise, the invariant expression is written next
to the location. For instance, location ReadyToSend of Fig. 11 has
clockTime<=TIMELIMIT && clockTime<=sndTime + 1 as an
invariant.
As commented above, automata transitions can contain different
elements. A transition may have a guard that is a Boolean condition.
An automaton can only take a transition if its guard evaluates to true .
For instance, in the Lamp , guards y<5 andy>=5 in transitions from
low tobright , and low tooff establish the yvalues allowed
to take each transition. Similarly, in Fig. 11, the transition from
ToSublinks toReadyToSend can only be executed if the guard
sblIterator==c_sblNum istrue .
A transition may also have a synchronized condition which is ex-
pressed via an operation on a synchronized channel such as channelpress in the Lamp example. Operations on channels are written using
the CSP notation ( press! andpress? are, respectively, the write
and read operations in the example). Channel operations constitute
the natural mechanism for synchronizing timed automata in uppaal .
A transition with a synchronized condition can only be fired if the
synchronization is possible at that moment. In the Lamp example, this
synchronization is always available, since the User is continuously
trying to press the button via operation press! . However, in the
Sender in Fig. 11, the transition from location WaitingForRe-
set toReadyToSend can only take place if the synchronization via
channel Reset is available.
Finally, transitions can also be used to update some variables. For
instance, in the Lamp , the transition from off tolow reset clock
yto0, is used to measure the exact time the automaton spends in
state low. Transitions can update any variable. For example, in the
Sender Fig. 11, the transition from Sending toSelectingRed
updates variable sndData toRED and increases variable wolper by
one. Finally, it is worth noting that a transition cannot be executed if
the invariant of the remote location is false .
Intuitively, the execution of a network of timed automata proceeds
as follows. All network automata start at their initial location. The
network can evolve in two ways: (1) by means of a continuous network
transition , where the time of all clocks increases simultaneously or (2)
by means of a discrete network transition , when one (or several) automa-
ton transits to a remote location. It is important to note that discrete
transitions are instantaneous , meaning that their execution involves no
time passing. Observe that when a transition contains a synchronization
via a channel, it has to be executed simultaneously by all the automata
involved in the synchronization. The network blocks when it is not
possible to execute either a continuous or a discrete transition.
If(loc,y=n) denotes the state of automaton Lamp when it is at
location loc and the value of yisn, the following two sequences of
states show possible executions of the network of the Lamp example. In
the sequence,𝑛← ← ← ← ← ← →represents a continuous transition of duration 𝑛, while
𝚙𝚛𝚎𝚜𝚜← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← →𝑑is the discrete transition produced by synchronizing the Lamp
and𝚄𝚜𝚎𝚛 transitions via channel press :
1.(off,0)2← ← ← ← ← ← →(off,2)𝚙𝚛𝚎𝚜𝚜← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← →𝑑(low,0)2.5← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← →(low,2.5)
𝚙𝚛𝚎𝚜𝚜← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← →𝑑(bright,2.5)1.5← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← →(bright,4)𝚙𝚛𝚎𝚜𝚜← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← →𝑑(off,4)
...
2.(off,0)1.5← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← →(off,1.5)𝚙𝚛𝚎𝚜𝚜← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← →𝑑(low,0)5← ← ← ← ← ← →(low,5)
𝚙𝚛𝚎𝚜𝚜← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← ← →𝑑(off,5) ...
Note that in a timed automata network, there are several sources of
non-determinism that may produce a non-numerable set of different
behaviors. For instance, an automaton may take a transition at any
moment during the time interval in which both the invariant and
the transition guard are true and the transition synchronization, if
it exists, is available. In addition, if several discrete transitions are
possible, the system may evolve selecting any of them.
uppaal provides several mechanisms to control non-determinism.
One of them is to declare locations as committed , which is denoted
placing a Cletter inside the location. When some automaton of the net-
work is at a committed location, no continuous transition can be carried
out, since the transitions from committed locations are executed with
priority. Committed locations allow executing a sequence of transitions
atomically. For instance, in the Sender automaton of Fig. 11, the
sequence of discrete transitions from Sending toSelectingRed ,
then to WolperSelected , toToSubLinks , etc., are atomically
executed since all these locations are committed.
3.1. Temporal logic
uppaal can analyze properties written in a well defined subset of the
timed computational tree logic tctlwhich is a timed version of tem-
poral logic ctl. Logic ctlis aimed at describing the expected behavior

--- Page 5 ---
Computer Communications 212 (2023) 390–406
394D. Rico et al.
Fig. 2. ctlsyntax.
of a system on the execution tree it determines from its initial state.
To do this, the semantics of ctlformulae rely on the formalization of
systems using transition systems as = (𝑆,𝑠0,→)where𝑆is the set
of system states, 𝑠0∈𝑆is the initial state, and →⊆ 𝑆×𝑆defines the
transitions 𝑠→𝑠′between states. Informally, from relation →, we can
inductively construct the execution tree 𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑒(𝑠)for each state 𝑠∈𝑆, as
𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑒(𝑠) = {𝑠→𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑒(𝑠′)|𝑠→𝑠′}, i.e.𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑒(𝑠)is a tree with root 𝑠containing
all possible executions determined by from𝑠. From𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑒(𝑠), we can
define𝑝𝑎𝑡ℎ𝑠 (𝑠)as the set of execution paths of the form 𝑠→𝑠′→⋯
that can be obtained traversing 𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑒(𝑠)from its root 𝑠.
Fig. 2 shows part of the syntax of ctl. The rule for 𝜎defines the
syntax of the so-called state formulae which can be evaluated on single
system states. In this rule, 𝑝ranges over a set of atomic propositions.
The second rule defines the ctlformulae that can be either state
formulae or make use of the universal and existential path quantifiers
𝐴and𝐸.𝐴means ‘‘for all paths’’ while 𝐸can be read as ‘‘for at least a
path’’. In ctl, path quantifiers are always written next to the temporal
operators ‘‘always’’ ( []) and ‘‘eventually’’ ( ⟨⟩). Usually, the semantics of
[]and ⟨⟩are derived from the semantics of operator ‘‘until’’ 𝑈, but we
have skipped it here to make this presentation easier, since it is not
supported by uppaal . Operators []and ⟨⟩evaluate on execution paths
with the following intuitive meaning: []𝑓holds on a path 𝜋=𝑠𝑖→
𝑠𝑖+1→⋯∈𝑝𝑎𝑡ℎ𝑠 (𝑠)iff for all𝑗≥𝑖the sub-trace 𝜋𝑗=𝑠𝑗→⋯satisfies
𝑓. Similarly, ⟨⟩𝑓holds on a path 𝜋∈𝑝𝑎𝑡ℎ𝑠 (𝑠)iff there exists 𝑗≥𝑖such
that the sub-trace 𝜋𝑗=𝑠𝑗→⋯satisfies𝑓.
Taking this into consideration, the semantics of the ctlformulae can
be summarized as:
•𝜎holds on𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑒(𝑠)iff state𝑠satisfies𝜎.
•𝙴⟨⟩𝑓𝑐𝑡𝑙holds on𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑒(𝑠)iff there exists some execution in 𝑝𝑎𝑡ℎ𝑠 (𝑠)
for which ⟨⟩𝑓𝑐𝑡𝑙holds.
•𝙴[]𝑓𝑐𝑡𝑙holds on𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑒(𝑠)iff there exists some execution path in
𝑝𝑎𝑡ℎ𝑠 (𝑠)for which []𝑓𝑐𝑡𝑙holds.
•𝙰⟨⟩𝑓𝑐𝑡𝑙holds on𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑒(𝑠)iff⟨⟩𝑓𝑐𝑡𝑙holds for all execution paths of
𝑝𝑎𝑡ℎ𝑠 (𝑠).
•𝙰[]𝑓𝑐𝑡𝑙holds on𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑒(𝑠)iff[]𝑓𝑐𝑡𝑙holds for all execution paths of
𝑝𝑎𝑡ℎ𝑠 (𝑠).
The last rule of Fig. 2 contains the subset of tctlformulae supported
byuppaal . Formula A[](𝜎1->A<>𝜎2) is written as 𝜎1- ->𝜎2in the tool.
The following tctlformulae describe some properties of the Lamp
example of Fig. 1
1. ‘‘The Lamp is initially off’’:Lamp.off
2. ‘‘The Lamp may be bright ’’:E<>Lamp.bright
3. ‘‘If the Lamp isbright then it can be off, eventually’’:
A[](Lamp.bright -> E<>Lamp.off)
4. ‘‘It is always possible that the Lamp ison’’:
A[]E<> (Lamp.low || Lamp.bright)
3.2. Uppaal smc
uppaal smc is an extension of uppaal able to carry out Statistical Model
Checking ( smc) on networks of timed automata. smcallows combining
model checking and testing approaches to analyze systems that displaya stochastic nature. To do this, uppaal automata and tctlproperties
can be enriched with statistical annotations before being simulated
and analyzed by uppaal smc . For instance, a rational number of the
form𝑎∶𝑏decorating a location associates it with an exponential
probability distribution describing the chance of the automaton to leave
the location. Transitions can also be decorated with constant values,
indicating the probability that the automaton chooses the transition
to leave the location. Finally, properties accepted by uppaal may be
annotated as Pr[<=N]A<> 𝜎to ask for the probability of the system
to satisfy A<>𝜎before the global time reaches value 𝑁.
4. The Multi-connection Tactile Internet Protocol
The Multi-connection Tactile Internet Protocol is a multipath trans-
port protocol for the remote control of Tactile Internet applications.
MTIP creates a link between a multi-homed Tactile Internet device and
a remote controller. This link consists of multiple sublinks that rep-
resent independent end-to-end connections through different wireless
communication networks such as 4G, 5G or 6G, as shown in Fig. 3.
Fig. 3. Link and sublink structure in MTIP.
MTIP is geared at Tactile Internet communications with specific
restrictive demands, where the traffic pattern usually includes short
packets with latency and reliability constraints (see previous Table 1).
In order to meet the strict requirements, one of MTIP’s main character-
istics is the use of multi-connectivity. By sending redundant packets
over multiple sublinks, MTIP exploits the benefits of the different
available paths and increases reliability without using other reliabil-
ity mechanisms like retransmissions that impact negatively on the
latency. In fact, due to the importance of latency requirements, MTIP
is deadline-aware and uses timestamps to discard expired data that is
no longer useful according to application preferences. By just using
these timestamps and sequence numbers, MTIP is able to control data
exchanges and duplicate packets without flow control or congestion
control, which would add unnecessary artificial waits for such small
packets and data rates. Moreover, the MTIP header remains light, as
shown in Fig. 4.
Fig. 4. The MTIP header.
The specific purpose of sequence numbers in MTIP is to avoid
reorder and duplication when sending the data to the consumer appli-
cation. Like in all protocols that use sequence numbers, their range is
finite due to the actual limit of the protocol header, and some recycling
is needed. We must ensure that recycled numbers cannot disturb the
correct working of the protocol, avoiding a negative impact in low-
latency applications. Hence, MTIP cannot benefit from the sliding
window feature of other protocols like TCP to avoid a quick recycling
of sequence numbers. We need the following premise when designing
the cyclic sequence numbers in MTIP (the recycling assumption ):the
valid maximum latency supported by a packet is always much lower than
the time needed to recycle the sequence numbers . So, even if two packets
with the same sequence number are present at the consumer buffer, one
of them will be discarded as a late packet. Note that this is a realistic

--- Page 6 ---
Computer Communications 212 (2023) 390–406
395D. Rico et al.
assumption as shown in Table 1, where the worst scenario for recycling
would be the one with the maximum supported latency of 100 ms.
With 16-bit sequence numbers, MTIP can support a maximum of 216
control actions (messages) in that 100 ms slot to avoid two on-time
packets with the same sequence number. This translates into sending a
maximum of one action every 0.0015 ms (655360 packets/s). Holland
et al. [ 42] show that this is a reasonable data rate for TI applications
like tele-operation or automotive, which present the most extreme case
with an action every 0.25 ms (4000 packets/s). In any case, longer
sequence numbers could be used in specific applications at the cost of
increasing the header.
MTIP is envisioned for large private networks, the typical environ-
ment of Tactile Internet use cases such as the remote control of indus-
trial machinery or manufacturing. Large private networks, conjointly
with novel cellular communications such as 5G, have the potential
of offering an enhanced environment for such applications in terms
of security, availability, optimization, etc. MTIP makes use of the
specific mechanisms that private networks offer to function properly,
such as security methods, like GTP tunnels in the fixed part of the
network, and synchronization like the Precision Time Protocol (PTP).
Moreover, such networks may also have specific methods to expose
network information and enhance MTIP network measurements.
MTIP design properties can be separated into correctness and per-
formance. Correctness properties describe how MTIP performs the basic
exchange of data, while performance properties add constraints to this
exchange of data in order to explore some beneficial trade-offs for
the specific application. In the next subsections, we describe the four
correctness and two performance properties considered for MTIP.
4.1. MTIP correctness properties
Apart from the restrictions of TI data, the use of multiple sublinks
for a same connection entails potential issues that must be managed
by the communication protocol. For instance, sending multiple copies
of a same packet at the transport level should never result in receiving
multiples copies on the receiving application. Moreover, multipath data
transmissions may cause reordering due to several causes (q.v. [ 43]),
such as consuming from different sublinks when packet loss occurs.
Fig. 5 visually depicts these potential issues.
Fig. 5. Potential issues in multipath communications.
In order to verify the correct MTIP operation, we define four cor-
rectness properties that must be satisfied. For a better understanding, in
this section data at the application level will be referred to as messages ,
while data at the transport level will be referred to as packets . The four
correctness properties of MTIP are the following.
•P1: Application never receives messages that have met their dead-
line ( packets that are considered late).
•P2: Application never receives duplicate messages .
•P3: Application never receives out-of-order messages .
•P4: Every packet that is not a duplicate or late is forwarded to the
application.To satisfy the correctness properties, MTIP uses the sequence num-
bers and timestamps in the following manner. First, when sending
messages , MTIP dispatches duplicate packets over the different sub-
links. To be able to identify those duplicates, each copy has the same
sequence number as the original. This sequence number not only
identifies duplicates, but also identifies reordering and losses, since
sequence numbers are increased with each message . This operation is
complemented with timestamps to control the life of packets . Each
packet carries a timestamp marking the exact time when the message
was generated. The timestamp will be used on the reception side to
calculate the deadline of the packet , and additional network measure-
ments to characterize the sublinks. The MTIP reception algorithm is
depicted in Fig. 6.
Fig. 6. The MTIP reception algorithm.
Upon reception of a packet , the reception algorithm computes the
deadline of each packet using the timestamp and current time. Then,
it uses a window that controls if the packet has met the deadline and
is no longer relevant to the application layer. If the packet is late, it
is discarded to satisfy P1. If the packet is not late, the next step is to
control duplicates. MTIP stores the sequence numbers already received
that are still relevant time-wise. Each new packet is compared with
previously received sequence numbers, ensuring that if it is a duplicate,
it is discarded and not sent to the application, satisfying P2. Finally, for
P3, MTIP checks that there is no gap in the sequence numbers received.
If there is a gap, MTIP stores the packet for a certain amount of time
before sending it to the application. This time is calculated so that
it never exceeds the deadline of the packet (refer to [ 43] for further
information about multipath packet expiration). If the missing packet
arrives within that time frame, both packets are sent to the application
in order. If the missing packet does not arrive, it is considered lost and
the stored packet is sent to the application. The combination of these
operations satisfies P4. Fig. 7 shows a message sequence chart (MSC)
that depicts a simplified data exchange in MTIP.
4.2. MTIP performance properties
MTIP performance properties define the performance of the protocol
according to application preferences. While using all sublinks to send
duplicate data would be the most beneficial in terms of maximizing
some KPIs, like reliability, it could also incur in an excessive use of the
resources that could affect both the network and the Tactile Internet
devices. Hence, MTIP exhibits a trade-off between reliability, which
refers to the correct reception of data by the consuming application,
and resource utilization, which relates to the amount of duplicate pack-
ets employed during communication. This trade-off can be separated in
two performance properties:
•P5: The use of more sublinks tends to result in more correct
messages received.
•P6: The use of more sublinks tends to result in more duplicate
packets received.

--- Page 7 ---
Computer Communications 212 (2023) 390–406
396D. Rico et al.
Fig. 7. Simplified MSC of MTIP.
In order to address this trade-off, MTIP exposes an Application
Programming Interface (API) where the application can indicate its
preferences. MTIP then uses this information, plus network measure-
ments, to select which sublinks should be used to send data. Regard-
ing application preferences, the application can define communication
preferences such as the maximum latency that should be tolerated
on the reception side. In terms of network awareness, MTIP performs
continuous measurements on-the-go using the sequence numbers and
timestamps. Thanks to these measurements and optional exhaustive
ones, MTIP creates a database of KPI values, such as latency and
reliability, for each sublink. MTIP presents a first algorithm to make the
selection of the sublinks based on this information, which is presented
in [4]; however, it also offers the application the possibility of making
its own selection.
5. Modeling decisions
The main difficulty to use model checking is how to build an ab-
stract model of the protocol that represents the relevant behaviors, but
at the same time can be analyzed with the available resources (mainly
system memory). As explained by G. Holzmman in [ 7,9], the protocol
model for verification should only reflect the details to conclude that
properties verified in the model are also satisfied in the real protocol.
In addition, removing unnecessary details contributes to mitigate the
state explosion problem. Practical rules for modeling include avoiding
redundancy, sinks, sources, filters, or counters [ 44].
In our model of MTIP, such abstractions should additionally con-
sider the size of relevant parameters such as application layer data,
sequence numbers, timestamps and sublinks. This section provides our
design decisions regarding these aspects.
5.1. Wolper test for application data
One major challenge when modeling MTIP is to decide how much
application layer data should be sent over MTIP to preserve the cor-
rectness properties. This problem was already addressed by G. Holz-
mann [ 9] using previous results by P. Wolper [ 10]. Wolper developed
the ‘‘data independence test’’ which reduces the amount of different
data to be used to analyze the correctness of one algorithm. He demon-
strated that verification results are valid for a given set of user data if
the behavior of the underlying system managing these data does not
depend on the specific set.
G. Holzmann adapted Wolper results to the case of end to end
communication protocols in order to verify correctness properties.Holzmann stated that three distinct data items suffice for the typical
correctness properties of flow control protocols (e.g., red data, blue
data and white data), if they are sent in a sequence consisting of one
red and one blue message inserted randomly in an infinite sequence of
white messages. This number of minimum distinct data is independent
of other factors, such as the sequence number range or the window size.
Fig. 8 represents part of a sender process in uppaal that imple-
ments the sequences of data defined by Holzmann to implement the
Wolper test. It presents a loop that starts sending white messages
(SelectingWhite ) until a non-deterministic selection of uppaal increases
the variable wolper . Then, it sends a red message ( SelectingRed ) and
returns to sending white messages ( SelectingWhite ). At some point,
the non-deterministic interleaving will increase the variable wolper
again, and it will send a blue message ( SelectingBlue ). Finally, it con-
cludes with an infinite sequence of white messages ( SelectingWhite ) and
the Wolper test is considered completed. As for model checking, this
code will be executed in an exhaustive manner (interleaving with the
rest of the MTIP model), to ensure that all possible infinite sequences
of white, red and blue messages are sent.
Fig. 8. Part of the Sender automaton: The Wolper test.
5.2. Modeling time
To model time in uppaal , we make use of clock variables that simu-
late time. The first abstraction decision in this context is to set a value
that defines the DEADLINE of the packets. In MTIP design, this value
is specified by the application (provided the recycling assumption
is preserved). Higher numbers tend to provoke more packets arriving
on time to the destination endpoint, while lower numbers favor more
packets arriving late, due to the reduced time lapse it sets for the
packets to arrive at the other endpoint. In our model, we have tested
different DEADLINE values and assessed that the model always satisfies
the correctness properties ( P1toP4) and follows the same tendency
for the performance properties ( P5andP6). So, to simplify, we use a
DEADLINE of three, the same number used in our previous model [ 3].
However, the results of the evaluations of the different DEADLINE
values (1 to 4) wrt to the properties are accessible in [ 45].
As already stated, uppaal is able to handle real time by using clocks.
However, uppaal uses time symbolically by means of constraints, or
intervals [ 46]. This causes that clock values cannot be directly used
inuppaal : they can be compared with integer expressions in guards, as
in𝑦 < 5, for instance, but you cannot know the current value of a
clock. For this reason, we need the support of extra variables such as
sndTime to manage time in the uppaal implementation of the protocol.
These variables work in conjunction with the clocks to effectively
manage time but should not grow uncontrollably, so a TIMELIMIT
must be set. This TIMELIMIT must be sufficient to allow the presence
of packets that are still on time and packets that are late in the sublinks.
In the next subsection, we focus on this specific value.
5.3. Sequence numbers
Following the recycling assumption , we need to find a valid
abstraction to reduce the 216available sequence numbers in MTIP to a
reasonable size for a formal verification. Our goal is to accurately model

--- Page 8 ---
Computer Communications 212 (2023) 390–406
397D. Rico et al.
Fig. 9. Example of the abstraction of sequence numbers for the model.
and manage various scenarios that can occur in an MTIP link, including
duplicate packets, packet reordering, packet loss, and late packets.
To achieve this, we take an incremental approach to determine a
reasonable size for the sequence numbers. Firstly, we need at least
one sequence number to detect duplicate packets. If the receiving
side receives this sequence number twice, it can flag the packet as a
duplicate. If we want to model packet reordering, we need at least
two differentiated sequence numbers to enable the protocol to identify
unexpected orders during processing. Additionally, to represent gaps
in received data, we need an extra sequence number to abstract the
previous situation plus some application data being lost. Finally, if
we want to incorporate late application data, we need an additional
sequence number. Therefore, to model the most extreme case where
different application data is duplicated, reordered, lost, and late, we
need a minimum of four sequence numbers to ensure that the protocol
can recover from this scenario effectively. Fig. 9 displays an example
that depicts this abstraction. It shows a sequence of white, red and blue
data sent over a link (constituted by multiples sublinks) and received
at a destination endpoint. In green, it shows duplicated, reordered, lost
and late data using 16-bit sequence numbers, while in yellow it shows
how this scenario will translate into 4-bit sequence numbers in order
to be effectively abstracted.
Sequence numbers must have a limit and be incremental. In our
model, the timestamps have the same behavior, since they need a
TIMELIMIT and they are also incremental. In fact, we can increment
each timestamp by one without limiting behaviors, since losses would
simulate periods without sending data. That is why we just use times-
tamps ( sndTime andrcvTime ) to model both time and sequence
numbers and set the TIMELIMIT to four. Moreover, this replicates the
behavior of TI applications that normally send data in a constant and
periodic manner [ 42] (e.g., 1 KHz). However, in a real implementation
where timestamps are used to measure the specific end-to-end latency
of each packet and packets might be sent with small variations in the
period, it is necessary to use the complementary sequence numbers to
ensure MTIP operation in a fail-safe manner.
5.4. Sublinks
The use of several sublinks can provoke packet reorders (unexpected
sequence number received) and duplicates (same sequence number
received from several sublinks) at the receiving side (see previous
Fig. 5). It is clear that we need at least two sublinks to model reorders
and duplicates. The question is whether more than two sublinks add
any added value compared to two sublinks. Regarding the correctness
properties, adding more sublinks would generate longer reorders and
more duplicates, but the states generated with two sublinks are enough
to check MTIP’s ability to manage these situations. However, in terms
of performance properties, even if two sublinks are enough, it is in-
teresting to explore the impact of additional sublinks in the protocol’s
trade-off. Therefore, in our uppaal model, we use three sublinks.6. Analysis and verification of MTIP with uppaal
In this section, we provide a description of the uppaal model for
MTIP that has already been introduced in previous sections. Addition-
ally, we evaluate the model by defining target properties in tctl(Timed
Computation Tree Logic). First, we assess correctness properties to
validate MTIP’s data exchange. Then, we verify performance properties
using the uppaal smc to analyze the use of a different number of sublinks
under various network scenarios. Compared to the evaluation of the
implementation of MTIP performed in [ 4], which focused on assessing
the adaptability of MTIP for selecting the appropriate sublinks, this
evaluation examines the effects of using a variable number of sublinks
across a wider range of network scenarios. Performing this validation
on statistical model checking allows extracting these insights in a
more cost-effective manner than conducting experiments on a physical
testbed. Moreover, it enables future adjustments to be made to the
protocol algorithm in order to select a more appropriate number of
sublinks based on the specific scenario.
6.1. The uppaal model
The uppaal model developed for MTIP is represented in Fig. 10.
It presents an automaton Sender that uses Sublinks automata to
communicate with an automaton Receiver . At the application level,
it models a Source that represents a remote control and a Destina-
tion that represents a controlled device. Following recommendations
for practical modeling [ 9], these applications are directly implemented
in the transport Sender andReceiver automata to avoid state
explosion. We now discuss some additional details of the model.
TheSender automaton is shown in Fig. 11. It is constituted by
a main loop (bottom part) that continuously sends data through the
different sublinks (indicated by the configurable value of c_sblNum ).
This data follows the Wolper test, which is directly implemented in
theSender automaton, and includes a timestamp sndTime in each
packet. In the top part of the automaton, we can see the functionality
to reset the value of sndTime when the TIMELIMIT is reached in all
parts of the model.
TheSublink automaton, presented in Fig. 12, is responsible for
simulating channel operation. It has two main locations, Empty and
notEmpty . The Sublink initiates synced with all the other automata
and stays at the location Empty . When the Sender wants to send some
data to the other endpoint, it uses the Sublink automaton, which
receives the data and stores it with its timestamp in a circular buffer.
Then, the Sublink automaton progresses to the notEmpty location,
where it can keep receiving data until it is full or has the opportunity to
send the packet (data and timestamp) to the receiver automaton in a
non-deterministic manner. The time it takes the automaton to leave this

--- Page 9 ---
Computer Communications 212 (2023) 390–406
398D. Rico et al.
Fig. 10. Simplified graphical view of the uppaal model.
Fig. 11. Sender automaton.
location is configured by the exponential rate c_lateTendency , a
variable that indicates the probability that the automaton will leave the
location. The data can be successfully sent to the Receiver automa-
ton, or the packet can be lost during the sending process. The selection
of how data are sent is also non-deterministic at first; however, a
variable c_lossTendency has been added in order to control the
losses in terms of probability and study the impact of the use of multiple
sublinks. Note that variables such as dstLoc orsblLoc are necessary
since uppaal smc only supports broadcast channels for synchronization,
as described in [ 47]. The Sublink automaton also has an operation
that forces discarding every packet that is left in the queues when the
clock needs to be reset by the Receiver endpoint, since those packets
will have already reached the deadline.
TheReceiver automaton ( Fig. 13) has the following tasks. First,
it initiates the synchronization with all the automata (left part). Then,
it waits for packets to be received from any sublink. When packets are
received (bottom part), it checks if the packet is a duplicate, on time,
late or lost and it only saves it in the buffer if it is an accepted packetaccording to the MTIP receiving algorithm explained in Section 4.1.
Note that there are additional variables ( a_r, a_b, o_r, o_b, l_r,
l_b, d_r, d_b ) and labels in the form of location names ( r_r, r_b )
that will be used to check formal properties in Section 6.2. Finally,
theReceiver automaton is in charge of resetting the clock when it
reaches the TIMELIMIT plus the maximum DEADLINE allowed for
the packets (right-top part). This operation begins with the application
consuming the buffer and saving relevant information for the formal
validation. When this operation concludes, the clock is reset, along with
other complementary variables. All automata keep working following
the Wolper test.
Listing 1 contains the values of the constants used in the model,
variables for the formal verification (denoted by underscores) and the
initial values of the configurable variables (starting with c_) that will
be used later to study the performance properties with uppaalsmc . The
different functions shown in the model have self-explanatory names;
however, the full code of the model can be found in [ 45].

--- Page 10 ---
Computer Communications 212 (2023) 390–406
399D. Rico et al.
Fig. 12. Sublink automaton.
Fig. 13. Receiver automaton.

--- Page 11 ---
Computer Communications 212 (2023) 390–406
400D. Rico et al.
1// Constants ( Wolper )
2const i n t LOST = 0;
3const i n t WHITE = 1;
4const i n t RED = 2;
5const i n t BLUE = 3;
6
7// Constants ( and l i m i t s )
8const i n t TIMELIMIT = 4;
9const i n t MAXBUF = TIMELIMIT ;
10const i n t MAXSBL = 3;
11const i n t DEADLINE = 3;
12const i n t EMPTY = 0;
13
14// Variables for formal v e r i f i c a t i o n
15i n t a_r , a_b ;
16i n t o_r , o_b ;
17i n t l _ r , l _ b ;
18i n t d_r , d_b ;
19
20// Configurations for SMC
21i n t c_sblNum=3;
22i n t c_lossTendency =50;
23i n t c_lateTendency =50;
Listing 1: Global declarations
6.2. Simulation and formal verification of MTIP properties
We run the automata network with uppaal . First, we simulate the
model to identify and eliminate any discrepancies that could render it
an unsuitable representation of MTIP. Then, we evaluate the correct-
ness and performance properties described in Section 4 to check that
theuppaal model built behaves as expected wrt the MTIP protocol and
evaluate its performance.
6.2.1. Simulation of the model
We have generated multiple Message Sequence Charts (MSC) that
provide illustrative traces of iterations of our model. These MSCs
are represented by uppaal as shown in the MSC example of Fig. 14.
They visually demonstrate the interconnected interactions between the
sender and the receiver, utilizing three distinct sublinks.
In the MSC presented in Fig. 14, we observe the sender transmitting
white data through the three separate sublinks. Subsequently, sublink
1 forwards this data to the receiver, which processes it. Afterward,
sublink 0 redundantly forwards the same data, resulting in its rejection
as a duplicate packet upon reception by the receiver. Finally, sublink
3 forwards the data, which, in this case, is either delayed or lost and
serves no purpose for the receiver. The final part of the excerpt of
the MSC displayed illustrates the selection of red data, continuing the
Wolper test.
It is important to highlight that all MSC analyzed exhibit no devia-
tions from the expected behavior of MTIP, previously depicted in Fig. 7.
Consequently, it serves as a foundational reference point for validating
our model’s adherence to the protocol.
6.2.2. Analysis of correctness properties
We translate the correctness properties introduced in Section 4.1
into the tctl language used by the uppaal validator. The formulas
are presented in Listing 2, with rbeing the Receiver . In order to
check that the application never receives messages that have met their
deadline, the formula for P1states that if all red or blue packets arrive
late, the application will not receive them. The formula for P2checks
the absence of duplicates through no red or blue data arriving twice
to the applications. Then, the formula for P3assesses that no red data
is received in the application if blue data has been received, to ensure
order. Finally, the formula for P4checks that if red or blue data arrives
on time and is not a duplicate, it will be processed by the application
Fig. 14. MSC extracted from uppaal .

--- Page 12 ---
Computer Communications 212 (2023) 390–406
401D. Rico et al.
at some point. We successfully verified the formulas against the models
and obtained the results reported in Table 2. The table includes four
columns, with the first column ‘‘States, stored’’ indicating the number
of unique states discovered during the verification process, reflecting
the model’s actual size. The second column, labeled ‘‘States, matched’’,
lists the number of duplicate or previously encountered states. The
sum of these two columns provides a total count of unique transitions
performed, which serves as a measure of the verification’s workload.
The last column shows the memory usage during each verification. It
is worth noting that all properties were verified using the same number
of stored states, since uppaal performs a complete system analysis
for each property. However, the matched states were greater for the
final properties due to the increased number of states generated when
evaluating the ‘‘imply’’ condition.
t c t l P1 { A[] not ( ( l _ r == c_sblNum && a_r > 0)
↪ | | ( l _ b == c_sblNum && a_b > 0) ) }
t c t l P2 { A[] ( ( a_r <= 1) && ( a_b <= 1) ) }
t c t l P3 { A[] not ( r . r _ r && a_b >0) }
t c t l P4_red { ( o_r == 1 && a_r == 0) −−> r . r _ r }
t c t l P4_blue { ( o_b == 1 && a_b == 0) −−> r . r_b }
Listing 2: Correctness properties in TCTL
Table 2
Verification results in uppaal .
States, stored States, matched Memory usage
General 42105198 133566430 7581.232 MB
P1 42105198 133566430 7588.732 MB
P2 42105198 133566430 7588.732 MB
P3 42105198 133566430 7588.944 MB
P4_red 42105198 227928967 10735.344 MB
P4_blue 42105198 235998863 10933.564 MB
6.2.3. Analysis of performance properties
After evaluating the correctness of MTIP with uppaal , we proceed
to study the performance properties. In order to do so, we evaluate
onuppaal smc the impact of the modification of the three configurable
variables (presented in previous Listing 1), the number of sublinks that
are in use, the tendency to losses in the sublinks and the tendency to
add additional delays in the sublinks. The idea is to study how using
different sublinks under different channel characteristics affects MTIP’s
two main performance properties, i.e., the probability of receiving
packets successfully ( P5) and the probability of receiving duplicate
packets and thus, wasting resources ( P6). These properties are also
based in the Wolper tests and are presented in Listing 3. Since in uppaal
smctime is needed for the evaluations, we tested different values and
selected the value time = 100 that assures that the completion of
the experiment ( Pr[<=100] (<> receiverEnd == 1) ) occurs in
[0.990031,1] with confidence 0.99.
t c t l P5_red { Pr[<=100] (<> a_r > 0) }
t c t l P5_blue { Pr[<=100] (<> a_b > 0) }
t c t l P6_red { Pr[<=100] (<> d_r > 0) }
t c t l P6_blue { Pr[<=100] (<> d_b > 0) }
Listing 3: Performance properties in TCTL
First, we evaluate the use of 1, 2 or 3 sublinks with the same condi-
tions and configurations of 0 to 100 loss and late tendencies (in 10-sized
steps). The heatmaps that present the first property evaluations are in
Fig. 15 while the second property heatmaps are in Fig. 16. These graphs
show the mean results of the validation of the properties under the
statistical parameter configurations shown in Table 3. To compare both
heatmaps graphically, the color blue has been set in both situations toTable 3
smcparameters in uppaal .
Statistical parameter Value
Lower probabilistic deviation 0.01
Upper probabilistic deviation 0.01
Probability of false negatives 0.01
Probability of false positives 0.01
Probability uncertainty 0.01
Ratio lower bound 0.9
Ratio upper bound 1.1
Histogram bucket width 0.0
Histogram bucket count 0
Trace resolution 4096
Discretization step for hybrid systems 0.01
represent a good scenario for that performance property, while the red
one represents a bad outcome.
Evaluating performance property P5, we can extract several ideas.
First, a general view of the colors of the graphs shows that the use
of more sublinks enhances the communication. More green and blue
colors can be seen in scenarios with two and three sublinks. How-
ever, it is also clear that when the scenarios are really bad, it is
harder to improve them with multiple sublinks, since if all sublinks
are faulty, this redundancy cannot overcome the communication issues
(seeLossTendency 100% andLateTendency 100% ). Moreover,
we see that the data of property P5_red has slightly more chance of
reaching the destination than the data of P5_blue . Since the wolper test
first sends the RED data and then the BLUE one, it is more likely that
just the RED one arrives when evaluation of the property is completed,
even if the experiment is completed in [0.990031, 1] probability with
confidence 0.99, as stated before.
Moving to the performance property P6, we observe an obvious
analogous behavior. With this property, we want to measure the excess
use of resources in the sense of using multiple sublinks. When just
one sublink is in use, there are no duplicate packets arriving at the
destination, so in this sense there is no excess of resources. However, if
two and three sublinks are used, more duplicate packets arrive at the
receiving endpoint. Although the duplication of packets helps in the
delivery of messages, the fact that duplicate packets are arriving shows
that the configuration under study is potentially using more resources
than it should.
When looking at both figures as a whole, MTIP’s main trade-off is
clearly shown. The use of more sublinks helps improve the probability
of arrival; however, it also creates more duplicate packets that incur
more excessive resource usage. The solution of this trade-off resides
in the application’s specific requirements and the specific scenario
through which it is sending data. For instance, if the requirements set
a minimum of 0.9 probability of arrival of red data under a scenario of
20% loss and 10% late tendencies, the test shown in Fig. 15 displays
that this can be achieved with three sublinks. However, if the required
probability of arrival it is a little looser, such as a 0.85, the maximum
resource waste desired also fits in the equation. For example, in the
case of a maximum probability of 0.5 duplicates (wrt Fig. 16), the use
of two sublinks would be more beneficial for the scenario than the use
of three sublinks, even if the latter provides more reliability.
Then, we conducted a second evaluation, exploring the scenario
of dissimilar conditions within different sublinks. In this case, the
model was adapted to configure distinct values of c_lateTendency and
c_lossTendency for each sublink. Given the substantial number of sce-
narios that emerge from combining 10-sized step configurations across
dissimilar sublinks, we chose to focus on three representative sublinks
that incorporate loss and late tendencies at levels of 20%, 50%, and
80%. These resulting scenarios simulate a simplified version of MTIP’s
sending algorithm as presented in [4], selecting the best sublinks
based on both loss and late tendencies incrementally. The results are
illustrated in Figs. 17 and 18. The nomenclature ‘‘X–Y–Z’’ on the axis

--- Page 13 ---
Computer Communications 212 (2023) 390–406
402D. Rico et al.
Fig. 15. Evaluation of performance property P5in sublinks with the same conditions.
Fig. 16. Evaluation of performance property P6in sublinks with the same conditions.

--- Page 14 ---
Computer Communications 212 (2023) 390–406
403D. Rico et al.
Fig. 17. Evaluation of performance property P5in sublinks with different conditions.
identifies the loss and late tendencies of the first sublink (X), the second
one (Y) and the third one (Z).
From a broader perspective, the conclusions we can draw from the
graphs mirror those previously presented: employing more sublinks
increases the number of correct messages ( P5) but also increases the
reception of duplicate packets ( P6). However, this scenario with dis-
similar conditions allows for a richer assessment. To illustrate it, we
can compare two representative cases in P5_red andP6_red : case (a)
with 20–80–80 loss and late tendencies and case (b) with 50–50–80. In
case (a), the first sublink has 20% loss-late tendencies and the second
and third sublinks aresubstantially worse compared to it (both 80%
loss-late tendencies). In case (b), the first sublink has 50% loss-late
tendencies and the second and third sublinks are not substantially
worse (50% and 80% loss-late tendencies). In case (a), we observe that
using more sublinks does not greatly improve the communication. With
one sublink, P5_red is 0.61, using two sublinks it is 0.63 and using
all of them for the communication it is 0.65. In this case, the scenario
presents a substantially better sublink, so the addition of further worse
sublinks do not greatly improve performance. However, in case (b), we
observe that using more sublinks has a noticeable positive impact, with
P5_red increasing from 0.28 to 0.50 (one sublink vs three sublinks). In
fact, the most significant performance improvement occurs when em-
ploying two sublinks (increasing from 0.28 to 0.48). This underscoresthe importance of introducing sublinks with favorable conditions as a
key factor in enhancing performance, since the second sublink presents
50% loss-late tendencies while the third sublink shows a level of 80%.
Regarding P6_red , we observe that the increase of duplicates is highly
tied to the increase in performance. In case (a) it goes from 0.01 to 0.02
and then 0.07; whereas in case (b) it rises from 0.01 to 0.08 and finally
0.10. The selection of the specific use of sublinks would depend once
again on the application preferences regarding resource waste.
This evaluation serves as a valuable extension of the experiments
detailed in [ 4], in which an initial implementation of MTIP underwent
evaluation in a real 5G testbed. In said study, only a limited number
of scenarios could be explored due to the constraints of real-world
experimentation. Nevertheless, the tests performed showed the main
trade-off of MTIP, demonstrating that utilization of additional duplicate
packets helps to reduce losses in most scenarios. The performance
evaluation of MTIP’s uppaal model presented in this paper further
complements these findings with a comprehensive analysis across a
broader spectrum of scenarios. Moreover, it offers valuable insights
for potential adjustments to fine-tune MTIP’s algorithm, aiding in the
selection of the most suitable sublinks for any given scenario, thus
improving the performance.

--- Page 15 ---
Computer Communications 212 (2023) 390–406
404D. Rico et al.
Fig. 18. Evaluation of performance property P6in sublinks with different conditions.
7. Conclusions and future work
MTIP uses multi-connectivity in multi-homed Tactile Internet de-
vices connected to different wireless networks to increase reliability
and reduce latency through the selection of the most reliable and fastest
paths. The real-time nature of data in this application domain suggests
avoiding flow control mechanisms in favor of low latency. In this
paper, we have presented a formal model with abstraction decisions
to accurately model the protocol and the verification work that ensure
correctness and performance. Comparing this work with our previous
spinbased research in [ 3], we have found that uppaal modeling of time
is more natural for this protocol and additionally checks the statistical
performance properties of the protocol under different configurations.
With the performance evaluation, we have observed the specific
impact of using a greater number of sublinks in different scenarios.
In most cases, this leads to an improved reliability at the expense of
some resource waste. This work complements the evaluation of MTIP’s
implementation in [ 4] and gives some insight for future adjustments
to fine-tune MTIP’s algorithm to select the most appropriate sublinks.
Moreover, the uppaal model presented here opens up future work to
exploit statistical model checking for MTIP in different networking
scenarios. Considering the growing interest in Non-Terrestrial Networks
(NTN) in the context of cellular networks [ 48,49], a relevant example
is to evaluate the behavior of MTIP combining 5G with satellite links
without the elevated cost of a satellite connection.CRediT authorship contribution statement
Delia Rico: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Validation,
Formal analysis, Writing – original draft. María-del-Mar Gallardo:
Conceptualization, Methodology, Validation, Formal analysis, Writing
– review & editing. Pedro Merino: Conceptualization, Methodology,
Validation, Writing – review & editing, Supervision.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing finan-
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
influence the work reported in this paper.
Data availability
No data was used for the research described in the article.
Acknowledgments
Work supported by the 6G-SANDBOX Project (Smart Networks and
Services Joint Undertaking under the European Union’s Horizon 2020
research and innovation programme grant agreement No 101096328),
and by the Spanish government (grant FPU17/04292 and the UNICO
I+D 5G+TACTILE_1 project TSI-063000-2021-11). Funding for open
access charge: Universidad de Málaga / CBUA.

--- Page 16 ---
Computer Communications 212 (2023) 390–406
405D. Rico et al.
References
[1] O. Holland, E. Steinbach, R.V. Prasad, Q. Liu, Z. Dawy, A. Aijaz, N. Pappas,
K. Chandra, V.S. Rao, S. Oteafy, M. Eid, M. Luden, A. Bhardwaj, X. Liu, J.
Sachs, J. Araújo, The IEEE 1918.1 ‘‘tactile internet’’ standards working group and
its standards, Proc. IEEE 107 (2) (2019) 256–279, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
JPROC.2018.2885541.
[2] V. Singh, T. Karkkainen, J. Ott, S. Ahsan, L. Eggert, Multipath RTP (MPRTP),
Tech. Rep., (draft-singh-avtcore-mprtp) IETF Secretariat, 2017, URL https://
datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-avtcore-mprtp.
[3] D. Rico, M.-d.-M. Gallardo, P. Merino, Modeling and verification of the multi-
connection tactile internet protocol, in: Proceedings of the 17th ACM Symposium
on QoS and Security for Wireless and Mobile Networks, Q2SWinet ’21, As-
sociation for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2021, pp. 105–114,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3479242.3487328.
[4] D. Rico, K.-J. Grinemmo, A. Brunstrom, P. Merino, Performance analysis of the
multi-connection tactile internet protocol over 5G, J. Netw. Syst. Manage. 31 (3)
(2023) 49, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10922-023-09737-0.
[5] 3GPP, 3rd Generation Partnership Project; Technical Specification Group Core
Network and Terminals; General Packet Radio System (GPRS) Tunnelling Pro-
tocol User Plane (GTPV1-U) (Release 17), Tech. Rep., (29.281) 3rd Generation
Partnership Project, 2021, Version 17.0.0.
[6] V. Shankarkumar, L. Montini, T. Frost, G. Dowd, Precision Time Protocol Version
2 (PTPV2) Management Information Base, Tech. Rep., (8173) RFC Editor, 2017.
[7] G.J. Holzmann, Design and Validation of Computer Protocols, vol. 512, Prentice
hall Englewood Cliffs, 1991.
[8] K. Hameed, S. Garg, M.B. Amin, B. Kang, Towards a formal modelling, analysis
and verification of a clone node attack detection scheme in the internet of things,
Comput. Netw. 204 (2022) 108702, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.comnet.2021.
108702.
[9] G.J. Holzmann, The model checker SPIN, IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng. 23 (5) (1997)
279–295, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/32.588521.
[10] P. Wolper, Expressing interesting properties of programs in propositional tem-
poral logic, in: Proceedings of the 13th ACM SIGACT-SIGPLAN Symposium on
Principles of Programming Languages, in POPL ’86: Proceedings of the 13th
ACM SIGACT-SIGPLAN symposium on Principles of programming languages, New
York, NY, USA, 1986, pp. 184–193, http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/512644.512661.
[11] K.S. Kim, D.K. Kim, C. Chae, S. Choi, Y. Ko, J. Kim, Y. Lim, M. Yang, S.
Kim, B. Lim, K. Lee, K.L. Ryu, Ultrareliable and low-latency communication
techniques for tactile internet services, Proc. IEEE 107 (2) (2019) 376–393,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/JPROC.2018.2868995.
[12] 3GPP, 3rd Generation Partnership Project; Technical Specification Group Services
and System Aspects; Service Requirements for Cyber-Physical Control Appli-
cations in Vertical Domains; Stage 1 (Release 18), Tech. Rep., (22.104) 3rd
Generation Partnership Project, 2021, Version 18.0.0.
[13] 3GPP, 3rd Generation Partnership Project; Technical Specification Group Services
and System Aspects; Service Requirements for the 5G System; Stage 1 (Release
16), Tech. Rep., (22.261) 3rd Generation Partnership Project, 2017, Version
16.0.0.
[14] G. Cisotto, E. Casarin, S. Tomasin, Requirements and enablers of advanced
healthcare services over future cellular systems, IEEE Commun. Mag. 58 (3)
(2020) 76–81, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MCOM.001.1900349.
[15] P.M. Vespa, C. Miller, X. Hu, V. Nenov, F. Buxey, N.A. Martin, Intensive care
unit robotic telepresence facilitates rapid physician response to unstable patients
and decreased cost in neurointensive care, Surg. Neurol. 67 (4) (2007) 331–337,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.surneu.2006.12.042.
[16] S. Dadhich, U. Bodin, U. Andersson, Key challenges in automation of earth-
moving machines, Autom. Constr. 68 (2016) 212–222, http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/j.autcon.2016.05.009.
[17] S. Dodeller, Transport layer protocols for telehaptics update messages, in: Proc.
22nd Biennial Symposium on Communications, June 2004, 2004.
[18] A. Cen, M.W. Mutka, D. Zhu, N. Xi, Supermedia transport for teleoperations over
overlay networks, in: NETWORKING 2005: Networking Technologies, Services,
and Protocols, in: Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 3462, Springer, 2005,
pp. 1409–1412, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/11422778_126.
[19] R. Wirz, M. Ferre, R. Marín, J. Barrio, J.M. Claver, J. Ortego, Efficient transport
protocol for networked haptics applications, in: M. Ferre (Ed.), Haptics: Percep-
tion, Devices and Scenarios, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2008,
pp. 3–12.
[20] G. Kokkonis, K. Psannis, M. Roumeliotis, S. Kontogiannis, A survey of transport
protocols for haptic applications, in: Proceedings of the 16th Panhellenic Con-
ference on Informatics, 2012, pp. 192–197, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/PCi.2012.
54.
[21] J. Qadir, A. Ali, K.A. Yau, A. Sathiaseelan, J. Crowcroft, Exploiting the power
of multiplicity: A holistic survey of network-layer multipath, IEEE Commun.
Surv. Tutor. 17 (4) (2015) 2176–2213, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/COMST.2015.
2453941.
[22] D. Rico, P. Merino, A survey of end-to-end solutions for reliable low-latency
communications in 5G networks, IEEE Access 8 (2020) 192808–192834, http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3032726.[23] A. Ford, C. Raiciu, M. Handley, O. Bonaventure, TCP Extensions for Multipath
Operation with Multiple Addresses, Tech. Rep., (8684) RFC Editor, 2020, http:
//www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8684.txt.
[24] T. Viernickel, A. Froemmgen, A. Rizk, B. Koldehofe, R. Steinmetz, Multipath
QUIC: A deployable multipath transport protocol, in: 2018 IEEE International
Conference on Communications, 2018, pp. 1–7, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ICC.
2018.8422951.
[25] C. Battaglia, V. Bruyère, O. Gauwin, C. Pelsser, B. Quoitin, Reasoning on BGP
routing filters using tree automata, Comput. Netw. 65 (2014) 232–254, http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.comnet.2014.01.001.
[26] B. Touijer, Y. Ben Maissa, S. Mouline, IEEE 802.15.6 CSMA/CA access method for
WBANs: Performance evaluation and new backoff counter selection procedure,
Comput. Netw. 188 (2021) 107759, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.comnet.2020.
107759.
[27] E.K.K. Edris, M. Aiash, J.K.-K. Loo, Formal verification and analysis of primary
authentication based on 5G-AKA protocol, in: 2020 Seventh International Con-
ference on Software Defined Systems, SDS, 2020, pp. 256–261, http://dx.doi.
org/10.1109/SDS49854.2020.9143899.
[28] M. Kamel, S. Leue, Formalization and validation of the general inter-ORB
protocol (GIOP) using PROMELA and SPIN, Int. J. Softw. Tools Technol. Transf.
2 (4) (2000) 394–409.
[29] P. Merino, J.M. Troya, Modeling and verification of the ITU-T multipoint
communication service with SPIN, in: Proceedings of the 2nd International
Wrokshop on SPIN Verification, 1996.
[30] Y. Cai, D. Qi, Control protocols design for cyber-physical systems, in: 2015
IEEE Advanced Information Technology, Electronic and Automation Control
Conference, IAEAC, 2015, pp. 668–671, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/IAEAC.2015.
7428638.
[31] S. Chouali, A. Boukerche, A. Mostefaoui, M.A. Merzoug, Formal verification and
performance analysis of a new data exchange protocol for connected vehicles,
IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. 69 (12) (2020) 15385–15397, http://dx.doi.org/10.
1109/TVT.2020.3040817.
[32] UP4ALL International AB, Uppaal, 2022, https://uppaal.org/. (Accessed 18
November 2022).
[33] S. Saini, A. Fehnker, Evaluating the stream control transmission protocol using
uppaal, Electron. Proc. Theor. Comput. Sci. 244 (2017) 1–13, http://dx.doi.org/
10.4204/eptcs.244.1.
[34] A. Rashid, O. Hasan, K. Saghar, Formal analysis of a ZigBee-based routing pro-
tocol for smart grids using UPPAAL, in: 2015 12th International Conference on
High-Capacity Optical Networks and Enabling/Emerging Technologies, HONET,
2015, pp. 1–5, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/HONET.2015.7395420.
[35] X. Wu, H. Ling, Y. Dong, On modeling and verifying of application protocols of
TTCAN in flight-control system with UPPAAL, in: 2009 International Conference
on Embedded Software and Systems, 2009, pp. 572–577, http://dx.doi.org/10.
1109/ICESS.2009.27.
[36] W. Guo, Y. Huang, J. Shi, Z. Hou, Y. Yang, A formal method for evaluating the
performance of TSN traffic shapers using UPPAAL, in: 2021 IEEE 46th Conference
on Local Computer Networks, LCN, 2021, pp. 241–248, http://dx.doi.org/10.
1109/LCN52139.2021.9524955.
[37] M. Houimli, L. Kahloul, S. Benaoun, Formal specification, verification and
evaluation of the MQTT protocol in the Internet of Things, in: 2017 International
Conference on Mathematics and Information Technology, ICMIT, IEEE, 2017, pp.
214–221.
[38] M. Houimli, L. Kahloul, S. Benaoun, Formal specification, verification and
evaluation of the MQTT protocol in the Internet of Things, in: 2017 International
Conference on Mathematics and Information Technology, ICMIT, 2017, pp.
214–221, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MATHIT.2017.8259720.
[39] P. Höfner, A. McIver, Statistical model checking of wireless mesh routing
protocols, in: NASA Formal Methods: 5th International Symposium, NFM 2013,
Moffett Field, CA, USA, May 14-16, 2013. Proceedings 5, Springer, 2013, pp.
322–336.
[40] M. Naeem2023, M. Albano, K.G. Larsen, B. Nielsen, A. HOedholt, C.O. Laursen,
Modelling and analysis of a sigfox based IoT network using UPPAAL SMC, IEEE
Sens. J. (2023) 1, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/JSEN.2023.3261667.
[41] G. Behrmann, A. David, K.G. Larsen, A tutorial on uppaal, in: M. Bernardo,
F. Corradini (Eds.), Formal Methods for the Design of Real-Time Systems:
International School on Formal Methods for the Design of Computer, Communi-
cation, and Software Systems, Bertinora, Italy, September 13-18, 2004, Revised
Lectures, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2004, pp. 200–236,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-30080-9_7.
[42] O. Holland, E. Steinbach, R.V. Prasad, Q. Liu, Z. Dawy, A. Aijaz, N. Pappas,
K. Chandra, V.S. Rao, S. Oteafy, M. Eid, M. Luden, A. Bhardwaj, X. Liu, J.
Sachs, J. Araújo, The IEEE 1918.1 ‘‘tactile internet’’ standards working group and
its standards, Proc. IEEE 107 (2) (2019) 256–279, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
JPROC.2018.2885541.
[43] M. Amend, D. Hugo, Multipath Sequence Maintenance, Tech. Rep., (draft-
amend-iccrg-multipath-reordering-03) IETF Secretariat, 2022, https://www.ietf.
org/archive/id/draft-amend-iccrg-multipath-reordering-03.txt.
[44] G.J. Holzmann, The SPIN Model Checker - Primer and Reference Manual,
Addison-Wesley, 2004, pp. I–XII, 1–596.

--- Page 17 ---
Computer Communications 212 (2023) 390–406
406D. Rico et al.
[45] D. Rico, MTIP: The multi-connection tactile internet protocol, 2021, URL https:
//github.com/deliarico/MTIP.
[46] G. Behrmann, A. David, K.G. Larsen, A tutorial on Uppaal 4.0, 2006, Department
of computer science, Aalborg university.
[47] A. David, K.G. Larsen, A. Legay, M. Mikučionis, D.B. Poulsen, Uppaal SMC
tutorial, Int. J. Softw. Tools Technol. Transf. 17 (4) (2015) 397–415, http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10009-014-0361-y.[48] M. Giordani, M. Zorzi, Non-terrestrial networks in the 6G era: Challenges and
opportunities, IEEE Netw. 35 (2) (2020) 244–251.
[49] G. Araniti, A. Iera, S. Pizzi, F. Rinaldi, Toward 6G non-terrestrial networks, IEEE
Netw. 36 (1) (2021) 113–120.
