--- Page 1 ---
Simulink to UPPAAL Statistical Model Checker:
Analyzing Automotive Industrial Systems
Predrag Filipovikj1, Nesredin Mahmud1, Raluca Marinescu1, Cristina
Seceleanu1, Oscar Ljungkrantz2, and Henrik L onn2
1M alardalen University, V aster as, Sweden,
ffirst.lastg@mdh.se
2Volvo Group Trucks Technology, Gothenburg, Sweden,
foscar.ljungkrantz, henrik.lonn g@volvo.com
Abstract. The advanced technology used for developing modern auto-
motive systems increases their complexity, making their correctness as-
surance very tedious. To enable analysis, but also enhance understanding
and communication, by simulation, engineers use MATLAB/Simulink
modeling during system development. In this paper, we provide further
analysis means to industrial Simulink models by proposing a pattern-
based, execution-order preserving transformation of Simulink blocks into
the input language of UPPAAL Statistical Model checker, that is, timed
(hybrid) automata with stochastic semantics. The approach leads to be-
ing able to analyze complex Simulink models of automotive systems, and
we report our experience with two vehicular systems, the Brake-by-Wire
and the Adjustable Speed Limiter.
1 Introduction
Features for automating driving tasks, such as the Adjustable Speed Limiter
(ASL) that enables drivers to set a maximum speed in order to reduce the risk
of over speeding, as well as trends like the drive-by-wire technology, in which
standard vehicle operations such as braking are carried out by electronic com-
ponents rather than mechanical ones, make the assurance of a modern vehicle's
correct operation extremely challenging.
Model-based design enables industry to create executable specications in
the form of MATLAB/Simulink [1] models that can be simulated and formally
analyzed [2] to detect hidden design errors and requirement violations.
In this paper, we introduce a pattern-based approach (Section 3) that cap-
tures formally the behaviors of a large set of Simulink blocks, as networks of
stochastic timed/hybrid automata, and report our experience with analyzing
two industrial systems from Volvo Group Trucks Technology, the Brake-by-Wire
(BBW) prototype and the operational Adjustable Speed Limiter (ASL), with UP-
PAAL SMC (Statistical Model Checker) [3] (Section 4). The crux of our method
is twofold: (i) using patterns in the transformation, which eases the modeling
process while preserving the execution semantics of Simulink blocks, and (ii) ver-
ifying the encodings of the Simulink blocks behaviors as C routines in UPPAAL,
with the program verier Dafny [4].

--- Page 2 ---
Our endeavor is justied by the industrial needs of ensuring correctness with
respect to both functional and timing behaviors of automotive embedded sys-
tems. Moreover, an initial investigation of verifying ASL's Simulink models with
the Simulink Design Verier (SDV) shows limitations in terms of verifying large
models and that a substantial part of the requirements cannot be directly con-
cluded due to, for instance, translation problems and boundaries not being de-
ned. The application of our approach to BBW and ASL (specically ASL's En-
gine Manager) shows improved scalability in the sense of being able to function-
ally analyze via statistical model checking the complete transformed Simulink
models, but it also reveals limitations in tackling timing requirements, due to
using only information from Simulink models.
Related work. Several works have already tackled the formal analysis of
Simulink models. Barnat et al. [5] and Meenakshi et al. [6] propose transfor-
mations that target only Simulink blocks with discrete-time behavior. The work
of Agrawal et al. [7] focuses on the transformation of Simulink into networks
of automata, without providing concrete means for formal verication. Miller
[8] investigates how translating Simulink to Lustre enables formal verication
with a constellation of model checkers and provers. Transformation frameworks
for Stateow into timed and hybrid automata are presented in [9] and [10],
respectively, with the former one applicable on a restricted class of Stateow
diagrams. Compared to these frameworks, our approach covers both continuous-
and discrete-time blocks, and we show how our transformation leads to the for-
mal verication of industrial automotive systems models, against a wide set of
requirements. This is an endeavor not really carried out before. One other solu-
tion is the use of PLASMA-Lab [11], a tool that is able to take as input dierent
Simulink simulations and provide statistical model checking results. Compared
to this approach, we generate a formal model that can be extended further (e.g.,
with extra-functional information) to provide additional verication results.
2 Preliminaries
In this section, we present the two tools used in our framework: (i) Simulink,
which is used to model the automotive systems, and (ii) UPPAAL SMC, which
is used to analyze the systems.
Simulink. Simulink [1] is a graphical programming environment for modeling,
simulation and code generation targeting multi-domain dynamic systems. The
tool provides a set of libraries with predened blocks that can be combined to
create a hierarchical diagram of the system. A block represents an atomic dy-
namic system that computes an equation or another modeling concept to produce
an output, either continuously ( continuous-time block), or at specic points in
time ( discrete-time block). Besides these atomic blocks, Simulink supports def-
inition of custom blocks via Stateow diagrams or user-dened functions called
S-Functions written in MATLAB, C, C++ or Fortran. The hierarchical diagram
is achieved through the implementation of subsystem , a block that contains a

--- Page 3 ---
set of atomic blocks and possibly other subsystem blocks. Such subsystems can
bevirtual (blocks are evaluated according to the overall model), or non-virtual
(blocks executed as a single unit). A non-virtual subsystem can also be condi-
tionally executed based on a predened triggering function. During simulation,
Simulink determines the order in which to invoke the blocks. This block invoca-
tion order is done based on a predened sorted order . In Simulink, the dynamic
models can be simulated and the results can be displayed as simulation runs.
UPPAAL SMC. The UPPAAL SMC [12] tool provides statistical model check-
ing for stochastic hybrid systems. A hybrid automata (HA) is dened as a tuple:
HA=hL;l0;X;;E;F;Ii (1)
whereLis a nite set of locations, l02Lis the initial location, Xis a nite set
of continuous variables, =i]ois a nite set of actions partitioned into
inputs (i) and outputs ( 0),Eis a nite set of edges of the form ( l;g;a;';l0),
wherelandl0are locations, gis a predicate on RX, action label a2, and'is
a binary relation on RX,F(l) a delay function for the location l2L, andIas-
signs an invariant predicate I(l) to any location l. With this denition, UPPAAL
SMC extends the timed automata (TA) tuple used by UPPAAL [13] with the
delay function Fthat allows the continuous variables to evolve according to or-
dinary dierential equations. In UPPAAL SMC, the automata have a stochastic
interpretation based on: (i) the probabilistic choices between multiple enabled
transitions, and (ii) the non-deterministic time delays that can be rened based
on probability distributions, either uniform distributions for time-bounded de-
lays or user-dened exponential distributions for unbounded delays.
A model in UPPAAL SMC consists of a network of interacting stochastic
HA that communicate through broadcast channels and shared variables. In the
network, the automata repeatedly race against each other, that is, they inde-
pendently and stochastically decide how much to delay before delivering the
output, and what output to broadcast at that moment, with the \winner" being
the component that chooses the minimum delay.
UPPAAL SMC uses an extension of WMTL [14] to provide probability eval-
uation (Pr(xC)), wherestands for (eventually ) or(always ), which cal-
culates the probability that is satised within cost xC, but also hypothesis
testing and probability comparison.
3 Simulink to UPPAAL SMC: Transformation Approach
There are two major aspects of transforming Simulink models into a network of
stochastic timed/hybrid automata: (1) transforming the individual blocks, and
(2) synchronizing their execution to preserve the behavior of the model. In this
section we present how we transform Simulink models into a network of TA
with stochastic semantics, suitable for statistical model checking with UPPAAL
SMC.
Discrete-time blocks execute their computational routine on a predened ob-
servable time interval called sample time , whereas continuous-time ones execute

--- Page 4 ---
the routine over innitely small time intervals. The same classication applies
for the S-Functions that are masked, preserving only the specication of their
input-output relation. For the subsystem blocks, the transformation is reduced
to a attening procedure which eliminates a subsystem block from the model
and replaces it with its inner content with preserved atomicity of execution. The
details and algorithm for attening are given later in the section. The attening
procedure, however, does not apply for Referenced models given as as executa-
bles only, as no Simulink model is available for them. Such blocks are treated as
atomic.
In the following, we provide a formal denition of a Simulink block as a tuple
andpatterns for transforming both discrete- and continuous-time blocks into TA
with stochastic semantics.
Each atomic Simulink block can be formally dened as a tuple:
B=hVin;Vout;VD;ts;Init;blockRoutine i (2)
where:Vin,VoutandVDdenote the set of input, output and data variables, re-
spectively;tsdenotes the sample time, Initis the initialization function, whereas
theblockRoutine is a function that maps inputs and state variables onto out-
put values. Our transformation is basically a semantic anchoring of tuple Bof
equation (2) onto the HA tuple given by equation (1).
The automata patterns corresponding to discrete and continuous categories
is given in Figures 1a and 1b, respectively. Each of them is composed out of
three locations, namely Start ,Oset and Operate , with Start being the initial
one. The Oset location is used to model the delay of the block execution. The
last location is Operate , in which the automaton produces output either at pre-
dened time intervals, or continuously. A local clock tis used to model the delay
of the execution in both cases, and also to trigger the periodic behavior of the
discrete blocks, whereas the continuous behavior is modeled via assigning expo-
nential rates on the Operate location. The exponential rate is a mechanism used
to specify the probability of the automaton to leave a location, according to an
exponential distribution [3]. Simulation time is represented via the global clock
gtime , which is used as part of the synchronization mechanism. The input pa-
rameters relevant for the pattern and its instantiation for a particular Simulink
block are passed as array called param . The start time of the atomaton is cal-
culated as a combination of the block execution order ( sn) and the inter-arrival
time of the block ( IAT).
Preserving Block Execution Order. The execution order (sorted order) of
the Simulink model blocks is generated by calling the \slist" function while
Simulink is in debug mode. Simulink uses the assigned execution order to invoke
blocks during simulation, with smaller execution order number denoting higher
priority. We perform the attening of the sorted order automatically, using Al-
gorithm 1, which parses the \slist" output and assigns execution order number
to atomic blocks nested arbitrary deep inside a subsystem.
We use this execution order to release the discrete and continuous time blocks
during initialization in the UPPAAL model, and to arbiter their execution at

--- Page 5 ---
(a) Pattern for discrete blocks
 (b) Pattern for continuous blocks
Fig. 1: Our used TA patterns
Algorithm 1 Flattening algorithm for slist.
1:function atten(String currentBlockId, String currentBlockOrderNo, String parentBlockO-
rderNo)
2: orderedList emptyList . Ordered list containing blocks IDs.
3: ifisAtomicBlock (currentBlockId )then .The current block is atomic.
4: orderedList:append (parentBlockOrderNo:concat (currentBlockOrderNo ))
5: else .The current block is a subsystem.
6: currentChildren  getChildren (currentBlockId )
7: concatenatedParentId  parentBlockOrderNo:concat (currentBlockOrderNo )
8: for all child in currentChildren do
9: orderedList:append (flatten (child:id; child:orderNo; concatenatedParentId ))
10: return orderedList
times when two or more blocks are ready to execute. Also, to assure the data
integrity and predictability in the model we provide transformation for the Rate-
Transition blocks.
Verifying UPPAAL Simulink Block Routines With Dafny. We use Dafny
[4], a language and program verier, to prove the functional correctness of the
block routines encoded as C functions in UPPAAL. Below we present an example
that shows verication of simple block routine using Dafny.
Rounding is one of the fundamental operations in Simulink, with several
variants including rounding to oor, ceiling, x, etc. In this example, we consider
the oor variation of the function for non-negative real numbers. Due to space
limitation, we omit the encoding of the function and present only the assertions
that are used for proving the correctness. By using the Dafny, we establish the
correctness of the function by checking the following pre- and postconditions,
denoted as requires and ensures , respectively: \requires input0.0",\ensures 0.0
(input - output) <1.0", where output2Z0. We use the same approach to verify
the correctness of all Simulink block behaviors that we encode as C functions in
UPPAAL.
4 Application on Industrial Use Cases: Results
The proposed transformation has been validated on two industrial use cases,
namely the Brake-by-Wire (BBW) industrial prototype, and the Adjustable
Speed Limiter operational system. In this section we provide a brief overview of
our results.
The BBW Use Case. The BBW system is a braking system equipped with an
ABS function, and without any mechanical connection between the brake pedal

--- Page 6 ---
and the brake actuators. A sensor reads the pedal's position, which is used to
compute the desired brake torque. At each wheel, the ABS algorithm decides
whether to apply the brake torque based on the slip rate. When the slip rate
increases above 0.2, the friction coecient of the wheel starts decreasing. For
this reason, if the slip rate is greater than 0.2 the brake actuator is released and
no brake is applied, otherwise the requested brake torque is used. The BBW
system has a set of 13 functional and 4 timing requirements that need to be
veried. Here, we present two such requirements, in natural language:
R1BBW(End-to-end deadline): The time needed for a brake request to prop-
agate from the brake pedal sensor to the wheel actuator should not exceed
200 ms.
R2BBW(Functional requirement): If the slip rate exceeds 0.2, then the ap-
plied brake torque shall be set to 0.
Transformation. The hierarchical Simulink model for the BBW system con-
sists of 320 blocks, out of which only 174 are computational blocks. The re-
maining 146 blocks dene the structure of the model (e.g., Subsystem, Inport,
Outport, From, Goto, Reference) and they are removed during the attening.
Consequently, the transformation provides a network of 174 TA. In this network,
only 10 automata have continuous-time behavior, while the rest compute output
only at sample times.
Fig. 2: BBW's Monitor Automaton.
Verication. In order to verify the system properties mentioned above, we
have implemented a Monitor automaton that follows the propagation of data
throughout the system, from sensors to actuators. It relies on the denition of
an array of broadcast channels trigg[N] , with N2[1, 174] . Each TA in the net-
work broadcasts the message trigg[own id]!when it performs a new computation
blockRutine() , and the Monitor receives these messages in a predened order. For
own idwe have used the predened sorted number, since it is unique for each
TA. Figure 2 presents an excerpt of the Monitor implemented for requirements
R1BBW andR2BBW .
For the BBW system we have veried all functional and timing requirements.
In Table 1 we provide concrete verication results for requirements R1BBW and
R2BBW .

--- Page 7 ---
Table 1: Overall Results of Statistical Model Checking.
Req. Query Result Runs
R1BBWPr[Monitor:x < = 200]( <> Monitor:End )Probability2[0.902606, 1]
with condence 0.9536
R2BBWPr[Monitor:x < = 200]([] Monitor:Wheel Probability2[0.900924, 1] 42
and Monitor:slipRate > 0:2and with condence 0.975
Monitor:torque == 0)
The ASL Use Case. ASL is used to limit the truck speed to not exceed a
maximum speed set by the driver. The driver normally enables and disables
the function using control buttons located on the dashboard, and the freewheel.
However, ASL can also be disabled when the accelerator pedal is pressed beyond
a hard point, or the truck is subjected to overspeed, for example, in downhill,
or becomes faulty during operation. ASL implements around 300 requirements,
and is modeled using 4845 Simulink blocks, of which 2835 are non virtual blocks.
We limit our verication to ASL Engine Manager ( ASL-EM ), which is a logical
component, and an interface to the power-train of the truck's engine. It en-
ables several functions of the truck, e.g., engine start and stop, climate control,
fuel economy strategy, and road speed limitation. In our case study, we have
transformed 94 non-virtual Simulink blocks, and veried all their functional and
timing requirements. Examples of the ASL requirements are: (i) R1ASL(Min.
speed limit): The ASL-EM controller shall be able to handle road speed limit
requests down to 5 km/h, (ii) R2ASL(Lowest speed limit): When several road
speed limit sources are active at the same time, ASL-EM shall use the low-
est speed limit value, (iii) R3ASL(Max. latency): The maximum latency of the
ASL-EM block shall be 20 ms.
5 Discussion and Conclusions
In this paper, we have introduced a pattern-based transformation of discrete- and
continuous-time Simulink blocks into networks of stochastic timed automata.
The approach is motivated by the industry's need of increasing the assurance of
vehicular systems developed using Simulink, and the limited coverage obtained
by employing the SDV for verication. Applying our approach on the BBW
and ASL-EM systems has provided improved scalability for verication, that is,
we have analyzed statistically the complete Simulink models, but we have also
encountered concrete challenges and limitations, as follows:
1. The formal model needs to obey the same execution order as the Simulink one.
For this, we have enforced the sorted order as generated by Simulink, which is
usually respected during execution, except for block methods (blocks operating at
the same rate and in the same task). These exceptions need to also be taken into
account during the transformation.
2. Simulink allows for the integration of code in the model by using S-function . In
our transformation, we do not provide direct means to verify this code. We view
such components as \black boxes", modeled based on their dened mask and not
the code itself.

--- Page 8 ---
3. Simulink lacks the possibility for modeling the timing behavior of the system (be-
yond the sample time), thus limiting the formal verication of extra-functional
requirements. By pairing the Simulink model with an architectural model that
allows for the representation of a wide set of extra-functional properties (such as
timing behavior and possibly resource consumption), the transformation and the
verication could provide a deeper insight to the engineers. Moreover, in the current
version of our transformation, we have not exploited the full power of UPPAAL
SMC. We have used TA with stochastic behavior, rather than stochastic HA. This
is due to the fact that for more complex blocks (e.g., Derivative, Integrator) we
have chosen to use the numerical approximation performed by Simulink, instead
of implementing the function directly in UPPAAL SMC. This modeling decision
will be further investigated.
Acknowledgement
This work was funded by the Swedish Governmental Agency for Innovation Systems
(VINNOVA) under the VeriSpec project 2013-01299.
References
1. J. B. Dabney and T. L Harman. Mastering Simulink . Pearson/Prentice Hall, 2004.
2. B. Boyer, K. Corre, A. Legay, and S. Sedwards. Plasma-lab: A exible, distributable
statistical model checking library. In QEST , pages 160{164. Springer, 2013.
3. Alexandre David, K.G. Larsen, A. Legay, M. Miku cionis, and D.B. Poulsen. Uppaal
smc tutorial. STTT Journal , 17(4):397{415, 2015.
4. K. Rustan M. Leino. Dafny: An automatic program verier for functional correct-
ness. In LPAR'10 , pages 348{370. Springer, 2010.
5. J. Barnat, J. Beran, L. Brim, T. Kratochv la, and P. Ro ckai. Tool chain to Support
Automated Formal Verication of Avionics Simulink Designs. In FMICS , pages
78{92. Springer, 2012.
6. B Meenakshi, A. Bhatnagar, and S. Roy. Tool for Translating Simulink Models
into Input Language of a Model Checker. In ICFEM , pages 606{620. Springer,
2006.
7. A. Agrawal, G. Simon, and G. Karsai. Semantic Translation of Simulink/Stateow
Models to Hybrid Automata using Graph Transformations. ENTCS Journal ,
109:43{56, 2004.
8. Steven P. Miller. Bridging the Gap Between Model-Based Development and Model
Checking. In TACAS , pages 443{453. Springer, 2009.
9. K. Manamcheri, S. Mitra, S. Bak, and M Caccamo. A Step Towards Verica-
tion and Synthesis From Simulink/Stateow Models. In HSCC'11 , pages 317{318.
ACM, 2011.
10. Y. Jiang, Y. Yang, H. Liu, H. Kong, M. Gu, J. Sun, and L. Sha. From Stateow
Simulation to Veried Implementation: A Verication Approach and A Real-Time
Train Controller Design. In RTAS'16 , pages 1{11, April 2016.
11. A. Legay and L.M. Traonouez. Statistical Model Checking of Simulink Models
with Plasma Lab. In FTSCS'15 , pages 259{264. Springer, 2015.
12. A. David, D. Du, K.G. Larsen, A. Legay, M. Miku cionis, D.B. Poulsen, and S. Sed-
wards. Statistical Model Checking for Stochastic Hybrid Systems. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1208.3856 , 2012.
13. K.G. Larsen, P. Pettersson, and W. Yi. UPPAAL in a Nutshell. STTT Journal ,
1(1):134{152, 1997.

--- Page 9 ---
14. P. Bulychev, A. David, K.G. Larsen, A. Legay, G. Li, and D.B. Poulsen. Rewrite-
based Statistical Model Checking of WMTL. In RV Conference , pages 260{275.
Springer, 2012.
