--- Page 1 ---
Aalborg Universitet
Modelling and Analysis of a Sigfox based IoT Network using UPPAAL SMC
Naeem, Muhammad; Albano, Michele; Larsen, Kim G.; Nielsen, Brian; Høedholt, Anders;
Laursen, Christian Ø.
Published in:
IEEE Sensors Journal
DOI (link to publication from Publisher):
10.1109/JSEN.2023.3261667
Publication date:
2023
Document Version
Accepted author manuscript, peer reviewed version
Link to publication from Aalborg University
Citation for published version (APA):
Naeem, M., Albano, M., Larsen, K. G., Nielsen, B., Høedholt, A., & Laursen, C. Ø. (2023). Modelling and
Analysis of a Sigfox based IoT Network using UPPAAL SMC. IEEE Sensors Journal, 23(10), 10577-10587.
https://doi.org/10.1109/JSEN.2023.3261667
General rights
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright owners
and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
            - Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the public portal for the purpose of private study or research.
            - You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit-making activity or commercial gain
            - You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the public portal -
Take down policy
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us at vbn@aub.aau.dk providing details, and we will remove access to
the work immediately and investigate your claim.
Downloaded from vbn.aau.dk on: March 31, 2026

--- Page 2 ---
IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. XX, NO. XX, XXXX 2017 1
Modelling and Analysis of a Sigfox based IoT
Network using UPPAAL SMC
Muhammad Naeem, Michele Albano, Kim G. Larsen,
Brian Nielsen, Anders Høedholt and Christian Ø. Laursen
Water Monitering System
UsingSMCModeling& Analysis
Abstract — Wireless sensor nodes are usually powered by batteries
that have limited energy capacity. In many applications, the nodes
are installed in inaccessible locations where they are problematic
to replace or recharge. Therefore, energy optimisation is crucial for
increasing the node’s lifetime. This study presents a method for the
analysis and prediction of the energy consumption of Sigfox-based
Wireless Sensor Nodes. The method is illustrated in a use case
where the nodes monitor the water level in drainage lines in cities to
improve surface and wastewater management. We propose a formal
model-based technique using the U PPAAL Statistical model checker
tool to model and analyse the node’s lifetime. Statistical model
checking provides a highly scalable technique for performance
analysis of complex cyber-physical systems. The model captures the energy-related behaviour of the node, the Sigfox
radio specification, and the sensor, each parameterised with values from the device’s datasheets. Furthermore, we
calibrate the model using measurements obtained from real-world hardware. Finally, we evaluate a collection of strategies
to optimise the battery lifetime of the node. We simulate the model with a 10,000 mAh battery, and the results indicate that
we can extend the node’s lifetime from 202 days to 2.71 years using our most optimised transmission strategy.
Index Terms — Battery lifetime, Wireless sensor nodes, LPWAN, Design space exploration, Statistical model checking,
Optimised transmission strategies
I. INTRODUCTION
RAPID developments in the Internet of Things (IoT) are
increasing its applications and deployments. The IoT
includes various wireless sensor nodes deployed in different
environments to collect data. The number of deployed IoT
devices has grown dramatically, and a research study expected
it to be in the range of tens of billions by the end of 2021 [1].
The sensor nodes are often battery-operated and typically
deployed in remote and harsh environments where charging
or replacing their batteries is inconvenient and expensive.
Therefore, it is crucial to optimise the node’s lifetime by de-
veloping efficient data processing and transmission strategies.
Low-Power Wide-Area Network (LPWAN) protocols such as
Sigfox, NB-IoT and LoRaWAN were developed to fulfil the
criteria of IoT networks [2], [3], [4]. These protocols provide
low data rate long-range communication while guaranteeing a
very low energy consumption.
The Donut project (Distributed Online monitoring of the
The manuscript is submitted on Monday 20thMarch, 2023. Research
funded in part by the Danish Innovationsfonden agency (DoNUT project,
grant nr. 7076-00123B), and it is part of the Validation WP of the ERC
Advanced Grant LASSO (Learning, Analysis, Synthesis and Optimisa-
tion of Cyber-Physical Systems).
Muhammad Naeem, Michele Albano, Kim G. Larsen and Brian
Nielsen are affiliated with Aalborg University, Denmark (e-mails:
mnaeem, mialb, kgl, bnielsen ;@cs.aau.dk). Anders Høedholt and Chris-
tian Ø. Laursen are affiliated with MONTEM A/S, Aarhus, Denmark (e-
mails: a.hoedholt, c.laursen ;@montem.io).Urban water cycle) [5] developed a Sigfox-based sensor net-
work and deployed it in drainage pipelines for monitoring the
water level. The increased understanding of the water flow
enabled by this sensor network may improve the sustainability
of cities by, e.g., preventing overflow scenarios, planning
the development and maintenance of the drainage system,
and locating sources of floods. The sensors were powered
by batteries, and replacing them often was not an option
since it represented a time-consuming (and expensive) effort.
Using energy harvesting techniques was unfeasible in most
deployment sites: solar panels on sewerage manhole covers
must be rigid enough to bear the potential automotive and
pedestrian traffic load; separate solar panels require wiring
and are vulnerable to vandalism; energy harvesting from the
water flow will cause the generator to clog; vibration can not
produce sufficient energy for this use case. Thus, optimising
the sensor’s energy usage became a priority to extend the
lifetime of the sensor network.
In [6], we developed energy models of the designed pro-
totype of the Sigfox-based sensor node to be used with
Statistical Model Checking (SMC) [7], which allows eval-
uating the performance of probabilistic systems. We used
the U PPAAL SMC model checking tool [8] to estimate the
sensor node’s operational lifetime with a given battery and
provide an insightful breakdown of energy consumption in
different system states. Furthermore, we investigated different
transmission strategies and their impact on the sensor node’s

--- Page 3 ---
2 IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. XX, NO. XX, XXXX 2017
lifetime.
This paper presents the revised and extended version of our
prior work, overcoming a threshold problem due to weaving
in water level and data error rate in the data compression
strategy. We overcome the threshold problem by increasing
the threshold level and applying Low Pass Filter(LPF) on
measured data. Further, we simulate the model for multiple
data sets obtained from sensor nodes deployed geographically
in different locations to investigate the data compression
strategy’s effectiveness and calculate a more realistic average
lifetime of a sensor node. We propose a new strategy that
combines the effects of the previous ones. It also includes the
detailed model of the case study as well as an example in
UPPAAL SMC for a better demonstration. When evaluating
the designed model with a 10,000mAh battery, our results
indicate that we can extend the node’s lifetime from 202 days
to 2.71 years using our proposed transmission strategies.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows: Section II
reviews previous work and introduces the Sigfox protocol and
UPPAAL SMC. Section III describes the Donut case study.
Section IV presents our modelling in U PPAAL SMC. Section
V thoroughly examines our investigations and their outcomes.
Finally, Section VI draws conclusions on the topic at hand.
II. B ACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
This section presents the background for the results pre-
sented in the paper. In particular, it discusses related work
and describes the Sigfox protocol and the U PPAAL toolset.
A. Related work
Some studies that address energy analysis of the Sigfox
protocol exist, and they present simulation results or analytical
models to predict the battery lifetime of a Sigfox-based net-
work [3], [9]–[14], either using power characteristics described
in datasheets, or measurements from the hardware implemen-
tation. Simple analytical models are often too abstract and risk
missing essential nuances, resulting in unduly conservative or
pessimistic projections.
In model-based development, abstract models are used to
analyse the system’s behaviour. One goal is to make this
analysis early in the development cycle prior to actual imple-
mentation to reduce the cost of finding and correcting defects.
A further goal is to explore different designs and strategies
without needing costly development, coding and tests. The
present work follows these ideas.
In [15], David et al. used U PPAAL SMC for energy-aware
analyses of the Lightweight Media Access Control protocol
(LMAC). Panigrahi et al. [16] used probabilistic algorithms to
predict the battery life of remote embedded devices. Using the
IEEE 802.16e standard, Xue et al. created an optimised energy
protocol for mobile stations and used the SMC technique for
verification and performance analysis of the protocol [17].
Model-checking is a class of formal techniques focused
on designing, comparing and evaluating the correctness of
systems [18]. Model-checking has been successfully used in
many application areas [19]–[21] and has proven particularly
useful in the early design stages when only a model or a
Radio Communication in Star Topology IP Based Network 
ULDLSigfox NodesSigfox BaseStationsSigfox CloudIoTPlatformsRadio Communication in Star TopologyIP Based NetworkFig. 1 : Basic Architecture of the Sigfox network [6]
AtmegaEEPROMTPS780TDL_WIN_START20 Sec25 SecTack1.4-4Sec1.12 -2.08 Sec1.12 SecUplink(UL) FrameUL frame Replicas are OptionalDownlink (DL) FrameUL Control For Receive ConfirmationListening  Window for DownlinkTIFU10-2000 m Sec1.12 -2.08 SecTIFU500-525 m Sec(a)(b)TimeTimeTIFP>= 10 m SecTIFP>= 10 m SecProcedurePProcedureP +1ProcedurePProcedureP +1
Fig. 2 : Sigfox Procedures. (a) Uni-directional, (b) Bi-
directional. [13]
blueprint of the product is available. SMC is an extension of
model checking that focus on performance analysis of complex
probabilistic systems [7].
Our model is based on the system’s detailed realistic be-
haviour as described by a stochastic state-based formalism.
The results are generated using the SMC technique, which
produces statistically correct model sampling. The designed
model includes all relevant energy-consuming states to reflect
the system’s behaviour realistically; we also include the battery
self-discharge, which was not included in previous studies.
This literature review concludes that our study [6] is the
first that uses model-checking approaches to analyse the
Sigfox protocol. This requires a model but supports automated
correctness checking thereof and especially avoids the pro-
gramming cost and effort of a dedicated simulator.
B. Sigfox
Sigfox is a LPWAN protocol [2]. It is a patented network
developed and operated by the Sigfox company. Figure 1
depicts the basic architecture of the Sigfox network, which is
similar to the cellular network; each end node device directly
communicates with the base station through a radio frequency
link. From there, it is forwarded via IP based network to
the IoT platform. Sigfox is primarily designed for M2M IoT
applications with low data rates communication [22].
The Sigfox specifications vary by region. This case study
is focused on the European region [23]. In Europe, it offers
frequency bands from 868-868.6 MHz and 869.4−869.65
MHz for transmission. The transmission baud rate is 100 bps

--- Page 4 ---
M.NAEEM et al. : MODELLING AND ANAL YSIS OF A SIGFOX BASED IOT NETWORK USING UPPAAL SMC (OCTOBER 2022) 3
for uplink (UL) and 600 bps for downlink (DL). Sigfox uses
Ultra NarrowBand radio communication to achieve a long-link
transmission with less power consumption.
A Sigfox node can send up to 6UL messages per hour
(144 messages/day) with up to 12bytes of payload each
and receive up to 4 8-byte DL messages/day. The Sigfox
protocol supports two types of communication procedures:
Unidirectional Procedure (UDP) and Bidirectional Procedure
(BDP), see Figure 2. Using a UDP, a node sends a UL frame
with max two replica frames. These replica frames are optional
and may be sent to reduce packet loss probability. A small
inter-packet delay TIFU is used between the UL frames, and
the node can start the next procedure after a minimum delay
ofTIFP. In a BDP, a node sends UL frames similar to the
UDP, and it also opens a listening window for 25 sec with a
delay of TDLWIN START from the end of the first UL of the
procedure. The node sends a control UL frame with a delay
ofTackfor a receive confirmation. A node uses a control bit
in the UL frame to select a procedure.
In Sigfox, only the node can initiate the communication,
and it listens only after transmitting a message through a
bidirectional procedure. So, the node can stay in sleep mode
for up to 90% of the time to minimise energy consumption
[22].
C. Statistical Model Checking (SMC) using UPPAAL SMC
SMC is an innovative technique introduced initially by
Younes et al. [24] and Koushik et al. [7]. SMC is being
used to estimate the qualitative and quantitative properties
of probabilistic systems. It avoids the exhaustive state-space
exploration problem of classic model checking, and it is less
memory and time intensive comparatively. The basic idea of
SMC is to create sufficient sample execution paths (runs) for a
model and verify the model’s formally specified requirements
using statistical hypothesis testing and efficient probability
estimation techniques. The runs are typically generated from
a model with precise stochastic semantics. The runs may be
generated using discrete-event simulation techniques , and they
may be generated by existing discrete-event simulator tools
[25].
UPPAAL SMC is an extension of the U PPAAL model
checker [8]. It represents a system using networks of priced
timed automata, and the automata model’s behaviour depends
on stochastic and non-linear dynamical properties.
1) Modelling in UPPAAL SMC : The modelling formalism of
classic U PPAAL is timed automata [26], [27]. The U PPAAL
tool offers a graphical user interface to describe a system
as a network of concurrent timed automata. Each automaton
instance is referred to as a process. A timed automaton is an
extended state machine that is equipped with special variables
called clocks, that advance automatically with a rate of 1. As
shown in Figure 3, there are two basic model elements, a
location and an edge (so-called transition) to specify states
and actions, respectively. A location is represented by a
circle; an initial state is indicated by a double lined circle.
A location can be committed as well (denoted by a ”C”
Fig. 3 : Example model (Measurement action part of the main
model)
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5
Time (days)00.511.522.533.54Value107
n_measure*(5000)
n_mesr_faulty*(500000)
battery
E_msr*(10)
Fig. 4 : Simulation results of example model. The value on
y-axis represents counts for nmeasure andnmesr faulty , and
charge in mAh for battery andEmsr
in the location) which means that transitions from this state
are executed without interleaving the action from other (non-
committed) states. In other words actions from a committed
state get priority w.r.t. non-committed states. This allows the
easy description of atomic sequences. The purpose of an
edge is to take some action. An edge may be guarded, i.e.,
executable if the edge condition evaluates to true. Executing
an action may update variables and clocks and communicate
with other process(es). Processes use synchronous channels
for communication. A sender and a receiver processes use ‘ !’
and ‘ ?’ signs, respectively with the relevant channel name.
Timed automata have formal semantics, and U PPAAL can
verify formally whether functional requirements are satisfied
by the model. The U PPAAL SMC is an extension of U PPAAL
classic, and it uses stochastic hybrid automata [8] to model
a system. In addition to the U PPAAL classic, it allows prob-
abilistic weights to model the probabilistic choice between
transitions (dotted lines). Furthermore, the clock rate can be
controlled by means of ordinary differential equations.
Figure 3 shows a part of the node model automaton de-
scribed in section IV-A to exemplify how systems are modelled
within the U PPAAL SMC framework. The example model has
three states and some transition actions between them. It mod-
els measuring water levels with a frequency of one minute. The
initial state is committed, so the model immediately moves
to the standby state after executing the variable assignments
in the transition. The system remains in the standby state
and moves to the Measure state when it needs to measure a
value. Here is a probabilistic transition to the Measure state,

--- Page 5 ---
4 IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. XX, NO. XX, XXXX 2017
Digital AccelerometerAtmegaEEPROMTPS780Ultrasonic SensorMB7360Sigfox TransceiverTD1208-RAtmega Controller328/PEEPROMCAT24M01Digital Accelerometer ADXL345-EPBattery (10,000 mAh)Regulator(TPS780)
Fig. 5 : Basic Hardware Architecture of the Sensor Node [6]
expressing that a sensor measurement is faulty with weight
one and correct with weight 99. cis a local clock variable
that controls the time spent in each state. Battery[id] is a
clock variable indicating the remaining energy level, and its
value decreases with each passing time unit with the rate of
current consumption value in the particular state. n-measure
represents the number of taken measurements, and E-msr
represents the energy cost in the measuring state.
The query ” Simulate Query : simulate N
[<=bound]{E1, .., Ek} ” was executed in U PPAAL SMC
on the model shown in Figure 3 for a bound of four days
duration to visualise the behaviour of the n_mesr _faulty ,
n_measure ,E_msr andbattery[id] variables, and it led to
generating the plot shown in Figure 4.
III. C ASE STUDY
A project of the Donut project partner, the Montem com-
pany, has built a prototype of a DWSN. Figure 5 depicts the
basic hardware architecture of the prototype. As traditional
water flow meters tend to clog when applied to sewage
water, an ultrasonic sensor [28] is used to measure the water
level. The Atmega controller [29] processes the burst of
measurements, filters them to compute a water-level value for
every measurement cycle and stores it in the EEPROM. These
measurements are transmitted to the base station through the
Sigfox transceiver (TD1207R/08R) [30]. The purpose of the
digital accelerometer [31] is to facilitate positioning the sensor
node in the correct position. Table I presents the DC power
characteristics of all hardware components obtained from their
datasheets. We considered the latest Sigfox radio specification
EP-SPECS-1.5 presented in Feb 2020 [23].
IV. I MPLEMENTATION IN UPPAAL SMC
The energy-aware analysis of a Sigfox Sensor Node (SSN)
is the main objective of this case study. The SSN controls
its communication with the Sigfox base station, and the rest
of the network does not affect the battery consumption of a
sensor node. So, the designed model only considers all major
energy-consuming activities associated with the SSN instead
of the complete network.
To optimise the node operational lifetime on a given battery,
we later in the section model four different transmission
strategies: Greedy ,Optimised Listening ,Weather-driven ,
Data Compression , and Combined Data Compression and
Weather-driven .
Transmission Strategies Scheduler  DataCompressionOptimisedListeningWeather/Rain GreedySensor NodeSelf-Discharge Initial Fig. 6 : Basic structure of the designed model in U PPAAL SMC
Our model consists of several sub-models interconnected
using channels and shared global variables. The high-level
structure is shown in Figure 6.
Four basic process automatons ( Initial, Sensor Node
, Scheduler, and Self-Discharge ) model the behaviour
of the SSN. Two further strategy control process automa-
tons ( Weather Driven and Data compression ) represent
the transmission strategies. The Optimised Listening and
Worst-Case Strategies are part of the Scheduler automa-
ton; we simulate these strategies by modifying the values
of the variables that regulate the sending and measuring
frequency.
TheInitial automaton aims to trigger all other processes
to an active state by using the begin! synchronous channel
and initialising all variables and clocks.
A. Sensor-Node process automaton
Figure 7 depicts the Node automaton. It represents the major
states ( Sleep ,Standby ,Sending ,Listening andMeasure )
and activities of the WSN. Normally, a node stays in Sleep
state and moves to the Standby state when it needs to perform
an action, be it either Sending ,Listening orMeasure . After
completing an action, it moves to the Standby state if any
other activity is scheduled; otherwise, it moves to the Sleep
state. Lastly, it reaches the Depleted state when the battery
level approaches zero.
In the node automaton, the battery[id] is a clock indicat-
ing the remaining energy level. idenables the simulation of
multiple nodes. Its value decreases with each passing time unit
with the rate of current consumption value depending on the
particular state. Table I summarises the current consumption
of each state. In our model, the base time unit is deci-second
(ds) to avoid floating point values from the conditions on
clocks because the U PPAAL tool else becomes unnecessarily
slow. The value of battery[id] decreases by 4750mAds
(1.32mAh ) when a node spends 250dsin the listening state
and consumes 19mA for each time unit. Table II describes the
variables used in the Node automaton.
An incorrect measurement by the sensor has a 1%chance
of occurring. With the Measure state, we add a probabilistic
transition to reflect this behaviour. When the measured value
is incorrect, the node measures it again.

--- Page 6 ---
M.NAEEM et al. : MODELLING AND ANAL YSIS OF A SIGFOX BASED IOT NETWORK USING UPPAAL SMC (OCTOBER 2022) 5
TABLE I : DC Power Supply Characteristics of hardware
Sym DescriptionSigfox Ultrasonic
sensorAtmega Digital
AccelerometerOverall Measured
values Min Max Min Max
VDD Supply V oltages 3.3V - 3.3V
ISleep Sleep Current 1.5µA 3.5µA 0 0.75µA 0.1µA 2.35µA 4.35µA 27.84µA
IRX Receive Mode Current 13mA 16mA 0 0.2mA 0.1µA 13.2mA 16.2mA 19.05mA
ITX Transmission Mode Current 50mA 50mA 0 0.2mA 0.1µA 50.2mA - 47.03mA
IApp Continues Application Current 10µA 10µA 0 0.2mA 0.1µA 210.01µA - 4300µA
IMsr Data Measuring Current 2.55mA 3.45mA 3.1mA 0.2mA 23µA 5.873mA 6.773mA 6.58mA
Fig. 7 : Node automaton model [6]
TABLE II : Variables used in Node automaton. C, D, and B
represents clock, double and boolean variable, respectively
Variable & Type Description
Battery CRepresents the battery level of sensor node
c CIt is used to record the time spent in a state
r CIt adds a 20s delay for the listening.
M_Time D
It represents overall time spent inmeasuring state
S_Time D sending state
R_Time D listening state
Stand _Time D standby state
Sleep _Time D sleep state
E_msr D
It represents overall energy spent inmeasuring state
E_send D Sending state
E_lstn D listening state
E_standby D standby state
E_sleep D sleep state
IPD DIt is used as inter-packet delay in UL frames replicas
AckDly DIt’s a time delay between DL and confirmation UL
mesr[id] B
It is used to controlmeasuring action
send[id] B sending action
recv[id] B listening action
B. Self-Discharge process automaton
This automaton models the behaviour of the battery self-
discharge. In our case, the battery consumes around 3%of
its electrical charge every month [32]. The model reducesapproximately 0.1%of its energy as self-discharge every 24
hour based on Equation 1, corresponding to 3%in a month.
battery [id] =battery [id]−sdcrate[id]∗
(battery [id]/sdc time[id])∗1∗day (1)
sdcrate[id] =Self −DischargeRate = 3% = 0 .03
sdctime[id] =Self −DischargeTime = 1∗month
UPPAAL SMC can model more advanced battery models
such as a Kinetic Battery Model (KiBaM) [33], but we do not
use them, as our use-case does not have any intense current
draw.
C. Scheduler process automaton
Figure 8 presents the scheduler automaton; it controls
all activities of the node using boolean variables ( recv[id
], send[id] and mesr[id] ) depending on the transmission
strategy. The node actions are guarded with these variables,
and it uses r,s and mlocal clocks to schedule listening,
sending and measuring, respectively, and uses tclock to
reset the UL and DL frames counters after every 24hour.
The counters are used to abide by the Sigfox transmission
restrictions.

--- Page 7 ---
6 IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. XX, NO. XX, XXXX 2017
Fig. 8 : Scheduler automaton model
To implement the Data compression strategy, we have
modified the scheduler automaton to add two checks on
the sending action shown in Figure 8. The first check is the
minimum delay between two ULs because there is a restricted
count/day. The scheduler enables ready (a boolean variable)
10min after sending a UL frame, which indicates that the node
is ready to send. The second check is diff (a boolean variable)
which is enabled by the Data compression process when it
measures a significant variation in water level compared to
the last sent value.
A transition is added with the ready state in the scheduler
automaton to implement the Weather-Driven Strategy. Using
this transition, the scheduler automaton is communicating
with the Weather-Driven automaton using a channel update[
SendTime][MsrTime]? to update the sending and measuring
frequency based on the weather prediction.
D. Greedy strategy
TheGreedy is a worst-case strategy; it simulates the SSN
model for the maximum functional capacity of the Sigfox
protocol. It schedules 144 UL (followed by BDP) and 4DL
frames per day at a max transmission power of 16dBm ,
measuring water level every minute. All UL frames follow
BDP; the gateway can respond to any UL frame within the
restricted number of DL/Day.
E. Optimised listening strategy
Our results show that the Sigfox node spends 38% of its
energy in the listening state while using the Greedy strategy.
We propose that it can be optimised by avoiding BDP as
much as feasible. The Optimised Listening strategy suggests
scheduling only four UL frames following BDP per day.
F . Weather-Driven strategy process automaton
The amount of rain that falls in a given area significantly
influences the water level in the pipes. We propose a Weather-
driven strategy based on weather prediction information for
the study region (Odense, Denmark), namely the chance of
forecasted rainy and dry weather over the year. The strategy
controls the number of UL frames and measurements based
on weather prediction. It schedules sending and measuring
operations every 10min and1min for rainy and every 30min
Fig. 9 : Weather-Driven strategy process automaton model
and3min for dry weather. In the weather-driven model, a
Sigfox node schedules up to four DL messages in a day and
receives the weather forecast, which can be either rainy or
dry. The weather-driven strategy has an advantage over the
data compression strategy, where a node reduces its measuring
frequency for dry days.
Figure 9 depicts the automaton model for weather predic-
tion, using the probability of 0.4642 and0.5358 for rainy and
dry weather, respectively, as per [34]. The weather forecast has
about 30% probability of being incorrect [35]. We model this
behaviour using a probabilistic choice of rainy or dry weather.
After both options, there is again a probabilistic choice; the
prediction could be correct or wrong. The automaton updates
the sending and measuring frequency for rainy and dry weather
to the scheduler using the update! channel.
G. Data-Compression strategy process automaton
The aim of implementing a data compression strategy is
to avoid sending unnecessary information. The base model
collects a measurement every minute and sends all these
measurements to the gateway every 10min. Most of the time,
the variation in water height is not that frequent, and we have
the same value in multiple measurements.
A simple (lossy) compression approach is to send a UL
frame only when measuring a significant variation in water
level compared to the last measurement sent to the gateway.
Even though its name can be deceiving, this strategy does not
apply a traditional compression algorithm. Instead, it sends
measured value(s) only when they are significantly different
from the last previously sent value. The rest of the measure-
ments are not sent. Using this strategy, we are reducing the
number of UL frames and the payload size in each frame.
To evaluate the effect of this strategy, we use data sets
of measurements generated from WSN hardware operating
in a real environment. Figure 10 depicts an automaton for
data processing. It measures a value every min from the
data set, and it enables a diff variable when it notices a
significant variation in the measured value. The scheduler
enables sending a message only when both ready anddiff
variables are true.
H. Combined Data Compression and Weather-driven
Strategy
The data compression strategy described in the previous
section optimises the sending frequency by avoiding sending
unnecessary information to the base station, but it measures

--- Page 8 ---
M.NAEEM et al. : MODELLING AND ANAL YSIS OF A SIGFOX BASED IOT NETWORK USING UPPAAL SMC (OCTOBER 2022) 7
Fig. 10 : Data automaton model
5400 5600 5800 6000 6200 6400 6600
Time (ds)0102030405060 Current Consumption (mA)Current Consumption
Fig. 11 : Current consumption graph of the Sensor Node with
Greedy Strategy
every minute. As shown in Table III, measuring state also con-
sumes significant energy. We can limit measuring frequency by
adding weather information in the data compression strategy
model.
V. S IMULATION RESULTS
This section presents results obtained from using the SSN
model within U PPAAL SMC. We compare our results with data
from other sources to check if the model agrees with them.
Furthermore, the different transmission strategies (described in
section IV) are evaluated.
A. Basic transmission cycle behaviour
Equation 2 simulates the basic model for 25min to monitor
the behaviour of the current consumption ( I) variable. As
described in section IV-A, the value of Iis updated for each
state based on current consumption on that state.
simulate [ <=25*min]{Sensor(0).I} (2)
Figure 11 presents the model’s current consumption be-
haviour for a few Sigfox cycles. The x-axis and y-axis of the
graph present the time in ds and current consumption in mA,
respectively. In the figure, small pulses show the measuring
050100150200250300350400Worst Case StrategyMeasuring frequency / 2Payload Size / 2Single UL without ReplicasListening frequency / 2Listening and sending frequency / 2Listening Once a day
Node Lifetime (Days)Fig. 12 : Battery lifetime comparison by changing different
protocol’s parameters [6]
activities; three consecutive pulses consuming around 50mA
are UL and its two replicas. Next follows the listening window,
followed by a receive confirmation UL. Hence, the basic duty
cycle behaviour is visualised.
B. Energy consumption by node’s states
Equation 3 in U PPAAL SMC calculates the overall energy
consumed in each model state. The formula uses the energy
variables described in table II.
simulate[ <=250](E _msr, E _send, E _lstn
,E_sleep, E _standby (3)
Table III shows the simulation results of energy consump-
tion by the different states for all strategies. In Table III,
we can observe that the most energy-consuming state within
the Greedy strategy is the listening state, where the node
needs to have its radio turned on for a long period of time.
Measuring is the second most energy-consuming state; in fact,
using an ultrasonic sensor requires activating an ultrasonic
transducer and issuing numerous radio waves — a relatively
energy-expensive operation. Finally, sending is also costly, but
here the radio is on for shorter bursts compared to listening.
The sleep and standby states require little energy, as one
would expect from a well-designed sensor node with a clear
active/inactive duty cycle.
Hence, three optimisations are possible: reduce listening,
measure less, and transmit less. In particular, it may be
inoptimal to spend around 38% of energy in a listening state
when only 4 DLs are possible in a day. Hence, an obvious
optimisation can revolve around coordinating the gateway and
node regarding when the DL messages may occur.
C. Effect of reducing different transmission parameters
Figure 12 investigates the node’s lifetime for the Greedy
strategy compared to the effect on lifetime by changing the
following parameters:
•Reduce listening, sending, and measuring frequencies to
half.
•Avoid sending replicas of ULs.
•Reduce the payload size 50%.

--- Page 9 ---
8 IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. XX, NO. XX, XXXX 2017
1.41 1.42 1.43 1.44 1.45
Time (ms) 10901020304050 Current Consumption (mA)Current Consumption
(a) UL’s and Listening Window
2.26 2.262 2.264 2.266 2.268
Time (ms) 10901020304050 Current Consumption (mA)Current Consumption (b) UL with 2 replicas
1.77 1.775 1.78 1.785
Time (ms) 1090510 Current Consumption (mA)Current Consumption (c) Measuring action
Fig. 13 : Current consumption graph generated from a hardware module of WSN operating in a real environment
We observe that reducing listening and sending have more
potential to increase the lifetime than limiting payload size and
limiting replication. Reducing measuring frequency is also an
important parameter, but there is a chance of losing important
information in that scenario. We can possibly optimise mea-
suring frequency by predicting water height based on weather
and water use patterns. The battery discharge curve is non-
linear because of battery self-discharge.
D. Comparison with actual power traces
In cooperation with the Montem company, we measured the
current consumption values of the WSN from the hardware
implementation. Figure 13 depicts the current consumption
graphs generated from the real hardware platform, where graph
(a) depicts three UL frames followed by a Listening window
for DL, graph (b) portrays a zoomed view of UL frames,
and graph (c) focuses on the measuring state. We calculate
the average current consumption values and the average time
required to perform different activities by analysing these
measurements.
Table I describes the min and max current consumption
statistics obtained from the hardware datasheets and aver-
age measured values from real hardware. We observe that
these values differ a little from the values obtained from the
datasheet. The real node consumes less energy in sending, but
it consumes more energy in all other states compared to the
datasheet values. In the listening state, it consumes even more
than the max energy consumption mentioned in the datasheet.
E. Calibrated model
We calibrate the designed model using hardware measure-
ments. Figure 14 presents the lifetime results from simulat-
ing the Greedy strategy, using in the model the minimum,
maximum (obtained from the datasheets) and measured power
characteristics. The Figure confirms that the model calibrated
with the measured values is consuming even more energy than
the model with max datasheet power ratings. The calibrated
model with the Greedy strategy differs the most because it
uses the BDP that involves more listening, and this is the
state where the calibrated data differs most significantly.
Comparing the results using the datasheet (a lifetime of
ca. 235 days) with using the calibrated values (lifetime ca.
215 days) gives a difference of 10%. So the results obtained
from using data sheet values only (not requiring hardware
construction) would still give usable results, particularly for
0 100 200 300
Time (days)0200040006000800010000Battery Level (mAh)Min
Max
MeasuredFig. 14 : Battery Consumption Graph For minimum, maximum
and measured power characteristics [6]
therelative effects of the different communication strategies.
All the following results are produced using the calibrated
models, i.e. using the values measured on the real hardware.
F . Effect of optimised listening strategy
In our case study, the gateway rarely needs to communicate
with the node. So we can schedule fixed time slots for
bi-directional communication, and the rest follows the uni-
direction procedure.
Figure 19(4th) depicts the model’s simulation results with
the optimised listening strategy. The figure shows that the
battery lifetime increases more than 100% . Table III shows that
the optimised listening strategy reduces the energy consumed
in the Listening state from 38% to2%during the entire
lifetime.
G. Effect of weather-driven strategy
Here, the transmission is based on rainy or dry weather
probability, so a range of battery lifetime is possible. Equation
4 simulates the lifetime of the model 200 times and predicts
an average value with an achieved confidence level of 0.95.
simulate [200 <=900 *day]{Sensor(0).lifetime} (4)
Figure 15 depicts the frequency histogram chart for the
expected lifetime of the model (737 to 756 days). The battery
discharge graph is shown in Figure 19(4th). The graph shows
that the battery lifetime increases up to 3 times from the
Greedy strategy. The disadvantage is of course insufficient
measurements taken in the situation where a wrong weather

--- Page 10 ---
M.NAEEM et al. : MODELLING AND ANAL YSIS OF A SIGFOX BASED IOT NETWORK USING UPPAAL SMC (OCTOBER 2022) 9
740 745 750 755
Node Lifetime (days)02040Count
Fig. 15 : Frequency Histogram of battery lifetime for weather-
driven strategy
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
Time (ds) 106-1000100200300400500ValueSent Measurments
Real Measurments
Difference of Real and Sent
ULs Counter
Fig. 16 : Comparison of measured and sent water height values
and effect of variation in water height on the frequency of UL
frames counter [6]
forecast predicts dry weather on a rainy day. This can be
alleviated by conducting some amount of extra measurements
and checking in the node that the water level is as expected
on a dry day, and then switching to more frequent sending if
a discrepancy is observed. The latter approach is a candidate
for future evaluation.
H. Effects of data compression strategy
We simulate the model with the data compression strategy
for a duration of 20days to investigate the effect of variation
in water height on the sending frequency since the data
compression strategy controls the sending frequency based on
the measurements. For this experiment, we have used data
streams generated from nodes operating in a real environment.
Each node measures the water height value on a given location
and sends data based on the data compression algorithm.
As expected, Figure 16 shows that the sending frequency
is increasing when measuring frequent variations in water
height. The figure also presents the error between measured
and sent values since, in this strategy, the model sends only
the measured values having a variation of at least 10mm from
the last sent value.
As shown in figure 17, some outlier data (erroneous ultra-
sonic measurements with very low water level) require sending
data even without significant variation in the real water level.
In order to prevent this inaccuracy, we remove the unrealistic
variations from the data, and we apply a low pass filter to
Number of MeasurmentsWater Height (mm)200250Measured Data
0 500 1000 1500220240260Lowpass FilterFig. 17 : Apply low-pass filter on measured dataset
Number of MeasurmentsError in Water Height (mm)02040
Average Error = 13.07
02040
Average Error = 9.70
02040
Average Error = 6.95
0 100 200 300 400 50002040
Average Error = 4.44
Fig. 18 : Difference error between measured and sent data
reduce the waving effect of the water from the data. The
modified data are shown in Figure 17.
Figure 19(1st) presents that applying a Low Pass Filter on
measured data improves the battery lifetime from 820 to 990
days by avoiding error variation in water level.
Because compression is lossy, there is a difference between
measured and sent data. This error is shown in the first graph
of Figure 18. We calculate an average error of 13.08mm in
water height. We could not employ other (traditional) data
compression techniques since the number of measurements
in a frame is unpredictable because it could be possible that
the model found a variation in water every 10 min, or there
could be no variation in a whole day. By applying a low pass
filter to the data, we can reduce the average error to 9.7mm.
Furthermore, we can reduce the error by sending multiple data
samples in a frame having the most significant difference in
the last duration. We have analysed a dataset to calculate the
effect of this workaround, which can differ for other scenarios.
The figure shows that sending two measured values from each
frame reduces the error to 6.95mm and can reduce up to
4.44mm by sending four values per frame.
We simulate the model to analyse the data compression
strategy, which is parameterised with the threshold that triggers
a UL transmission. A slight increase in the threshold level
reduces communication of the water waving behaviour which

--- Page 11 ---
10 IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. XX, NO. XX, XXXX 2017
Fig. 19 : (1st)Battery Lifetime for data compression strategy
after applying a Low Pass Filter; (2nd)Battery Lifetime for
data compression strategy with different threshold levels;
(3rd)Battery Lifetime for data compression strategy for mul-
tiple datasets; (4th)Battery Lifetime for all Strategies
we suspect is of low interest for the domain analysts. Figure
19(2nd) shows that the battery life slightly increases by
increasing the threshold level in the data compression strategy.
Furthermore, figure 19(3rd) depicts the model’s simulation
results with the data compression strategy for multiple datasets
obtained from sensor nodes for the periods 2021-01-01 to
2022-01-26, deployed geographically in different locations.
We investigate the data compression strategy’s effectiveness
and calculate the average lifetime. Figure 19(4th) illustrates
that the strategy has the potential to increase the battery
lifetime up to 4 times from the Greedy strategy. This simple
method for data compression is obviously less effective for
data sources with high variation in water level, as we have
observed in a few instances. For other simulations of data
compression strategy, we use a data set which gives an average
lifetime by comparing all datasets.
I. Effects of Combined Data Compression and
Weather-driven Strategy
It receives weather information from the base station,
similar to the weather-driven model, and selects measuringTABLE III : Energy Consumption in Each State (mAh)
Greedy Optimised
ListeningData
CompressionRain
Model
Battery Self Discharge 655.9 1690 2524.6 2072.2
Sleep 110.9 317.1 517.4 367.4
Standby 380.1 91.2 69.6 91.4
Sending 2378.4 4340.5 1049 3400.8
Listening 3841.1 272.3 399 314.3
Measuring 2633.3 3359.7 5440 3753.7
frequency based on weather conditions. It uses a data com-
pression strategy to enable sending. Figure 19(4th) presents
that the strategy can improve the battery lifetime from 820 to
985 days by optimising sending and measuring frequency.
J. Comparison of all strategies
This subsection compares the effects of all the strategies.
Table III presents the overall energy consumed by the battery
self-discharge and each sensor node state. Figure 19(4th)
depicts the battery lifetime graphs.
The graph reveals that the Greedy strategy model has a
lifetime of about 202 days, the optimised listening model
has a lifetime of about 388 days, the weather-driven model
has a lifetime of about 750 days, and the data compression
model has a lifetime of up to 990days. The measurement data
determines the node’s lifetime while using a data compression
strategy. Table III shows that the optimised listening model
decreases energy usage in the listening state from 50% to3%.
It is also clear that the data compression strategy spends much
more energy in the measurement state than in the sending state.
This is expected as this is a direct consequence of being able
to measure more with the goal of sending less. Finally, we
observe that the curves decrease non-linearly. This is the self-
discharge effect showing up when the lifetime gets long.
VI. C ONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
This study presents an energy-aware analysis of a Sigfox-
based DWSN using U PPAAL SMC. The simulation results
show the sensor node’s lifetime and energy and time cost for
the major system states. The comparison results demonstrate
the model’s behaviour with datasheet statistics and real hard-
ware measurements. The results also show how transmission
frequency, payload size, unidirectional and bidirectional com-
munication and data compression technique dramatically affect
the node’s lifetime. The results reveal that we can extend the
node’s lifetime from 202 days to 2.71 years using efficient
transmission strategies.
As future work, we will try to optimise the measuring
algorithm and related hardware because it consumes up to
57% of the energy. We also identified a limitation of our tool,
since the computation in U PPAAL SMC becomes slower when
using decimal value as invariant orguard in the model.
We are exploring different modelling tricks to reduce this
problem. Finally, we plan to compare our methodology to the
well-known tool Network Simulator 3, ns-3 , where we have
already contributed with a Sigfox radio model [13].

--- Page 12 ---
M.NAEEM et al. : MODELLING AND ANAL YSIS OF A SIGFOX BASED IOT NETWORK USING UPPAAL SMC (OCTOBER 2022) 11
REFERENCES
[1] H. Korala, D. Georgakopoulos, P. P. Jayaraman, and A. Yavari, “A survey
of techniques for fulfilling the time-bound requirements of time-sensitive
iot applications,” ACM Computing Surveys , 2022.
[2] K. A. Aldahdouh, K. A. Darabkh, W. Al-Sit et al. , “A survey of 5g
emerging wireless technologies featuring lorawan, sigfox, nb-iot and lte-
m,” in 2019 International conference on wireless communications signal
processing and networking (WiSPNET) . IEEE, 2019, pp. 561–566.
[3] M. E. Yuksel and H. Fidan, “Energy-aware system design for batteryless
lpwan devices in iot applications,” Ad Hoc Networks , vol. 122, p.
102625, 2021.
[4] S. Aguilar, A. Platis, R. Vidal, and C. Gomez, “Energy consumption
model of schc packet fragmentation over sigfox lpwan,” Sensors , vol. 22,
no. 6, p. 2120, 2022.
[5] M. Ahm, L. Duus, P. Rasch, P. Laursen, A. Høedholt, K. Larsen,
L. Sørensen, J. Nielsen, and M. Rasmussen, “Distributed online monitor-
ing of the urban water cycle (donut): vision and initial results,” 10th IWA
Symposium on Modelling and Integrated Assessment , 1–4 Sep 2019.
[6] M. Naeem, M. Albano, K. G. Larsen, B. Nielsen, A. Høedholt, and
C. Østergaard Laursen, “Battery aware analysis of sensor networks in
uppaal smc,” in 2021 10th Mediterranean Conference on Embedded
Computing (MECO) , IEEE. Budva, Montenegro: IEEE, 2021, pp. 1–6.
[7] K. Sen, M. Viswanathan, and G. Agha, “Statistical model checking
of black-box probabilistic systems,” in International Conference on
Computer Aided Verification . Springer, 2004, pp. 202–215.
[8] A. David, K. G. Larsen, A. Legay, M. Miku ˇcionis, and D. B. Poulsen,
“Uppaal smc tutorial,” International Journal on Software Tools for
Technology Transfer , vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 397–415, 2015.
[9] C. Gomez, J. C. Veras, R. Vidal, L. Casals, and J. Paradells, “A sigfox
energy consumption model,” Sensors , vol. 19, no. 3, p. 681, 2019.
[10] J. Finnegan and S. Brown, “An analysis of the energy consumption
of lpwa-based iot devices,” in 2018 Int. Symposium on Networks,
Computers and Communications (ISNCC) . IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–6.
[11] D. Hernandez, G. Peralta, L. Manero, R. Gomez, J. Bilbao, and C. Zubia,
“Energy and coverage study of lpwan schemes for industry 4.0,” in IEEE
Int. Workshop of Electronics, Control, Measurement, Signals and their
Application to Mechatronics (ECMSM) . IEEE, 2017, pp. 1–6.
[12] B. Nielsen, M. Albano, M. Naeem, T. Pedersen, A. Hødholdt, and C. Ø.
Laursen, “Battery lifetime estimation and optimization for an urban
water system wsn,” in IWA World Water Congress , 2021.
[13] M. Naeem, M. Albano, D. Magrin, B. Nielsen, and K. Guldstrand, “A
sigfox module for the network simulator 3,” in Proceedings of the WNS3
2022 , 2022, pp. 81–88.
[14] R. K. Singh, P. P. Puluckul, R. Berkvens, and M. Weyn, “Energy
consumption analysis of lpwan technologies and lifetime estimation for
iot application,” Sensors , vol. 20, no. 17, 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/20/17/4794
[15] A. David, K. G. Larsen, A. Legay, M. Miku ˇcionis, D. B. Poulsen,
J. Van Vliet, and Z. Wang, “Statistical model checking for networks
of priced timed automata,” in International Conference on Formal
Modeling and Analysis of Timed Systems . Springer, 2011, pp. 80–96.
[16] D. Panigrahi, C. Chiasserini, S. Dey, R. Rao, A. Raghunathan, and
K. Lahiri, “Battery life estimation of mobile embedded systems,” in
VLSI Design 2001. Fourteenth International Conference on VLSI Design .
IEEE, 2001, pp. 57–63.
[17] J. Xue, Z. Yuan, and Q. Zhang, “Traffic load-aware power-saving
mechanism for ieee 802.16 e sleep mode,” in 2008 4th International
Conference on Wireless Communications, Networking and Mobile Com-
puting . IEEE, 2008, pp. 1–4.
[18] C. Baier and J.-P. Katoen, Principles of model checking . MIT press,
2008.
[19] A. Rashid, O. Hasan, and K. Saghar, “Formal analysis of a zigbee-based
routing protocol for smart grids using uppaal,” in 2015 12th International
Conference on High-capacity Optical Networks and Enabling/Emerging
Technologies (HONET) . IEEE, 2015, pp. 1–5.
[20] P. L. Laursen, V . A. T. Trinh, and A. E. Haxthausen, “Formal modelling
and verification of a distributed railway interlocking system using
uppaal,” in International Symposium on Leveraging Applications of
Formal Methods . Springer, 2020, pp. 415–433.
[21] Y . Fei, H. Zhu, and J. Yin, “Modeling and verifying nlsr protocol of
ndn for cps using uppaal,” Journal of Software: Evolution and Process ,
p. e2384, 2021.
[22] J. C. Zuniga and B. Ponsard, “Sigfox system description,” LPWAN@
IETF97, Nov. 14th , vol. 25, 2016.[23] Sigfox Radio specifications , Sigfox, Feb 2020. [Online]. Avail-
able: https://storage.googleapis.com/public-assets-xd-sigfox-production-
338901379285/abaedf62-56de-402e-93c3-3a9c10a1cb49.pdf
[24] H. L. Younes and R. G. Simmons, “Probabilistic verification of discrete
event systems using acceptance sampling,” in International Conference
on Computer Aided Verification . Springer, 2002, pp. 223–235.
[25] S. Sebastio and A. Vandin, “Multivesta: Statistical model checking for
discrete event simulators,” in 7th Int. Conf. on Performance Evaluation
Methodologies and Tools , ser. ValueTools ’13. ICST, 2013, p. 310–315.
[26] R. Alur and D. Dill, “Automata for modeling real-time systems,” in
International colloquium on automata, languages, and programming .
Springer, 1990, pp. 322–335.
[27] G. Behrmann, A. David, and K. Larsen, “A tutorial on UPPAAL,” in
Formal methods for the design of real-time systems . Springer, 2004.
[28] MB7380, Ultrasonic sensor , HRXL-MaxSonar, [Accessed 11 Oct 2022].
[Online]. Available: https://www.maxbotix.com/documents/HRXL-
MaxSonar-WR Datasheet.pdf
[29] ATmega328/P , Microchip, [Accessed 11 Oct 2022]. [Online]. Available:
https://www.mouser.com/pdfdocs/gravitech atmega328 datasheet.pdf
[30] TD1207R/08R , Sigfox, 2016. [Online]. Available:
https://datasheetspdf.com/pdf-file/1338325/Telecom/TD1207R/1
[31] Digital Accelerometer ADXL345-EP , AnalogDevices, [Ac-
cessed 11 Oct 2022]. [Online]. Available:
https://www.mouser.dk/datasheet/2/609/ADXL345-EP-1503767.pdf
[32] H. Ryu, H. Ahn, K. Kim, J. Ahn, K. Cho, and T. Nam, “Self-
discharge characteristics of lithium/sulfur batteries using tegdme liquid
electrolyte,” Electrochimica acta , vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 1563–1566, 2006.
[33] D. Ivanov, K. G. Larsen, S. Schupp, and J. Srba, “Analytical solution for
long battery lifetime prediction in nonadaptive systems,” in Int. Conf.
on Quantitative Evaluation of Systems . Springer, 2018, pp. 173–189.
[34] “Average monthly rainy days in odense (funen), denmark,” 2022.
[Online]. Available: https://weather-and-climate.com/average-monthly-
Rainy-days,odense,Denmark
[35] M. Schleiss, J. Olsson, P. Berg, T. Niemi, T. Kokkonen, S. Thorndahl,
R. Nielsen, J. Ellerbæk Nielsen, D. Bozhinova, and S. Pulkkinen, “The
accuracy of weather radar in heavy rain: a comparative study for
denmark, the netherlands, finland and sweden,” Hydrology and Earth
System Sciences , vol. 24, no. 6, pp. 3157–3188, 2020.
