--- Page 1 ---
HAL Id: hal-00909062
https://inria.hal.science/hal-00909062v1
Submitted on 26 Nov 2013
HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access archive
for the deposit and dissemination of scientific re-
search documents, whether they are published or not.
The documents may come from teaching and research
institutions in France or abroad, or from public or pri-
vate research centers.L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL , est des-
tinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents scien-
tifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non, émanant
des établissements d’enseignement et de recherche
français ou étrangers, des laboratoires publics ou
privés.
HAL Authorization
Analyzing an Embedded Sensor with Timed Automata in
Uppaal
Timothy Bourke, Arcot Sowmya
To cite this version:
Timothy Bourke, Arcot Sowmya. Analyzing an Embedded Sensor with Timed Automata in Up-
paal. ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems (TECS), 2013, 13 (3), pp.44-1–44-26.
⟨10.1145/2539036.2539040⟩. ⟨hal-00909062⟩

--- Page 2 ---
0
AnalyzinganEmbeddedSensorwith TimedAutomata in Uppaal
TIMOTHYBOURKE , INRIA and École normale supérieure
ARCOT SOWMYA , University of NSW
An infrared sensor is modeled and analyzed in Uppaal. The sensor typiﬁes th e sort of component that
engineers regularly integrate into larger systems by writing interface h ardware and software.
In all, three main models are developed. For the ﬁrst, the timing diagra m of the sensor is interpreted and
modeledasatimedsafetyautomaton.Thismodelservesasaspeciﬁcat ionforthecompletesystem.Asecond
model that emphasizes the separate roles of driver and sensor is then de veloped. It is validated against the
timing diagram model using an existing construction that permits the ver iﬁcation of timed trace inclusion,
for certain models, by reachability analysis (i.e., model checking). A transmission correctness property is
also stated by means of an auxiliary automaton and shown to be satisﬁed by t he model.
A third model is created from an assembly language driver program, usin g a direct translation from
the instruction set of a processor with simple timing behavior. This model is va lidated against the driver
component of the second timing diagram model using the timed trace inc lusion validation technique. The
approach and its limitations offer insight into the nature and challenge s of programming in real time.
Categories and Subject Descriptors: C.3 [ Special-purpose and Application-based Systems ]: Real-time
and embedded systems; D.2.4 [ Software Engineering ]: Software/Program Veriﬁcation— Model checking ;
Validation ;Formal methods ; F.3.1 [Logics and Meanings of Programs ]: Specifying and Verifying and
Reasoning about Programs— Mechanical veriﬁcation ;Speciﬁcation techniques
General Terms: Design, Documentation, Veriﬁcation
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Timed automata, Uppaal, Timing diag rams, Timed trace inclusion
ACM Reference Format:
Bourke, T., Sowmya, A. 2012. Analyzing an embedded sensor with Timed Au tomata in Uppaal ACM Trans.
Embedd. Comput. Syst. 0, 0, Article 0 ( 2012), 25 pages.
DOI=10.1145/0000000.0000000 http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/00 00000.0000000
1. INTRODUCTION
Integrating specialized components is fundamental to many embedded engineering
projects. The behavior of these components is often speciﬁe d in informal timing di-
agrams which are interpreted by engineers during the design of interface hardware
and software. This article presents the modeling and analys is of one such component
and its interface: an infrared sensor and its assembly langu age driver. The interest is
in applying timed safety automata [Henzinger et al. 1994] an d reachability analysis
in Uppaal [Larsen et al. 1997] to a concrete example from prac tice, as opposed to an
abstract algorithm or protocol. The example itself is novel and treated in detail.
Thesensorisasmall-scalecasestudy:itsspeciﬁcationshe ethasonlyfourpagesand
a driver can be written in about twenty lines of assembly lang uage. It suits the intent
The work described was performed while the ﬁrst author was a student at UNSW and NICTA.
Author’s addresses: T. Bourke, Département d’Informatique, Éco le normale supérieure, Paris; A. Sowmya,
School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of NSW, Syd ney.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for pe rsonal or classroom use is granted
without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁ t or commercial advantage and that
copies show this notice on the ﬁrst page or initial screen of a display along wit h the full citation. Copyrights
for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honore d. Abstracting with credit is per-
mitted. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on servers, to redistribu te to lists, or to use any component
of this work in other works requires prior speciﬁc permission and/or a fee. Permissions may be requested
from Publications Dept., ACM, Inc., 2 Penn Plaza, Suite 701, New York, NY 10121-0701 USA, fax +1 (212)
869-0481, or permissions@acm.org.
© 2012 ACM 1539-9087/2012/-ART0 $10.00
DOI 10.1145/0000000.0000000 http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/0 000000.0000000
ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0, Publication date: 2012.

--- Page 3 ---
0:2 T. BourkeandA. Sowmya
oftreatinganexampletakenfrompracticeratherthanoneco ntrivedoradjustedtoex-
hibitpointsoftheoreticalinterest.Thesensorandthetim ingdiagraminitsdatasheet
are effectively treated as artifacts of intrinsic interest to be observed ‘in the wild’. This
is a reasonable view, even though both are man-made, for two r easons. First, because
the idea, initially anyway, is to observe, rather than to cha nge, practice. And, second,
because engineers must often work from speciﬁcations and ex periment alone without
recourse to component designers. The choice of a single, sma ll, and arbitrary example,
however, certainly limits generalization: some character istics of the device may be id-
iosyncratic, and other interesting characteristics are ce rtainly not represented. At the
very least, the case study is a data point to be added to the set of existing examples.
Quantitative time is integral to understanding and directi ng the sensor. Mostly be-
cause its timing diagram prescribes a way for two asynchrono us components to com-
municate with minimal interconnections: two wires in fact. Both the description of
these timing constraints and the way they may be met by implem entations are ex-
amined. Although the meaning of most signal changes depends more on protocol state
thanonprecisetimeofoccurrence,anopen-loopversionoft hedriverisalsoconsidered;
its operation relies on the passage of time rather than the re ceipt of events.
The sensor and its timing diagram are described in §2. A caref ul interpretation of
the timing diagram, and the timed automaton model that resul ts are presented in §3.
The timed automaton model is then reﬁned into a split model of cooperating timed
automata where the separate roles and the interaction of the sensor and driver are
emphasized. This model is presented in §4, which also contai ns a description of two
analyzes in Uppaal. In the ﬁrst, a testing automaton is const ructed from the origi-
nal timing diagram model and analyzed together with the spli t model to show timed
trace inclusion. In the second, a transmission correctness property is formulated and
veriﬁed by reachability analysis. The driver component of t he split model serves as
a speciﬁcation in §5, where an assembly language driver is mo deled and validated
against the speciﬁcation via timed trace inclusion testing . The article concludes in §6
with a discussion of the results and some suggestions for ext ending the research.
2. THESHARP GP2D02RANGE SENSOR
The Sharp GP2D02 range sensor exempliﬁes the sort of compone nt which engineers
integrate into embedded systems. The sensor is an electro-o ptical component that ex-
ploits physical principles to produce results that are usef ul within a larger system.
The choice of investigating the GP2D02 is somewhat arbitrar y. Signiﬁcantly, how-
ever, the device speciﬁcation is relatively simple, includ es timing constraints, and
mixesevent-driven responses withsampling.Anawareness o ftheexample’s strengths
andweaknessescouldguidefutureexperiments.Thephiloso phyistoexaminerealistic
examples for opportunities where they may be better underst ood or developed, rather
than to choose examples which suit a particular development approach.
2.1. Overview
The sensor, refer Figure 1a, is a small ( 14×29×14mm) box. Visible features include
two mounting slots, an infrared light emitting diode, a lens that covers a detecting
surface, and four electrical terminals: voltage, ground, i nput (vin), and output ( vout).
The sensor measures the distance to an object by emitting inf rared beams from the
diode which are then reﬂected by the object. The distance is e stimated by measuring
the position of the reﬂected beams along the detecting surfa ce. Measurement cycles
are triggered and 8-bit distance estimates read from the out put terminal by providing
a suitable signal on the input terminal. This signal and othe r details are described in
a data sheet [Sharp Corporation 1997]. The behavioral descr iptions are informal and
subject to interpretation against a background of engineer ing practice.
ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0, Publication date: 2012.

--- Page 4 ---
Analyzingan EmbeddedSensorwith Timed Automatain Uppaal 0:3
(a) Physical appearancetiming diagram
driver sensor
voutvin
(b) Utilization
Fig. 1: The GP2D02 Sensor.
70ms or more0.2ms or less
1ms or more1.5 ms or more 1.5ms or more
Po wer
OFFVin
Vout
MSB LSB LSB
Fig. 2: The sensor timing diagram [Sharp Corporation 1997].
In applications, a sensor is connected to another device, he re termed the driver, as
shown in Figure 1b. The driver controls the signal level on vin, and the sensor con-
trols the level on vout. Three interrelated models of this system are presented in t his
article. The ﬁrst, in §3, describes the combined protocol—th e causal relations and tim-
ing constraints between voltage levels and voltage level ch anges on the two wires—as
represented by a timing diagram.The sensor is treated as a bl ack box that guarantees
the stated behaviors on voutprovided the driver conforms to the expected behaviors
onvin. The individual roles of driver and sensor are emphasized in the second model,
presented in §4. The third model, presented in §5, concerns a driver implementation.
2.2. TimingDiagram
ThesensortimingdiagramisreproducedinFigure2.Thisﬁgu reiscopieddirectlyfrom
the sensor data sheet (with one minor change: the lower signa l, here named vout, is
referredtoas outputintheoriginal).Theuppersignal vinspeciﬁestheinputsequences
that may be applied to the unit. The lower signal voutspeciﬁes the expected response.
The ﬁrst falling edge on vintriggers a range reading which may take at most 70ms.
A series of pulses are then applied to clock data out of the sen sor, and, ﬁnally, at least
1.5msmust elapse before either repeating or terminating the proc ess.
The choice between stopping and continuing is the only point where control be-
haviors, as opposed to timing or data valuations, branch. Bo th possible scenarios are
shown at right in the diagram; in each a pulse on vinis labeled with 1.5ms or more .
The ﬁrst pulse on vinis interpreted as triggering a new range reading. The second , la-
beled with Power OFF , is interpreted as the decision to switch the sensor off. Bet ween
these alternatives, each signal line is broken by a dashed ho rizontal section. Clearly,
representing branching in a timing diagram is awkward.
There are four dashed vertical lines between the two signal w aveforms. These seem
to indicate synchronizing events, from left: commencing a r ange reading, triggering
a change in voutfor the most signiﬁcant bit (MSB), similarly for the least sig niﬁcant
ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0, Publication date: 2012.

--- Page 5 ---
0:4 T. BourkeandA. Sowmya
bit(LSB),andreturningtoalow voutlevelafteranunspeciﬁed,thoughbounded,delay.
There is a ﬁfth vertical line that does not reach the lower wav eform. Its meaning is
difﬁcult to decipher, it seems to imply that voutwill become high again within 1.5ms.
The diagram indicates that vinshould remain constant for at least 70msafter the
falling transition that triggers a range reading, during wh ich time the voutsignal
will change. Some implementations [Griebling 1999; Ramsey 2001] ignore the timing
constraint and act instead as soon as voutbecomes high—this possibility is modeled.
The crossed boxes on the voutsignal, between most and least signiﬁcant bits, indi-
cate data non-determinism. The signal value, either high or low, depends on the range
reading and must typically be sampled since there will not ne cessarily be a detectable
event.Foraccuratesampling,itisnecessarytoknowbounds onwhen,relativetoother
signal events, the voutlevel will be stable. The timing diagram could be more explic it,
but it seems that changes in voutare usually triggered by falling transitions on vin.
The exact behavior, however, of voutafter the least-signiﬁcant bit has been sampled is
not clear. If the last bit is zero, voutmust return to the high level before 1.5mselapses.
If it is one, it seems that voutmust go to a low level ﬁrst before returning to a high
level. An engineer could clarify such unclear details, shou ld they prove important, by
running experiments with an instance of the device. This is a n effective approach, but,
at least in principle, such observed behaviors may change be tween different versions
of the speciﬁed device. It is assumed that a rising vintransition after the last sample
triggers voutto fall if necessary and then rise again.
According to the diagram, the sensor requires at least 1.5msbetween the end of one
complete range reading and the beginning of the next. During this period there is a
rising transition on voutwhich could indicate that the sensor is ready to make another
reading before the whole 1.5mshas elapsed. The speciﬁcation is not clear.
The70ms or more and1.5ms or more constraints are readily justiﬁable: it takes
time for the device to make measurements and to recover; less so the0.2ms or less
constraint.Ratherthanseekamotive,theconstraintswill simplybeacceptedasgiven.
Also,ratherthaninterpret 0.2msorless asaconstraintforalltheotherpositivepulses
and perhaps also the negative pulses , it is assumed to pertain only to the ﬁrst.
The pulses, though, must deﬁnitely have some minimum value, as suggested by the
1ms or more constraint. The minimum width of a positive pulse will be rep resented by
minmark, and that of a negative pulse by minspace . The1ms or more constraint is not
otherwise further interpreted. The values of minmark andminspace will depend on the
sensor’s (unspeciﬁed) internal electronics and propertie s of the interconnection (such
as wire capacitance). They are assumed to be equal to zero fro m now on.
Althoughnot perfect, thetimingdiagram isadequate forint erfacingwiththesensor
once its ambiguities have been resolved. Converting such an informal description into
a precise notation quickly reveals what is clear and what is n ot.
3. TIMINGDIAGRAM MODEL
In this section, a timed automaton model of the timing diagra m is described. The sen-
sor timing diagram is ordinarily read as the speciﬁcation fo r a device driver—a circuit
or program for triggering the sensor and extracting a readin g. But it could also be
taken as a template for creating different types of compatib le sensors. In either case,
one would classify events and constraints within the diagra m from the perspective of
onesideortheother,asinputsoroutputs,orasassumptions orguarantees.Inthissec-
tionsensorisnotdistinguishedfromdriver.Thefocusisin steadonthetimingdiagram
as an artifact in itself. It is modeled as a timed automaton, t hus providing a precise
interpretation. Alternative modeling choices and possibl e variations are discussed.
There are ﬁve subsections. In §3.1, some beneﬁts of producin g such a formal model
and some of the philosophies that guide its creation are disc ussed. The choice of al-
ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0, Publication date: 2012.

--- Page 6 ---
Analyzingan EmbeddedSensorwith Timed Automatain Uppaal 0:5
phabet for the model is described in §3.2. A detailed descrip tion of the timing diagram
modelispresentedin§3.3.Livenessrequirementsarediscu ssedin§3.4.Lastly,in§3.5,
some limitations of the case study are listed.
3.1. Rationaleandguidingphilosophy
Timing diagrams are usually understood through convention , culture, and practical
experimentation rather than in formal terms, despite sever al proposed formalisms.1
Thereareatleastthreereasonsformodelingatimingdiagra minaformalframework:
(1) Detailed questions are asked of the speciﬁcation. Its me aning is clariﬁed and
ambiguities or omissions may be discovered and noted.
(2) A formal speciﬁcation deﬁnes a notion of correctness aga inst which other arti-
facts, such as sensor and driver implementations, may be val idated.
(3) Toolsforvalidatingandtransformingsometypesofmode lsexist,synthesisbeing
a special case of transformation into an executable form.
Implementation in a speciﬁc programming language is effect ively a translation to
a formal, or at least semi-formal, notation. There are, howe ver, important differences.
While implementation also requires attention to technical details, certain language
featuresmaybehavedifferentlyacrosscompilersandplatf orms.Signiﬁcantly,properly
expressing timing details may be difﬁcult. A program is, at b est, a single reference im-
plementation , it cannot usually reﬂect the full range of permitted behavi ors. Further-
more, there may be confusion between which features of the pr ogram are properties of
the object under consideration and which are necessitated b y the chosen language.
The key difference between a model and an implementation is o ne of abstraction.
Modelswillusuallyignoredetailsessentialtoimplementat ions,andconversely,imple-
mentations will typically be too constraining to act as mode ls for all purposes. When
specifyingtiming,andotherbehaviors,itisparticularly desirabletoignoredistracting
implementation details.2Ideally though, the models and implementations of a system
are interrelated in a precise manner.
The timing diagram, Figure 2, deﬁnes a partial ordering and r elative timing con-
straints on a set of events. The aim is to capture precisely th is information, and no
more, in a timed automaton model. Justiﬁcation will be offer ed for all compromises.
3.2. Choosinganalphabet
The transitions from one signal level to another are of most i mportance in this partic-
ular timing diagram. They are the main events that the model m ust address.
Thevinandvoutsignals can be described in terms of edgesandlevels. Edges are
characterized by direction of change, rising or falling; id eally they are instantaneous
with a deﬁnite time of occurrence. Levels are characterized by a state, high or low,
that persists over an interval between two edges. The sensor timing diagram depicts
ideal signal edges. Other timing diagrams acknowledge the n on-instantaneous nature
of edges by using vertical lines with a slight slant.
There are at least three different ways to associate events w ith transitions. The ﬁrst
associates a distinct event with every change in the value of a signal, and each event
hasauniquelabel:forexample, e1,e2,...,en.Suchdetailistediousand,forthetiming
diagrammodel,unnecessary.Thesecondwayassociatesanac tionwitheachsignal,for
example vinandvout. Different occurrences of the actions are distinguished by relative
orderofoccurrence.Thethirdwayissimilar,itassociates twoactionswitheachsignal:
1Bourke [2009, Appendix F] presents the model in a formal timing diag ram notation and cites related work.
2Although, conversely, most real-time programming is characterized by careful attention to such detail.
ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0, Publication date: 2012.

--- Page 7 ---
0:6 T. BourkeandA. Sowmya70ms or more0.2ms or less
1ms or more1.5 ms or more 1.5ms or more
Po wer
OFF
Vin
s7
s0 s2x<700
s1x<700
s6s3s8
s5s4x<=2
s10 s11 s9x < 15sample! b > 0 &&y > minspacevinH!y = 0
w==1voutL!
w=0vinL!x=0 voutL! voutH!
w==1 && y<=maxtrans&& !changedvoutL!w=0, changed = true w==0 && y<=maxtrans&& !changedvoutH!w=1, changed = truevinH! x=0y > minmark vinL!
y=0, b=b-1, changed = false
y>maxtrans sample!b>0 &&y > minspace
vinH! y=0
vinL! x=0, y=0, b=7,w=1,
changed=falsex>=15 vinL! x=0
x>=15powerOff! b==0 && x >= 10 && y > minspace vinH!
x=0, y=0w==0voutH!
w=1
Vout
MSB LSB LSB//1unit =0.1ms
const int maxtrans;
const int minmark;
// maxtrans ≤minmark
const int minspace;
clockx, y;
int[0 ,7] b = 0;
int[0 ,1] w = 1;
boolchanged = true;
Fig. 3: The timing diagram model (compared to the timing diag ram, in gray).
ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0, Publication date: 2012.

--- Page 8 ---
Analyzingan EmbeddedSensorwith Timed Automatain Uppaal 0:7
s2 s0
vinLvoutL!
(a) composites2 s0
vinL! voutL!voutL! vinL!
(b) interleaveds1 s2 s0
voutL! vinL!
(c) causals1x <= max
s2 s0 x >= min
voutL! vinL!
x = 0
(d) bounded causal
Fig. 4: Some alternatives for modeling two related events.
oneforarisingtransitiononthesignal,theotherforafall ingtransition.Thisextrade-
tail is not absolutely necessary, since rising and falling a ctions must alternate strictly,
but it clariﬁes the relationship between the model and the ti ming diagram, making
both easier to think about and to describe. This third choice is thus adopted. Transi-
tions labeled vinLandvinHcorrespond to falling and rising transitions, respectivel y, on
vin. Likewise for voutLandvoutHonvout.
The rising and falling transitions on vinandvoutare explicit in the timing diagram,
but the diagram also constrains two other events: powering o ff and sampling.
ApowerOﬀ action is introduced to represent the act of turning the sens or off.
The timing diagram is not explicit about when the level on voutcan be sampled,
even though it is an important feature of the protocol. The ti ming diagram model will
be more precise: a sampleaction is introduced to represent instants when readings
can be accurately taken from the voutline. This new action is controversial since it
is not explicit in the timing diagram. But, arguably, it woul d be inferred by engineers
anyway, and should perhaps have been included.
3.3. An explanationof themodel
The model in Figure 3 is the result of many gradual reﬁnements . It is thought to be an
accurate interpretation of the timing diagram of Figure 2, w hich is reproduced in gray
to aid comparison.3
The model is expressed as an Uppaal (4.0.13) timed automaton so that its relation-
ships with other models can be veriﬁed automatically. As a co nsequence, transitions
must be labeled as inputs or outputs despite the neutral stan ce taken on the issue.
They have all been made outputs, simply because this makes va lidation in §4.2 eas-
ier. The model is to be interpreted as an open system, one that deﬁnes a set of timed
sequences of allowed actions, rather than as part of a closed system that can only act
when another component is willing to synchronize.
In a valid Uppaal model all timing constants must be integers : in the model, one
unit of time is equivalent to 0.1msin the timing diagram.
There are three main phases in the timing diagram protocol: t he initial triggering of
arangereading(§3.3.1),transferringtheresultingvalue bit-by-bit(§3.3.2),andﬁnally
deciding whether to power off or to repeat the process (§3.3. 3).
3.3.1. Initial triggering. A range reading cycle is triggered from the initial location ,s0,
byafallingtransitionon vin:vinL.Accordingtothetimingdiagram voutLoccurssimul-
taneously. But, conceptually, vinLcausesvoutL. There are at least four ways to model
the relationship between the two events:
(1) Asingleeventcomposedoftwoothers: vinL·voutL.Suchacompositeeventresults
from the synchronization of two components, but in this sett ing the event would later
be decomposed into separate actions of the driver and sensor . There are two obvious
expressions in Uppaal. The one shown in Figure 4a is direct bu t makes decomposition
clumsy.TheoneshowninFigure4btriestocapturethecommut ativityandatomicityof
3A small improvement could perhaps be made. The model could be adjust ed to allow termination without
taking any range-readings by adding an extra transition from s0tos11labeled with powerOﬀ .
ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0, Publication date: 2012.

--- Page 9 ---
0:8 T. BourkeandA. Sowmya
the event combination operator, though atomicity is not gua ranteed by the committed
locations,4marked , in models where other such locations occur concurrently.
(2) One event after the other, capturing the causal dependen cy but not the implied
synchronization, as in Figure 4c. This choice is adopted for the timing diagram model.
(3) One event following the other but with a clock reset on ent ry,x= 0, and an
invariant on the middle location, x≤max, to express necessity of occurrence; as in Fig-
ure 4d. When maxis 0, the events are simultaneous but ordered, as for the micro steps
of state-diagram languages, or the delta steps of discrete-event languages. Adding a
lower bound, x≥min, gives a model that more accurately reﬂects physical realit y.
The70msormore constraintisgivenbetweeninitial vinLandvinHevents,butcausal
dependencies between vinLandvoutL, andvoutLandvoutH, andvoutHandvinHeffec-
tively also constrain the intermediate voutLandvoutHevents. The ﬁrst of the causal
dependencies has just been discussed. The second arises bec ause signal levels must
alternate. The third is less explicit, it is divined from som e extra knowledge of the sen-
sor,which,whenithasmadeareading,raisestheoutputsign al.Thusbothlocations s1
ands2have an invariant label x <700, which guarantees the occurrence of voutLand
voutHbefore70mspasses. Strict compliance with the timing diagram would req uire an
x≥700guard onthe vinHtransitionbetween s3ands4.Themodel variesonthispoint:
the driver may proceed as soon as voutHis detected—as earlier discussed.
ThevinHevent must be followed by vinLwithin0.2ms or less . This constraint is
modeled by resetting xwhen the former event occurs and adding an x≤2invariant to
s4. ThevinLtransition sets the clocks xandy, and the variables b,w, andchanged:
x records the time elapsed since the start of transmission of t he last MSB.
y records the time elapsed since the last change of vin
b counts down eight transmitted bits through locations s5,s6,s7, ands8,
w tracksvoutto ensure strict alternation of voutLandvoutHevents,
changed ensures that at most one output event occurs for each sampled bit.
3.3.2. Data transfer. A transmission cycle begins after a falling edge on vin,vinL,
prompts the sensor to transmit the next bit of the range readi ng. Both the initial vinL,
froms4, and the looping vinL, froms8, lead to s5.
The level of voutis only allowed to change while s5is active and within maxtrans
of the triggering vinL. The self-loops on s5express possible changes on vout; they are
discussed in more detail later. The timing constraint is mea sured by the clock ywhich
is reset, within the loop, whenever there is a change on vin. The constant maxtrans
combines an assumption on the maximum time the sensor will ta ke to change the
voutlevel after being triggered by vinL, and the time required to transmit any change
through the wiring and interface electronics. It is not expl icit in the timing diagram
but the sampling period is not well deﬁned without it.
Froms5, the driver must sample the voutlevel and then return vinto a high level.
Both actions, sampleandvinH, must happen after the maxtrans delay and before the
nextvinL. They are causally-independent for all but the LSB, that is w hileb>0.
Such relationships are naturally modeled with parallelism ; but expressing nested par-
allelism in Uppaal is awkward and requires additional synch ronizations. Since there
are only two actions all of their possible interleavings can be explicitly modeled: the
paths5–s6–s8samples ﬁrst and then raises vin, and the path s5–s7–s8raisesvinﬁrst
and then samples. But such an approach quickly becomes unten able as the number
of mutually-independent actions increases. For the case of the LSB, when b= 0, only
4Transitions from committed locations have priority over those from no n-committed locations and delays.
ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0, Publication date: 2012.

--- Page 10 ---
Analyzingan EmbeddedSensorwith Timed Automatain Uppaal 0:9
one of the interleavings is allowed. The sampleaction occurs ﬁrst because it is assumed
thatvinHsignals to the sensor that sampling is complete.
The alternation of vinLandvinHactions within the transmission loop gives alter-
nating negative and positive pulses on vin. Both types of pulse have a minimum
width:minspace for the negative pulses and minmark for the positive ones. This is
expressed in the timed automaton by guard expressions on clo cky. The timing dia-
gram is not explicit about minimum pulse widths. It states on ly that the eight neg-
ative pulses and seven positive pulses that comprise each cy cle must take 1ms or
more. Rather than assume minmark =minspace = 1/15ms, the model is validated with
minmark =minspace = 0; the most permissive choice. The 1ms or more lower bound is
enforced separately by the x >10guard on the vinHtransition leaving the loop.
The model assumes that maxtrans ≤minspace , but rather than add an extra clause
(... && y > maxtrans ) to the guards on edges s5–s7ands6–s8, this constraint on
the constants is stated outside the model. Setting minmark = 0thus implies that
maxtrans = 0. An alternative approach would be to duplicate the voutLandvoutHself-
loops on s7and add the guard y > maxtrans to the transition between s7ands8; but it
seems less natural to allow the driver to act before the senso r value has stabilized.
In the timing diagram, Figure 2, there are several crossed bo xes in the voutsignal
between MSB and LSB annotations. They represent data non-det erminism; the sig-
nal may change or remain constant from one bit to the next depe nding on the value
being transmitted. The crossed boxes thus abstract over 28possible data signals, not
distinguishing variations in timing. There are at least ﬁve ways to model them:
(1) By not modeling them explicitly. This results in a simple r model because there
are fewer transitions and the behavior of voutafter the LSB is easier to model. Whilst
sufﬁcient, from the driver’s perspective, to only specify w hen sampling may occur, the
timing diagram model tries to avoid bias toward either role.
(2) By marking the event with a changelabel, thereby ignoring the speciﬁc value.
This, however, would complicate later veriﬁcations of data transmission. It is also mis-
leading because the level of voutwill not change if adjacent bits are identical.
(3) By non-deterministic choice between both possible tran sitions. This technique
reﬁnes the changeaction into two different actions: rising and falling trans itions. It is
moreinthespiritofthetimingdiagram,asapartiallyorder edsetoftransitionevents,
but it incorrectly infers that an update of the output level i s always observable, which
depends, rather, on the values of adjacent bits in a data read ing.
(4) By modeling both types of transition, but also including the level of voutin the
automaton state. This treats the observability of events mo re accurately—no event
occurs if the level does not change—and also facilitates the v eriﬁcation of data trans-
mission (§4.3). This technique was chosen for the timing dia gram model of Figure 3.
Variable wencodes the level status and variable changed ensures that at most one
event occurs per data bit. In principle, one could write an ev ent-triggered driver that
responds to the presence or absence, in a given period, of tra nsitions on vout.
(5) By modeling the possibility that voutmay change several times before settling,
withinmaxtrans units, to a constant value. This approach [Vaandrager and de Groot
2006] is closer to physical reality where a signal may, after a change in level, oscillate
unpredictably before stabilizing. In this situation a driv er triggered by events, rather
than one that samples the signal level, is impractical. The t iming diagram model can
be adjusted to use this technique by removing all references to thechanged variable.
After eight transmission cycles, when bis zero, a transition leaves the loop from s6
onvinH. If the last voutlevel was high (the least signiﬁcant bit (LSB) was one; w= 1),
it must now be set to a low level via a voutLevent. The timing diagram is not precise
about when this event occurs, but it must precede the voutHevent, which in turn must
ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0, Publication date: 2012.

--- Page 11 ---
0:10 T. BourkeandA. Sowmya
precede the vinHevent that exits the sampling loop within 1.5ms. Thus both the voutL
self-loop on s9and the voutHtransition to s10are constrained by the invariant x <15.
3.3.3. Power off or repeat. After triggering a range reading and receiving the result,
there is a choice of terminating, the powerOﬀ action to s11, or of requesting another
reading, the vinLaction back to s1. Neither can happen until the sensor is ready. The
timing diagram demands that the choice be made 1.5ms or more after the vinHevent
that ends sampling. This constraint is expressed in the mode l byx≥15guards on
transitions from s10. An alternative is to interpret a voutHwithin this period as an
indication that the sensor is ready; as when waiting for comp letion of a range reading.
3.4. Livenessand progress
The location invariants in the timing diagram model specify when actions are neces-
sary; or equivalently, when unbounded delay is forbidden. W here there is no invariant
theprotocolmaystopcompletely.The vinL,vinH,sample,andpowerOﬀ actionsfrom s0,s3,
s6,s7,s8, ands10need never occur. Similarly for s5wherevoutLandvoutHmay possibly,
butneednot,occurwithinboundedtime,and s11whereunboundeddelayismandatory.
The timing diagram contains bounded liveness guarantees on all sensor responses.
These upper timing bounds are modeled as location invariant s, ons1,s2, ands4, or
as transition guards, on the loops at s5. The sensor must always respond to the driver
withinaﬁxedperiodoftime.Atime-boundedresponsefromth edriverisonlyexpected
ats4—and even this 0.2ms or less constraint is somewhat dubious.
It is sometimes useful to specify the necessity of progress w ithout stating an explicit
time bound. Such abstract liveness properties can be expres sed via an acceptance cri-
terion, like Büchi or Muller conditions, and a subset of accep ting states. Using Büchi
conditions, various liveness constraints could be added to the timing diagram model:
—Require complete protocol cycles : make both s10ands11accepting and add a
τ-transition5self-loop to s11. Range reading cycles must then run to completion—
reading taken and transmitted—once a triggering vinLhas occurred. Cycles may be
triggered continually forever, or a ﬁnite number of times un tilpowerOﬀ occurs.
—Allow a ﬁnite number of complete readings without mandating powerOﬀ : make
s0,s10, ands11accepting and add τ-transition self-loops to all three. Cycles must then
run to completion once triggered, but neither endless cycle s nor eventual powerOﬀ are
required: nothing need occur initially or between readings .
There are a few ways of stating in Uppaal that a model does not d elay indeﬁnitely:
by giving a speciﬁc upper bound in a location safety invarian t or equivalently using an
urgent location, committed location, or urgent channels, t hough these are less appro-
priate in an open model since their behavior in composition i s awkward. But Uppaal
cannot model abstract liveness requirements.
3.5. Limitations
At least seven factors limit generalizations from this exam ple:
(1) The timing diagram represents communications between a driver and sensor
where the former is essentially master and interaction is li mited. In particular, it is
possible for the driver to operate without any direct feedba ck from the sensor.
(2) Althoughthecommunicationsinvolvetwocomponentsrun ningconcurrently,the
protocol is essentially sequential. That is, neither compo nent performs many indepen-
dent actions between synchronizations with the other.
5Such transitions are not labeled with an action and thus cannot synchro nize with other transitions.
ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0, Publication date: 2012.

--- Page 12 ---
Analyzingan EmbeddedSensorwith Timed Automatain Uppaal 0:11
(3) There is almost no branching in the control structure. In particular, when one
component waits for the other, it always expects a speciﬁc si gnal—its actions do not
depend on which signal occurs, they are only delayed until th e awaited signal.
(4) The driver and sensor essentially form a closed system. T hat the environment
affects transmitted infrared beams has no bearing on the des ign.
(5) Data values do not signiﬁcantly affect the behavior of ei ther component.
(6) Timing constraints are stated solely between driver eve nts, but never between
sensor and driver events, or between two sensor events, and a lthough there are some-
times implications for sensor events no constraints are sta ted directly. The constraints
do not overlap, nor do they depend on the particular values of earlier delays.
(7) Component behavior does not depend on the measured lengt h of delays.
Limitations 5 and 7 could be overcome, but only by considerin g an unusual driver that
would detect event occurrence and absence rather than sampl e signal levels.
4. DRIVER/SENSORSPLITMODEL
While the individual roles of driver and sensor were largely ignored in the timing
diagram model they are the focus of §4.1, where a split model , which effectively adds
behavioraldetailtothestructuraldiagramofFigure1b,is presented.Therelationship
of this model to the timing diagram model is shown in §4.2. Bes ides corroborating the
timing diagram model, there are two other advantages to cons tructing the split model.
The ﬁrst, discussed in §4.3, is that it can be used to verify a t ransmission correctness
property. The second is explored in the following section, w here the driver component
of the split model becomes a speciﬁcation for an assembly lan guage implementation.
4.1. Thesplit model
Theﬁrststepinderivingdriverandsensorcomponentsfromt hetimingdiagrammodel
is to decide which actions each will control as outputs: An ac tion is an output at a com-
ponent if its occurrence is determined by that component. An action is an input at
a component if its occurrence may inﬂuence that component’s behavior. Actions vinL
andvinHare sensor inputs and driver outputs, and actions voutLandvoutHare sensor
outputs and driver inputs. These assignments reﬂect both th e reality of connections
between driver and sensor and a desired division of responsi bility. The events sample
andpowerOﬀ are slightly different since they do not inﬂuence the behavi or of the sen-
sor: they are driver outputs but not sensor inputs.
Intheinterpretation ofthetimingdiagram, in§3,thesenso ronlysynchronizes with
the driver at the triggering vinL, at thevinLfor reading each bit, and at vinHafter the
LSB. These synchronizations are inferred from background k nowledge about the sen-
sor,althoughmuchisalreadydeterminedbythepredominant lysequentialbehaviorof
the protocol and the strict alternation of falling and risin g transitions on a signal. The
driver, on the other hand, need not synchronize at all with th e sensor since the timing
guarantees make open-loop control possible. Alternativel y, it may synchronize on the
voutHthat indicates a completed reading. Both possibilities wil l be modeled.
4.1.1. Construction of the model. In the split model, the driver alone is supposed to be
solely responsible for determining when events on vinoccur, and similarly for the sen-
soronvout:outputactionsmaynotbeconstrainedbyothercomponents. Therearetwo
ways to model this in Uppaal: either with handshake communic ation and the addition
of input-enabling self-loops or with broadcast communicat ion.
Rather than directly declaring allowed actions, Uppaal mod els contain channel dec-
larations, each of which implies a speciﬁc pair of input and o utput actions. Commu-
nication on standard channels (declared with chan) requires the participation of two
processes: an output action from a component is blocked when no other component
ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0, Publication date: 2012.

--- Page 13 ---
0:12 T. BourkeandA. Sowmya
d1d
d1ed6
d0d5d2d7
d4d3x<=2
d8
d9vinL!
x = 0x>=15 vinL! x = 0
x>=700 vinH! x = 0
voutH?sample! b>0 &&
y>minspace
vinH!
y = 0
vinL!
x = 0vinH! x = 0y>minmark vinL!
y = 0, b = b - 1
y>maxtrans sample!b>0 &&
y>minspace
vinH! y = 0
vinL!
x = 0,
y = 0,
b = 7x>=15 vinL! x = 0
x>=15
powerOff!b==0 && x>=10
&& y>minspacevinH!
x = 0, y = 0
DRIVER
i0 i2x<700
i1x<700i5
i4
x<=maxtransi3
i6x<15b==0
vinH?
x = 0
wire==1
voutL!
wire = 0vinL?
x = 0voutL! voutH!wire==1
voutL! wire = 0
wire==0
voutH! wire = 1b>0 vinL?
x = 0, b = b - 1
vinL?
x = 0, b = 7,
wire = 1
wire==0 voutH! wire = 1
SENSOR// driver
clockx, y;
int[0 ,7] b = 0;// sensor
clockx;
boolchanged = true;
int[0 ,7] b = 0;
int[0 ,1] wire = 1;
// global
broadcast chan vinL , vinH;
broadcast chan powerOff , sample;
broadcast chan voutL , voutH;
Fig. 5: The split model of the sensor timing diagram.
is willing to accept it by performing the corresponding inpu t action. Ensuring input-
enabledness with such channels is possible but requires com plicating models with ad-
ditional transitions; an approach that is brieﬂy discussed in §4.1.3.
Uppaal also allows broadcast channels (declared with broadcast chan ), where an
output action may always occur and will be synchronized with a single, corresponding
input action in each process where any such action is enabled . When using broadcast
channels, no additional effort is required to ensure input- enabledness. A split model
based on broadcast communication is shown in Figure 5. The mo del comprises two
components in parallel:
DRIVER /bardblSENSOR .
The driver model was derived from the timing diagram model. A ll transitions on
voutLwere removed, as were all but the ﬁrst on voutH, which was made an input. The
variables wireandchanged were removed, as were the x <700location invariants,
and the initial sequence was duplicated through d1dwith a new x≥700guard.
The sensor model was derived in a similar way. All transition s onvinHbut the one
tos9, whose guard was changed, were removed. All transitions on sampleandpowerOﬀ
were removed. The variable wwas renamed to wireto avoid confusion. The variable
changed wasremoved;itseffectisrepresentedinthesensorcontrol structurebystates
i4(changed = 0) andi5(changed = 1). ThevoutLandvoutHself-loops on s5become
transitions between the two states, and a τ-transition is added for the case where
there is no change. The purpose of clock xis changed, it appears in invariants on i4
andi6that force the model to meet protocol timing assumptions.
4.1.2. Behaviorofthemodel. The driver initiates a range-reading from d0by emitting a
vinLoutput,onwhichthesensorsynchronizesfrom i0.Thedrivernon-deterministically
enterseither d1d,whereitwaitsfor 70msormore beforecontinuing,or d1e,whereitcan
continue as soon as the sensor emits voutH. A similar arrangement exists from d8. The
choice could be modeled using τ-transitions, a committed location, and an extra state
whichwouldavoidduplicatingthe vinLtransitions.Butsuchamodelwouldcomplicate
timetrace inclusiontesting,where τ-transitionsare forbidden. Itcan be argued thatit
is unreasonable to allow the driver to choose a different beh avior at each iteration; the
advantage of this model is that it can be specialized to one ty pe of driver or the other
by removing transitions.
Intheoriginalmodel,undertheassumptionthatthesensorw illrespondto vinLwith
voutHwithin70ms, the trace fragments accepted by the top path ( d0/d8)–d1d–d3are also
ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0, Publication date: 2012.

--- Page 14 ---
Analyzingan EmbeddedSensorwith Timed Automatain Uppaal 0:13
accepted by the bottom path ( d0/d8)–d1e–d2–d3. But both paths are included to make
the driver model self-contained when used in isolation from the sensor model and to
makeimplementationchoicesexplicit.Furthermore, eithe rbranch ofthechoicecanbe
eliminated to produce a more speciﬁc speciﬁcation.
The driver sampling loop d4–(d5/d6)–d7–(d4/d8) is taken directly from the timing di-
agram model. The sensor sampling loop is simpler. After rece iving avinLinput, the
sensor acts within maxtrans units to transition between i4andi5, either signaling a
level change by synchronizing on voutLorvoutH, depending on the local variable wire,
or by not signaling any change, but instead changing state wi th aτ-transition.
Location invariants are present at d3,i1,i2,i4, andi6. From each of these locations,
there is at least one outgoing transition labeled with an out put action. This is oblig-
atory in the split model because otherwise one component cou ld inﬂuence the behav-
ior of another by ‘stopping’ time, either indeﬁnitely, givi ng a Zeno trace, or until an
awaited input action is forced to occur.
Finally, the driver component has, from d8, the choice of delaying indeﬁnitely, trig-
gering another range reading, or powering the sensor off.
4.1.3. Alternative model with standard channels. Bourke [2009, Figures 4.20 and 4.21]
shows that it is also possible to build a split model using han dshake actions. Basically,
the automata of Figure 5 are made input-enabled by augmentin g them with extra
loops—for voutL?,voutH?inDRIVER and forvinL?andvinH?inSENSOR —for every lo-
cation and valuation (using guards) where such actions are n ot possible. An additional
process is added to ensure that sampleandpowerOﬀ outputs are never refused. All of
the veriﬁcations described in the remaining sections can be adapted for this model.
While it can be argued that handshake communications are eas ier to think about
than broadcast communications, since only two processes ar e ever involved in any
synchronization, this is less convincing for models that in volve two, or at most three,
automata. Moreover, in this case there are no real obstacles t o applying the testing
construction for timed trace inclusion, which is usually on ly deﬁned for handshake
channels. All of the self-loop transitions needed when usin g handshake channels are
annoying to maintain and distracting. Such problems only be come worse in a model as
the number of inputs and processes increase.
4.2. Verifyingimplementation
Both the split model and the timing diagram model are propose d as formalizations
of the reading and transmission protocol. It is possible to s how that the split model
implements, in a precise sense, the protocol described by th e timing diagram model.
4.2.1. The choice of relation. There are many ways to relate transition systems in gen-
eralandtimedautomatainparticular.Theapproachinthisa rticlefollowsthatofKay-
nar et al. [2006] in adopting timed trace inclusion.
Timed trace inclusion is a relatively simple notion of imple mentation. One timed
automaton implements another timed automaton if the set of a ll timed traces of the
former are a subset of the set of all timed traces of the latter —any safety properties
proved of a speciﬁcation model are immediately also true of i ts implementations. To
claim that the split model implements the timing diagram mod el is to claim that any
timed trace of the split model is also a valid timed trace of th e timing diagram model.
There are, however, some technicalities, which are discuss ed soon, because the split
model is a network of timed automata rather than a single time d automaton.
Although timed trace inclusion is undecidable in general [A lur and Dill 1994],
when the speciﬁcation model is deterministic, which also ef fectively means free of
τ-transitions, there are constructions for deciding it via r eachability analysis in Up-
paal [Jensen et al. 2000; Stoelinga 2002]. The basic idea is o utlined in §4.2.2.
ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0, Publication date: 2012.

--- Page 15 ---
0:14 T. BourkeandA. Sowmya
Whiletimedtraceinclusionallowssafetypropertiestobei nferred,deadlockandlive-
ness are ignored. This fact is less limiting for timed models than for untimed models,
because bounded liveness, the necessity of action within a ﬁ xed ﬁnite time, is a safety
property. But this caveat must, nevertheless, be kept in min d. The separate veriﬁca-
tion of liveness and deadlock properties, including timed d eadlock, is sufﬁcient for the
models of this article, since their branching structures ar e relatively uncomplicated.
Timed trace inclusion is an asymmetric relation. Using it to verify that the split
model implements the timing diagram model only shows that th e former never ex-
ceeds the behaviors permitted by the latter. Showing the sam e relation in the other
direction would imply the stronger relation of timed trace e quivalence of the models,
in particular, that no valid behaviors are excluded from the split model. The models
would be interchangeable modulo the limitations of timed tr ace equivalence. But, the
testing construction used in this article only applies to si ngle automata, not networks
of automata. In recent work [Bourke et al. 2011], a technique based on timed games
andimplementeddirectlyinthemodel-checkingengine,has beenappliedtoverifythat
the timing diagram model implements an adjusted version of t he split model. But the
present approach, using an unmodiﬁed model-checker, still has advantages in terms
of transparency and relative simplicity, and working in one direction is sufﬁcient to
verify a driver implementation against the timing diagram.
4.2.2. Veriﬁcation. The procedure for testing timed trace inclusion6within a speciﬁca-
tion, namely the timing diagram, has two steps: transformin g the speciﬁcation into a
testing automaton, then performing reachability analysis of the result in parallel with
the implementation automaton, that is, with the split model .
Several changes are necessary to transform a speciﬁcation a utomaton into a test-
ing automaton. A new location, called Err, is added. Inputs are made outputs and vice
versa. Then from each location new transitions to Errare added for every action that
cannot occur from that location. Input and output actions ar e considered as distinct
even when on the same channel. Whether an action can occur or n ot may depend on
the values of clocks and variables, so the guards of outgoing transitions must be con-
sidered. Furthermore, each location invariant is replaced by aτ-transition to Errthat
has the negated invariant as a guard. The result is a testing a utomaton that can ‘ob-
serve’ another automaton by running in parallel with it and s ynchronizing on each
of its actions, hence the inversion of action directions, an d decide, based on location,
clocks, and state variables, whether an action is allowed, i n which case observation
continues, or forbidden, in which case a transition to the Errstate is taken. Should the
observed automaton fail to act in sufﬁcient time, thus viola ting a location invariant of
the original speciﬁcation, a τ-transition to Errwill become enabled. The Errstate will
not be reachable if the timed traces of the observed automato n are a subset of those
of the speciﬁcation automaton, since each action of the form er will synchronize with
a valid action of the testing automaton created from the latt er. Reachability analy-
sis, in Uppaal, can determine whether Erris reachable and hence whether two timed
automata are related by timed trace inclusion. A formal desc ription of the testing con-
struction is given by Stoelinga [2002, §A.1.5]. A tool that p erforms the transformation
automaticallyforaclassofUppaalmodelsispresentedbyBo urkeandSowmya[2008].
The result of applying the testing transformation to the tim ing diagram model is
shown at the top of Figure 6 (in addition, all actions have bee n preﬁxed with a ‘ T’ and
all output transitions have been removed; the rationale and justiﬁcation follow below).
The original structure persists in the nodes and transition s with black lines, although
6Technically, the procedure veriﬁes a timed simulation relation, but time d trace inclusion can then be in-
ferred because it is a coarser relation [Lynch and Vaandrager 1996] .
ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0, Publication date: 2012.

--- Page 16 ---
Analyzingan EmbeddedSensorwith Timed Automatain Uppaal 0:15
x>=700 x>=700 x>2x>=15TvinH?TvinL?
TvoutH?TvoutL?
TpowerOff?
TvinH?
TvoutH?
TvoutL?
TpowerOff?
Tsample?x<700 TvinH?
x<700 TvinL?
x<700 TvoutL?
x<700 TpowerOff?
x<700 Tsample?x<700 TvinH?
x<700 TvinL?
x<700 TvoutH?
x<700 TpowerOff?
x<700 Tsample? b!=0 && b<=0 TvinH?b!=0 && y<=minspace TvinH?
x<10 && b<=0 TvinH?x<10 && y<=minspace TvinH?
y<=minspace && b<=0 TvinH?y<=minspace TvinH?
TvinL?
TvoutH?TvoutL?
TpowerOff?
Tsample?TvinL?
TvoutH?
TvoutL?
TpowerOff?
Tsample?TvinH?y<=minmark TvinL?
TvoutH?TvoutL?
TpowerOff?
Tsample?
b<=0 TvinH?y<=minspace TvinH?
TvinL?
w!=0 TvoutH?y>maxtrans TvoutH?changed TvoutH?w!=1 TvoutL?y>maxtrans TvoutL?
changed TvoutL?
TpowerOff?
y<=maxtrans Tsample?x<=2 TvinH?
x<=2 TvoutH?x<=2 TvoutL?
x<=2 TpowerOff?
x<=2 Tsample?TvinH?
x<15 TvinL?
TvoutH?TvoutL?
x<15 TpowerOff?
Tsample?TvinH?
TvinL?
TvoutH?TvoutL?
TpowerOff?
Tsample?x<15 TvinH?
x<15 TvinL?
x<15 && w!=0 TvoutH?x<15 && w!=1 TvoutL?
x<15 TpowerOff?
x<15 Tsample?Tsample?b>0 &&y>minspace
TvinH?y = 0
w==1 && x<15
TvoutL?
w = 0TvinL?
x = 0x<700TvoutL? x<700TvoutH?
w==1 &&y<=maxtrans&& !changedTvoutL?w = 0,changed = true w==0 &&y<=maxtrans&& !changedTvoutH?w = 1,changed = trueTvinH?x = 0y>minmark TvinL?y = 0, b = b - 1, changed = false
y>maxtrans Tsample?b>0 &&y>minspaceTvinH?y = 0
x<=2TvinL?x = 0, y = 0, b = 7, w = 1,changed = falsex>=15 TvinL? x = 0
x>=15TpowerOff? b==0 && x>=10 && y>minspace TvinH?
x = 0, y = 0w==0 && x<15TvoutH? w = 1Errs7
s0 s2 s1s6s3s8
s5s4 s10 s11 s9
GP2D02 TEST(13 locations.
98 transitions:
17 black, 81 gray.)veriﬁcation: 327 states (< 1s).
d1d
d1ed6
d0d5d2d7
d4d3x<=2
d8
d9vinL!x = 0x>=15 vinL! x = 0
x>=700 vinH! x = 0
voutH?sample! b>0 &&y>minspacevinH!y = 0
vinL!x = 0 vinH! x = 0y>minmark vinL!
y = 0, b = b - 1
y>maxtrans sample!b>0 &&y>minspace
vinH! y = 0
vinL!x = 0,y = 0,b = 7x>=15 vinL! x = 0
x>=15powerOff!b==0 && x>=10&& y>minspacevinH!x = 0, y = 0
DRIVERi0 i2x<700
i1x<700i5
i4x<=maxtransi3
i6x<15b==0vinH?x = 0
wire==1
voutL!wire = 0vinL?x = 0 voutL! voutH!wire==1voutL! wire = 0
wire==0voutH! wire = 1b>0 vinL?
x = 0, b = b - 1
vinL?x = 0, b = 7,wire = 1
wire==0 voutH! wire = 1
SENSORTpowerOff!
powerOff?
Tsample!
sample?
TvoutH!voutH?
TvoutL!voutL?TvinH!vinH?TvinL!vinL?
TBCAST// gp2d02_test
clockx, y;
boolchanged = true;
int[0 ,7] b = 0;
int[0 ,1] w = 1;// global
chanTvinL , TvinH, TvoutL , TvoutH;
broadcast chan vinL , vinH , powerOff , sample;
broadcast chan voutL , voutH;
// driver
clockx, y;
int[0 ,7] b = 0;
// sensor
clockx;
boolchanged = true;
int[0 ,7] b = 0;
int[0 ,1] wire = 1;
Fig. 6: Timed trace inclusion testing of the split model
ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0, Publication date: 2012.

--- Page 17 ---
0:16 T. BourkeandA. Sowmya
speciﬁcation
model
≤
implementation
model
(a) Normal scenariotiming
diagram
model
≤
driver
modelsensor
model
(b) The split model
Fig. 7: Deviation from the usual veriﬁcation of timed trace i nclusion.
the actions are now inputs rather than outputs. The new state ,Err, is the hub of a nest
of new gray transitions from each of the other locations. Whi le individual transitions
are not legible, the general structure is clear. Guards, whe re present, and actions on
the error transitions are tabulated above and to the left, re spectively right, of source
locations s7ands8andbelowtheothers.Forinstance,theonlyactionpermitte dfroms0
in the original automaton is vinL!, so in the testing automaton vinL?leads to s1, and all
other actions lead to Err; none of them have guards. The situation is similar from s1,
but since there is a location invariant x <700in the diagram model, a τ-transition
with guard x≥700, shown as an expression with no associated action, is added t o
the testing automaton, and the guards of the other transitio ns are augmented with
the invariant to ensure determinism. The guards on the error transitions are more
complicated at s5. For instance, vinH?is legal only when b>0, similarly, sample?is
forbidden when y≤maxtrans .
The standard testing technique is intended for comparing on e timed automaton to
another, see Figure 7a, but in the present case the implement ation model is a network
of timed automata whose interactions are to be veriﬁed, see F igure 7b. The two ap-
proaches differ from each other in their interpretation of a model as a set of timed
traces. The differences have ramiﬁcations for verifying ti med trace inclusion.
In the normal testing scenario, each automaton, be it speciﬁ cation or implementa-
tion,isgivenan openinterpretationwhereanyinputoroutputactionmayoccurat any
time. They are assigned maximal sets of timed traces that sub sume their behaviors in
any composition. A normal testing automaton is always ready to synchronize on any
input or output action, it effectively explores all possibl e behaviors of its environment.
In the split model, by contrast, there are two interacting au tomata, DRIVER and
SENSOR . An advantage of using broadcast channels is that the output actions per-
formedbyeitherofthecomponentsarestillobservableexte rnallyeveniftheyalsosyn-
chronize with an input action of the other component (wherea s successful handshake
communications would become τ-transitions). Any unsynchronized input actions re-
main possible, but they are not supposed to be triggered from outside since they are
explicitly controlled by one or other of the components.
A testing automaton must normally include both input and out put actions. This is
problematic for broadcast outputs because their occurrenc e says nothing about the be-
havior of the component being tested. Fortunately, they can simply be dropped from
the testing automaton in Figure 6 since the split model effec tively only performs out-
put actions. Broadcast inputs would work perfectly, since t hey observe interactions in
thesplitmodelwithoutinﬂuencingthem,butforaslighttec hnicality:Uppaaldoesnot
currently allow clocks in guards on transitions that synchr onize with input actions on
broadcast channels (so called ‘broadcast receivers’). For this reason only, the testing
automaton must synchronize on handshake input actions, hen ce the ‘T’ preﬁxes, that
are triggered by the new automaton TBCAST that unconditionally accepts the original
ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0, Publication date: 2012.

--- Page 18 ---
Analyzingan EmbeddedSensorwith Timed Automatain Uppaal 0:17
d1d
d1e dTd6
d0d5d2d7
d4d3x<=2
d8
d9vinL!
x = 0x>=15 vinL! x = 0
done!x>=700 vinH! x = 0
voutH?sample!
Dbyte[b] = wireb>0 &&
y>minspace
vinH!
y = 0
vinL!
x = 0vinH! x = 0y>minmark vinL!
y = 0, b = b - 1
y>maxtrans sample!
Dbyte[b] = wireb>0 &&
y>minspace
vinH! y = 0
vinL!
x = 0,
y = 0,
b = 7x>=15 vinL! x = 0
x>=15
powerOff!b==0 && x>=10
&& y>minspacevinH!
x = 0,
y = 0
DRIVER′
iTx<700
i0 i2x<700
i1x<700i5
i4
x<=maxtransi3
i6x<15measure!b==0
vinH?
x = 0wire==Sbyte[b]
wire==1
voutL!
wire = 0vinL?
x = 0voutL! voutH!wire==1 && Sbyte[b]==0
voutL! wire = 0
wire==0 && Sbyte[b]==1
voutH! wire = 1b>0 vinL?
x = 0, b = b - 1
vinL?
x = 0, b = 7,
wire = 1
wire==0 voutH! wire = 1
SENSOR′BadReadT1 T0measure?done?
Sbyte==Dbytedone?Sbyte!=Dbytedone?
v : int[0,BITRANGE]measure?
tobits(Sbyte, v)
TESTER// driver
clockx, y;
int[0 ,7] b = 0;
// global
broadcast chan vinL , vinH;
broadcast chan powerOff , sample;
broadcast chan voutL , voutH;// sensor
clockx;
boolchanged = true;
int[0 ,7] b = 0;
int[0 ,1] wire = 1;
voidtobits ( bool& ar[NBITS] , intv)
{
inti ;
intmask = 1;
for( i = 0; i < NBITS; ++i ) {
ar[ i ] = v & mask;
mask< <=1;
}
}// global
chanmeasure, done;
const int NBITS = 8;
const int BITRANGE = 255;
boolDbyte[NBITS];
boolSbyte[NBITS]; veriﬁcation: 851713states (< 10s)
Fig. 8: Models for validating transmission correctness.
broadcast outputs and ‘forwards’ them to their handshake co unterparts. The commit-
ted locations in TBCAST ensure that an action like vinL!is immediately followed by its
counterpart TvinL!, and thus that this modiﬁcation is sound.7
The Uppaal model for verifying timed trace inclusion of the s plit model against the
timing diagram model is shown in Figure 6. It is a composition :
DRIVER /bardblTBCAST /bardblSENSOR /bardblGP2D02 TEST.
Reachability analysis in Uppaal veriﬁes that A✷(¬GP2D02 TEST.Err), that is, the error
location is not reachable. This indicates that the split mod el of Figure 5 correctly im-
plements the timing diagram model of Figure 3.
4.3. Verifyingtransmissioncorrectness
The driver and sensor components of the split model interact to request and perform
range-readings, and then to transfer the resulting value bi t-by-bit through repeated
signaling and sampling over the vinandvoutwires. In the previous section, it was
establishedthatthesplitmodelimplementsthetimingdiag rammodel.Inthissection,
the correctness of data transmission is veriﬁed by augmenti ng the split model with
extra details, which do not affect the protocol, expressing the transmission property as
a separate automaton, and, ﬁnally, performing reachabilit y analysis in Uppaal.
The model for verifying transmission correctness is shown i n Figure 8:
DRIVER′/bardblSENSOR′/bardblTESTER .
An array Sbyte[8] is added at the sensor component to store the bits from the mos t
recent range-reading. The choice at i4between changing the voutlevel or leaving it
stable is no longer non-deterministic, but depends on the bi t value to be sent, that
is onSbyte[b] wherebis successively decremented by the transmission loop. An ar -
rayDbyte[8] is added at the driver component to store the bits sampled fro m the
voutline. The value on the shared wirevariable, previously used only to restrict level
changesinthesensorcomponent,iscopiedinto Dbyte[b] whenasampleactionoccurs.8
7Note that no two committed locations can ever be active simultaneously.
8Note that the b variables are local to the components and hence dist inct.
ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0, Publication date: 2012.

--- Page 19 ---
0:18 T. BourkeandA. Sowmya
The value of Sbytemust be set when a reading occurs and compared with that
ofDbytewhen a transmission is complete. The TESTER automaton performs these
tasks. But, importantly, the sensor itself decides when a re ading has been made and,
likewise, the driver decides when data has been received. Th ese judgments are part
of the interaction. New transitions are thus added to both co mponent models. In the
sensor model, a transition labeled measure!is added between locations iTandi2. The
new location iThas an invariant to preserve the timing properties of the pro tocol. In
the driver model, a transition labeled with done!is added between d5andd8. The al-
tered model has a different timed trace set to the original, b ut the protocol remains
fundamentally unchanged: dropping measure!anddone!actions from every timed trace
recovers the original set. The actions could also have been r enamed into τs to give a
set that would be equivalent to the original modulo τ-transitions.
TheTESTER component synchronizes on the measure anddoneevents. It assigns a
value to Sbytewhen the former occurs and compares it with the value in Dbytewhen
the latter occurs, entering BadRead if there is a discrepancy. A measureordoneaction
at the wrong time also causes TESTER to enterBadRead . All possible assignments
toSByteare tested using a selection binding to non-deterministica lly choose a value
in the range [0,28), before the tobitsfunction converts it into eight separate bits. The
same idea could be modeled using eight separate one-bit sele ction bindings, which
would obviate the need for a conversion function but also mak e parametrization, over
the number of bits to transmit, impossible. Reachability an alysis in Uppaal veriﬁes
thatA✷(¬TESTER .BadRead )and hence transmission correctness.
Range readings are correctly transmitted in the split model . Unfortunately, this fact
cannot be inferred of the timing diagram model because timed trace inclusion has only
been veriﬁed in one direction. The ability to make such infer ences would be another
advantage of showing timed trace equivalence.
5. ASSEMBLYLANGUAGE IMPLEMENTATION
The timing diagram typically serves as a speciﬁcation for wr iting drivers to integrate
the sensor’s functionality into larger designs. In §5.1, an implementation in assembly
language is described and then, in §5.2, it is modeled using t imed automata. In §5.3,
themodelisshowntobeanimplementationofthedrivercompo nentofthesplitmodel.
The timing diagram, split, and program models can thus be rel ated by two timed trace
inclusions: DRIVER /bardblSENSOR ≤TIMEDIAG andMCS51≤DRIVER. The limitations of
the assembly program model and the veriﬁcation are discusse d in §5.4.
5.1. MCS51 Program
A driver for the infrared sensor, implemented in MCS51 [Intel Corporation 1994] as-
sembly language, is presented in Figure 9a. It was adapted fr om a version written for
a 68HC12 microcontroller [Griebling 1999]. The MCS51 archit ecture (8051) is older
technology, but it is relatively simple, well-understood, and typical for the application
domain of low-level embedded controllers. Crucially, its i nstruction timing is simple
andpredictable.9Instructioncyclecountscanbeaddedtogetherwithouthavi ngtocon-
siderpipelining,cacheeffects,andothersimilarmechani sms.Whilethischaracteristic
simpliﬁes the timed automaton model of the next section, it a lso limits generalization.
In any case, the aim is to examine how timed behavior is realiz ed by the program, not
to propose a general methodology for verifying assembly lan guage programs.
The assembly program is called as a subroutine which interac ts with the sensor and
returns a range reading in the accumulator register. It func tions as follows.
9Several manufacturers provide microcontrollers that faithfully p reserve both the register behavior and the
cycles per instruction of the 8051 instruction set; even though the pe riod of a cycle may vary.
ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0, Publication date: 2012.

--- Page 20 ---
Analyzingan EmbeddedSensorwith Timed Automatain Uppaal 0:19
1VINEQUP1.0
2VOUTEQUP1.1
3W100USEQU50
4
5RREAD: PUSHIE
6 CLREA
7 CLRVIN
8 NOP
9 NOP
10 JBVOUT,*
11 JNBVOUT,*
12 MOVR0, #8
13LOOP: SETBVIN
14 MOVR1, #W100US
15 DJNZR1,*
16 CLRVIN
17 MOVR1, #W100US
18 DJNZR1,*
19 MOVVOUT, C
20 RLCA
21 DJNZR0, LOOP
22 SETBVIN
23 POPIE
24 RET
(a) MCS51 programMCS51
s17 x<=2 * Ps0 x<=2 * P
s1 x<=P
s2 x<=P
s3 x<=P
s4 x<=P
s5 x<=2 * P
s6 x<=2 * P
s7 x<=P
s8 x<=P
s9 x<=P
s10 x<=2 * P
s11 x<=P
s12 x<=P
s13 x<=2 * P
s14 x<=P
s15 x<=P
s16 x<=2 * P
s18 x<=2 * P
s19 x<=2 * P
s20x>=1500
x = 0x>=P
vinH!
x = 0R0!=1 && x>=2 * P
R0 -= 1, x = 0R1!=1 && x>=2 * P
R1 -= 1, x = 0R1!=1 && x>=2 * P
R1 -= 1, x = 0latch==0 && x>=2 * P
x = 0latch==1 && x>=2 * P
x = 0x>=2 * P
x = 0
x>=P
x = 0
x>=P
vinL!
x = 0
x>=P
x = 0
x>=P
x = 0
latch==0 && x>=2 * P
x = 0
latch==1 && x>=2 * P
x = 0
x>=P
R0 = 8, x = 0
x>=P
vinH!
x = 0
x>=P
R1 = W100US, x = 0
R1==1 && x>=2 * P
R1 -= 1, x = 0
x>=P
vinL!
x = 0
x>=P
R1 = W100US, x = 0
R1==1 && x>=2 * P
R1 -= 1, x = 0
x>=P
sample!
x = 0
x>=P
x = 0
R0==1 && x>=2 * P
R0 -= 1, x = 0
x>=2 * P
x = 0
x>=2 * P
x = 0POLL
voutH?
latch = 1voutL?
latch = 0//1unit =0.001ms
const int P = 1;
const int W100US = 50;
const int minspace = 0;
const int minmark = 0;
const int maxtrans = 0;
clockx;
int[0 ,1] latch = 1;
int[0,255] R0 = 0;
int[0,255] R1 = 0;
(b) Timed automata model
Fig. 9: Assembly language driver implementation.
Lines 1–3. These are assembler directives that declare constants. The ﬁrst two asso-
ciate the vinandvoutsignals with the two lowest pins of I/O port 0. The third deﬁne s
a constant W100USfor the number of iterations required to delay for 100 micros econds
later in the program. The value depends on the number of cycle s taken by certain
decrement and jump instructions and the clock frequency of t he target platform.
Lines 5–6 and line 23. The code is intended to execute without interruption on the
target device, so it begins by pushing the Interrupt Enable ( IE) register onto the stack
and then disabling all interrupts by clearing the Enable All (EA) bit ﬂag. Interrupt
handling is restored, prior to returning from the subroutin e, by popping the original
valueoftheIEregisterwhichcontains theEAbit.Disabling interrupts greatlysimpli-
ﬁes modeling and reasoning about program timing, but, again , limits generalization.
Lines 7–9. Line 7 sets the vinsignal to low. The following two NOP,no operation ,
instructions cause a brief delay before the status of voutis checked. They have no
ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0, Publication date: 2012.

--- Page 21 ---
0:20 T. BourkeandA. Sowmya
other effect. Pausing inthis way between Input/Output (IO) actions is characteristic of
assembly language programming and signiﬁcant with respect to timing behavior.
Lines 10–11. The instruction at line 10 either jumps back to itself if vouthas a high
value—the assembler replaces the asterisk witha relative of fset—orotherwise contin-
uestothenextinstruction.Itcontinuouslypollsthesigna lstateuntilthedesiredvalue
is observed. The next line is similar, it waits for a rising tr ansition on voutby jumping
back to itself while the signal value is low. The two instruct ions together await the
occurrence of two events in sequence: voutL–voutH.
Lines12–13andline21. Lines12–21implementaloopforreceivingareadingbit-by-
bit.TheR0registeristhecounter,itisinitializedto8atline12.Lin e13islabeled LOOP,
so that the instruction at line 21 can jump back to it—the DJNZ,Decrement and Jump
if Not Zero , instruction decrements the given register by one, then jum ps to another
location if the new value is not zero, and otherwise continue s to the next instruction.
The instruction on line 13 sets vinhigh, causing a rising transition: vinH.
Lines14–15. Betweentherisingtransitionon vinandasubsequentfallingtransition
there is a delay of approximately 100 microseconds, which is implemented by counting
downfromthe W100USvalueintheR1register.Thedelayisequaltotheamountofti me
it takes to execute the DJNZinstruction multiplied by the initial value of the counter
register. Such loops, with no internal statements, serve to delay program execution.
Lines 16–18. These lines set vinto low, giving a vinLaction, and then delay for an-
other 100 microseconds.
Lines 19–20. Together, these lines sample the level of voutinto the received range
reading. The former copies the bit named VOUTinto the carry ﬂag. The latter shifts the
contents of the accumulator to the left and sets its LSB to the carry ﬂag value.
Lines 22–24. Finally the driver sets vinhigh, restores the interrupt enable register,
and returns to the calling program.
5.2. Programmodel
Theassemblylanguageprogramismodeledasthecomposition oftwotimedautomata:
MCS51/bardblPOLL. The model is presented in Figure 9b.
Since only integer timing constants are allowed in Uppaal, t he timing diagram and
split model assumed a scale of one unit of model time to 0.1msof real time. It turns out
that even older microcontrollers, like those of the MCS51 fam ily, are much faster and
thusrequireasmallertimescale:oneunitofmodeltimeinth eprogrammodelisequiv-
alent to 0.001msof real time. The number was chosen for a device clocked at 12MH z
with a machine cycle every 12 clock periods and running at one cycle per microsec-
ond [Intel Corporation 1994, p. 1-18]. For the driver model t o serve as a speciﬁcation,
all of its constants must be multiplied by 100.
The program model is based on a direct translation from the so urce program. The
translation effectively gives a semantics for programs wri tten in the MCS51 instruc-
tion set in terms of timed automata. Close structural simila rity between the source
program and its model is important because results obtained for the latter are in-
ferred of the former. In other words, that the model is a faith ful formalization of the
program is determined solely by informal argument: the larg er the gap between them
the greater the risk of an error. A location snin the model of Figure 9b corresponds to
the instruction at line n−5in the program of Figure 9a.
It takes a ﬁxed number of cycles to execute each MCS51 instruct ion. These delays
and the propulsion of execution are expressed in the model by transition guards and
location invariants. The constant Pis the length of a single execution cycle. It varies
acrossMCS51implementationsandoscillatorfrequencies.T hemapping,though,from
instructions to the number of execution cycles is ﬁxed for th e instruction set [Intel
Corporation 1994, Table 10]—the informal semantics thus des cribe not only how in-
ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0, Publication date: 2012.

--- Page 22 ---
Analyzingan EmbeddedSensorwith Timed Automatain Uppaal 0:21
structions transform microcontroller states but also how l ong those transformations
take, at least nominally. Lower and upper bounds on instruct ion execution times are
expressed as inequalities between the clock x, which is reset on every transition, and
integer multiples of P. For instance, the /angbracketleftPUSHIE/angbracketrightinstruction takes two cycles to exe-
cute, thus the invariant at location s0isx≤2∗P, which forces progress, and the guard
on the outgoing transition is x≥2∗P, which expresses the execution time.
5.2.1. Modeling time. According to the translation, instructions begin and end at pre-
cisemultiplesof P.Whilethissimpliﬁcationisadequateforpresentpurposes ,sincethe
timing constants in the program model are an order of magnitu de smaller than those
in the timing diagram model, it ignores two potentially impo rtant aspects: oscillator
inaccuracies and processor states within machine cycles.
No oscillator is perfect. At the very least such ‘clocks’ dri ft with respect to one an-
other and against an ideal notion of real time. Such inaccura cies can be important in
certain applications, and, more fundamentally, their exis tence makes the decision to
conﬂate processor time and real time in the program model dou btful. They could be
incorporated into the program model by increasing the resol ution of model time and
widening invariants, for instance to x≤P +ǫ, and guards, x≥P−ǫ. In this way,
the (still idealized) behavior of the execution platform wo uld be encoded in the pro-
gram semantics, and any approximations, even just ǫ= 0, would be clearly stated.
Rather than blend the different aspects of platform and prog ram so implicitly, execu-
tion platforms could be modeled separately and composed wit h program models; the
models are then not only individually reusable, but each is a lso likely more compre-
hensible, the intricacies of their interrelationships bei ng left to the mechanics of the
modeling language. In one approach [Vaandrager and de Groot 2006], the cycle clock
is modeled as a separate automaton that emits a tickaction at intervals. The disad-
vantage, compared to simply widening the invariants, is tha t synchronizing with tick
on each instruction transition makes it awkward in Uppaal to also synchronize with
other actions, as occurs for inputs and outputs in the progra m model.
Aside from oscillator inaccuracies, the program model also abstracts from the de-
tailed timing behavior of an MCS51 device [Intel Corporation 1994, pp. 1-17–1-20].
Each oscillator period corresponds to a phase, two phases make a state, and six states
make amachine cycle . Instructions are fetched and executed at speciﬁc phases wi thin
a cycle. Signiﬁcantly, values are written or sampled from po rts in speciﬁc phases [Intel
Corporation 1994, pp. 3-33–3-35]. While many applications depend on the time taken
to execute individual instructions, it is doubtful whether the correctness of a system
should further depend on the ﬁner timing details within a cyc le. But such judgments
are perhaps best made by engineers for each speciﬁc applicat ion.
5.2.2. Featuresofthemodel. The program model contains several other interesting fea-
tures: input events, output events, loops for delaying, and assumptions on how fre-
quently range-readings are requested.
The program treats voutas an input line: Sometimes it reacts to changes in the
signal level. Sometimes it samples the signal level. It woul d not be accurate to label
transitions that represent instructions with voutL?orvoutH?actions because their oc-
currence is restricted to particular instants of time, wher eas not only may events of
both types occur at any time, but, for the model to be input-en abled, they must be al-
lowed to occur at any time. Instead, a separate automaton POLLis introduced. It effec-
tively models the hardware latches of the IO port connected t ovout. It is always ready
to synchronize with voutL?, setting a variable latchto zero, and voutH!, setting latch
to one. The assembler instructions that poll vout, for either a high level /angbracketleftJBVOUT,*/angbracketright
or low level /angbracketleftJNBVOUT,*/angbracketright, are modeled as loops, at s5ands6respectively, that poll the
latchvariable within the timing constraints of instruction exec ution. The assembly
ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0, Publication date: 2012.

--- Page 23 ---
0:22 T. BourkeandA. Sowmya
x>200
TvinH?TvinL?
TpowerOff?
Tsample?TvinH?TvinL?
TpowerOff?
TvinH?
TpowerOff?
Tsample? b!=0 && b<=0 TvinH?
b!=0 && y<=minspace * 100 TvinH?x<1000 && b<=0 TvinH?
x<1000 && y<=minspace * 100 TvinH?y<=minspace * 100 && b<=0 TvinH?y<=minspace * 100 TvinH?TvinL?
TpowerOff?
Tsample?TvinL?
TpowerOff?
Tsample?TvinH?y<=minmark * 100 TvinL?
TpowerOff?
Tsample?
b<=0 TvinH?y<=minspace * 100 TvinH?TvinL?
TpowerOff?
y<=maxtrans * 100 Tsample?x<=200 TvinH?
x<=200 TpowerOff?
x<=200 Tsample?TvinH?x<1500 TvinL?
x<1500 TpowerOff?
Tsample?
TvinH?TvinL?
TpowerOff?
Tsample?x>=1500 TvinL? x = 0
voutH?Tsample?b>0 &&
y>minspace * 100
TvinH? y = 0
TvinL?
x = 0TvinH? x = 0y>minmark * 100 TvinL? y = 0, b = b - 1
y>maxtrans * 100
Tsample?b>0 &&
y>minspace * 100
TvinH? y = 0
x<=200
TvinL?
x = 0,
y = 0,
b = 7x>=1500
TpowerOff?b==0 && x>=1000
&& y>minspace * 100TvinH?
x = 0, y = 0Err
d1ed6
d0d5d2d7
d4 d3 d8
d9DRIVER test
voutH!
voutL!SENSOR anyTpowerOff!
powerOff?
Tsample!
sample?TvinH!vinH?TvinL!vinL?
TBCAST′
veriﬁcation: 1803states(< 1s)
Fig. 10: Timed trace inclusion tester for DRIVER evt.
program waits for a rising transition on voutby ﬁrst blocking until the latched value
is zero and then polling again until it is one.
Outputactions,ontheotherhand,arejustiﬁablyconstrain edbytheprogrammodel.
Thus, and due to the assumption that outputs are never refuse d, the transitions for
certain instructions can simply be labeled with output acti ons:/angbracketleftSETBVIN/angbracketrightbecomes
vinH!,/angbracketleftCLRVIN/angbracketrightbecomes vinL!, and/angbracketleftMOVVOUT, C /angbracketrightbecomes sample!.
The loops at s9/s10ands12/s13cause the program to pause between changes to vin.
The register R1is ﬁrst initialized and then decremented until it reaches ze ro, which
accumulates individual 2∗Pdelays giving a total delay of W100US∗2∗P. The loops do
not change the microcontroller state in any signiﬁcant way, but yet they cannot be
removed without changing the observable behavior of the mod el. This is in contrast to
programming language semantics where such instructions co uld be shown equivalent
to an instruction that does nothing, for instance to skipor/angbracketleftNOP/angbracketright.
The guard on the last transition from s20back tos0,x≥1500, expresses a required
minimumdelaybetweencallstothesubroutine.Asthereisno locationinvarianton s20,
themodelallowsanyﬁnitenon-zeronumber,orevenaninﬁnit enumber,ofrepetitions.
5.3. Verifyingthe programmodel
Notonlydoesmodelingtheprogramofferinsightintotheass emblyprogram,execution
platform, and instruction set semantics, but the model itse lf can be validated against
the timing diagram and checked for other desired properties .
Thedrivercomponentofthesplitmodelismodiﬁedtoserveas aspeciﬁcationforthe
program model: all of the constants are multiplied by 100, to account for the increased
resolution of model time, and the top path through d1dis removed to make the model
deterministic. Determinism is required by the timed trace i nclusion testing construc-
tion. Since the assembler program does not wait for 70msor more after requesting
a range reading but rather begins clocking data in response t o an initial voutL, the
unused possibility is simply removed from the model. This is sound for timed trace
inclusion because it reduces the set of timed traces of the sp eciﬁcation.
A testing automaton for the driver speciﬁcation is derived b y slightly extending the
approach of §4.2.2: an automaton is built using the standard technique, all output
transitions to the Errlocation are removed, and all input actions are preﬁxed with ‘T’,
see Figure 10. This automaton must run in parallel with TBCAST′to work around
the Uppaal limitation on clock guards in broadcast receiver s. Additionally, since the
driver is open to the inputs voutL?andvoutH?, the tester must include corresponding
outputs. This explains the addition of SENSOR any, which effectively adds self-loops for
ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0, Publication date: 2012.

--- Page 24 ---
Analyzingan EmbeddedSensorwith Timed Automatain Uppaal 0:23
the two actions to all states of the tester except d1ewhich has a self-loop on voutL!,
and a transition elsewhere on voutH!. This modiﬁcation is justiﬁed because the driver
must be input-enabled for these outputs. It only works becau se, in this case, there is
no clock guard on the transition between d1eandd2; were this not so a TvoutH!action
and explicit self-loops would be required.
The relation between the driver speciﬁcation and program mo dels can be veriﬁed by
model checking the property: A✷(¬DRIVER test.Err)on:
MCS51/bardblPOLL/bardblDRIVER test/bardblTBCAST′/bardblSENSOR any.
Uppaal quickly shows that the property holds, and thus that t he timed traces of the
program model are included in those of the driver model. But w hat about the original
timing diagram? Importantly, it is the composition of drive r and sensor models that
was veriﬁed against the timing diagram: there is a possibili ty that the driver model
has behaviors which violate the timing diagram model, but wh ich do not occur in com-
position with the sensor model. The veriﬁcation thus shows o nly that the program
model iscorrect against thetimingdiagram model, and byinf erence theassemblypro-
gram against the speciﬁcation, provided that it is used with a correct sensor, namely
onewhosetimedtracesareasubsetofthoseofthesensorcomp onentofthesplitmodel.
Timed trace inclusion gives no guarantees about liveness, a nd such properties must
be checked separately. Both deadlock freedom, A✷(¬deadlock ), and that the routine
has the possibility of running to completion, E✸(MCS51.s20), hold when the program
model is placed in parallel with the sensor component with sc aled constants:
MCS51/bardblPOLL/bardblDRIVER evt/bardblSENSOR ×100.
The property that the routine always completes once called, MCS51.s0❀MCS51.s20,
does not hold: from i1the sensor can perform a voutL!andvoutH!before the program
starts polling at s5, which does not violate DRIVER because nothing forces a vinH!from
d2. Lower bounds on the sensor actions are needed.
5.4. Limitations
Thechoiceofsucharelativelysimpleexecutionplatformre strictsthenumberofissues
that must be addressed and simpliﬁes both the approach and ex position. But it also
means sidestepping the most difﬁcult aspects of timing on mo dern processors, where
executionpathsandcachecontentsmustbeconsidered.Moreo ver,themodelitselfdoes
not capture all the timing intricacies of the MCS51, and the qu estion of when such
complexities can be ignored completely, or distilled to mor e abstract principles, and
whether they must ever be modeled in complete detail merits f urther consideration.
Another limitation of the approach is that it ignores interr upts and the concomi-
tant timing complexity. For instance, delays in the program are implemented by busy
waiting rather than with timers. Furthermore, the possibil ity of being interrupted by
othereventsorconcurrentprocessesisnotconsidered.Whi leinterruptsareavoidedin
someapproachestoembeddeddesign,theyarewidelyusedinp racticeasalightweight
means of scheduling, and as a way to reduce latencies and impr ove timing accuracy.
The need for so much timing accuracy is indeed questionable, since the program
turns out to be two orders of magnitude faster than the timing constraints in the tim-
ing diagram. The challenge is to create delays rather than to meet deadlines, which
underscores the importance of programming with time but neg lects an important as-
pect of programming embedded systems.
Lastly, just as the sensor is usually just a single component of a system, so is its
driver just a single routine in a program. The issue of compos ing different routines,
each with their own timing behaviors and constraints deserv es more attention.
ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0, Publication date: 2012.

--- Page 25 ---
0:24 T. BourkeandA. Sowmya
6. DISCUSSION
The case study and its limitations. The detailed case study presented in this article
is a concrete example of an application of rigorous modeling and analysis methods to
a realistic, if small-scale, embedded component. It expose s the peculiarities of one spe-
ciﬁc problem, but also offers more general insights into the application domain. While
the example suffers several limitations, the limitations a re interesting in themselves
and could help to guide and evaluate future case studies. It i s challenging, however, to
extract general insights from the study of arbitrary exampl es; some peculiarities may
be truly idiosyncratic to a particular example. On the other hand, the design and im-
plementation of embedded systems are characterized by unco nventional devices and
ﬁne detail—research that ignores too many asperities risks i rrelevance.
While no pretense is made of proposing a general methodology , this article does con-
tribute a speciﬁc example to the growing collection of appli ed real-time veriﬁcations,
and it seems reasonable to make ﬁve general observations. Fi rst, time is integral to
some behavioral speciﬁcations and not simply a nonfunction al requirement for later
design stages. Second, while timing constraints can rule ou t sequential behaviors, as
exempliﬁed in the correctness argument for Fischer’s Proto col [Abadi and Lamport
1994, §3.4], this is not their only purpose. Third, timing be havior is not just about
meeting deadlines; determining precisely when an action oc curs is also important and
some commands are only given for their effect on timing. Four th, timing behavior
arises from an interaction of programming language semanti cs and platform char-
acteristics; creating models from the latter involves choo sing abstractions that are
suitable for the application at hand. Last, even a simple tim ing diagram can express
quite complex relations between events and present difﬁcul ties of interpretation.
The speciﬁcation models. It would be difﬁcult to argue that the model of Figure 3 is
easier to read than the timing diagram on which it is based, bu t it is certainly more
precise. The advantages of informality in timing diagrams m ust be balanced against
the need for accuracy during implementation and analysis. W hile timing diagram lan-
guages are not considered in this article, it is clear that th e modeling process involves
more than simple transcription: careful analysis, interpr etation, and the occasional
assumption may be necessary. Indeed, rather than clutter ti ming diagrams with the
additional constraints needed for precise formalization, it may be better to start with
a detailed formalism, like timed automata, and then to gener ate, according to manual
instructions, sets of timing diagram ‘traces’ to serve as do cumentation.
While timed trace inclusion of the split model in the timing d iagram model was
veriﬁed, the inverse relation was not. Using an approach bas ed on timed games and a
newmodel-checkingalgorithm,Bourkeetal.[2011]present analteredsplitmodeland
show full timed trace equivalence between it and the timing d iagram model. The use
of explicit testing automata nevertheless remains a simple and traceable alternative.
Real-time programming. The assembly language modeling and veriﬁcation exhib-
ited in this article is unlikely to scale. Verifying assembl y language programs of real-
istic size requires speciﬁc abstractions and techniques ev en when real-time behavior
is ignored [Schlich 2008]. Furthermore, the approach does n ot address interrupts, the
inclusion of driver routines in larger systems, or sophisti cated execution platforms.
It may be interesting to try to program the driver using diffe rent approaches, with
two requirements: that programs are veriﬁed against the tim ing diagram model, and
that programs can be faithfully executed against a real sens or. The adjective ‘faith-
fully’ implies an uncompromising relation between the veri ﬁed object and a running
system! Proposals should be evaluated on the compromise mad e between adequately
precise timing behavior and the interrelated issues of abst raction and portability. ‘Ab-
straction’essentiallymeanscomparingthetextofaprogra mwiththebehavioritseeks
ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0, Publication date: 2012.

--- Page 26 ---
Analyzingan EmbeddedSensorwith Timed Automatain Uppaal 0:25
to express, and ‘portability’ relates to the ability to reus e the expressed solution whilst
maintaining the timing behavior, at least within the constr aints of the original spec-
iﬁcation. The proposed assembly program can be executed and veriﬁed, and it has
precise timing behavior but it is neither very abstract, sin ce the desired behavior is
really only expressed as a side-effect of a nest of implement ation-speciﬁc detail, nor is
it especially portable, since it speciﬁes a very rigid trace of the timing diagram—the
ﬂexibility allowed by the problem constraints cannot be fur ther exploited.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Severaliterationsofthemodelof§3werepresentedat‘timedauto matateas’atNICTAduringwhichAnsgar
Fehnker, Peter Gammie, and Rob van Glabbeek asked insightful questions and made helpful suggestions.
Therestoftheworkinthispaperwasshapedduringapleasantafternoo natRadboudUniversityin2006
where Frits Vaandrager proposed both the approach used in §4.3 to t est transmission correctness, and the
timed trace inclusion testing technique applied in §§4.2 and 5.3.
We thank the reviewers for their valuable recommendations and comm ents.
REFERENCES
ABADI, M.ANDLAMPORT , L. 1994. An old-fashioned recipe for real time. ACM Transactions on Program-
ming Languages and Systems (TOPLAS) 16, 5, 1543–1571.
ALUR, R.ANDDILL, D. L. 1994.Atheoryoftimedautomata. TheoreticalComputerScience126, 2,183–235.
BOURKE, T. 2009.Modellingandprogrammingembeddedcontrollerswithtimedau tomataandsynchronous
languages. Ph.D. thesis, University of New South Wales, Sydney, Aust ralia.
BOURKE, T., D AVID, A., L ARSEN, K. G., L EGAY, A., L IME, D., N YMAN, U.,ANDW˛ ASOWSKI , A. 2011.
New results on timed speciﬁcations. In Recent Trends in Algebraic Development Techniques, 20th Int .
Workshop, WADT 2010 (Revised Selected Papers) , T. Mossakowski and H.-J. Kreowski, Eds. Lecture
Notes in Computer Science Series, vol. 7137. Springer-Verlag, Sch loss Etelsen, Germany, 175–192.
BOURKE, T.ANDSOWMYA, A. 2008. Automatically transforming and relating Uppaal models of e mbedded
systems. In Proceedings of the 8th ACM Int. Conference on Embedded Softwa re (EMSOFT’08) . ACM
Press, Atlanta, Georgia USA, 59–68.
GRIEBLING , E. T. 1999. GP2D02 assembly language driver for 68HC12B32 microcont roller.http://home.
earthlink.net/~tdickens/68hc11/code/sharpirhc12.asm .
HENZINGER , T. A., N ICOLLIN , X., SIFAKIS, J.,ANDYOVINE, S. 1994.Symbolicmodelcheckingforreal-time
systems. Information and Computation 111, 2, 192–244.
INTELCORPORATION . 1994. MCS®51 microcontroller family user’s manual.
JENSEN, H. E., L ARSEN, K. G., ANDSKOU, A. 2000. Scaling up Uppaal: Automatic veriﬁcation of real-time
systems using compositionality and abstraction. In Proceedings of the 6th Int. Symposium on Formal
TechniquesforReal-TimeandFault-Tolerance(FTRTFT’00) ,M.Joseph,Ed.LectureNotesinComputer
Science Series, vol. 1926. Springer-Verlag, Pune, India, 19–30.
KAYNAR, D. K., L YNCH, N., SEGALA, R.,ANDVAANDRAGER , F. 2006. The Theory of Timed I/O Automata .
Synthesis Lectures on Computer Science. Morgan & Claypool Publisher s, San Rafael, CA, USA.
LARSEN, K. G., P ETTERSSON , P.,ANDWANG, Y. 1997. Uppaal in a nutshell. Int. Journal of Software Tools
for Technology Transfer 1, 1–2, 134–152.
LYNCH, N.ANDVAANDRAGER , F. 1996. Forward and backward simulations. Part II: Timing-based sy stems.
Information and Computation 128, 1, 1–25.
RAMSEY, A. 2001. Interfacing the GP2D02 to a Microchip PIC. Encoder: The Ne wsletter of the Seattle
Robotics Society.
SCHLICH, B. 2008. Model checking of software for microcontrollers. Ph.D. t hesis, RWTH Aachen University,
Aachen, Germany.
SHARPCORPORATION . 1997. GP2D02: Compact, high sensitive distance measuring sensor.
STOELINGA , M. I. 2002.Aleajactaest:Veriﬁcationofprobabilistic,real-timeand parametricsystems.Ph.D.
thesis, Katholieke Universiteit Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
VAANDRAGER , F.AND DE GROOT, A. 2006. Analysis of a biphase mark protocol with Uppaal and PVS.
Formal Aspects of Computing 18, 4, 433–458.
Received May 2011; revised December 2011; accepted April20 12
ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0, Publication date: 2012.
