--- Page 1 ---
Aalborg Universitet
Dual Balancing of SoC/SoT in Smart Batteries using Reinforcement Learning in Uppaal
Stratego
Kristjansen, Martin; Kulkarni, Abhijit; Jensen, Peter Gjøl; Teodorescu, Remus; Larsen, Kim
Guldstrand
Published in:
IECON 2023- 49th Annual Conference of the IEEE Industrial Electronics Society
DOI (link to publication from Publisher):
10.1109/IECON51785.2023.10311828
Publication date:
2023
Document Version
Accepted author manuscript, peer reviewed version
Link to publication from Aalborg University
Citation for published version (APA):
Kristjansen, M., Kulkarni, A., Jensen, P. G., Teodorescu, R., & Larsen, K. G. (2023). Dual Balancing of SoC/SoT
in Smart Batteries using Reinforcement Learning in Uppaal Stratego. In IECON 2023- 49th Annual Conference
of the IEEE Industrial Electronics Society Article 10311828 IEEE (Institute of Electrical and Electronics
Engineers). https://doi.org/10.1109/IECON51785.2023.10311828
General rights
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright owners
and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
            - Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the public portal for the purpose of private study or research.
            - You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit-making activity or commercial gain
            - You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the public portal -
Take down policy
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us at vbn@aub.aau.dk providing details, and we will remove access to
the work immediately and investigate your claim.

--- Page 2 ---
Downloaded from vbn.aau.dk on: April 01, 2026

--- Page 3 ---
Dual Balancing of SoC/SoT in Smart Batteries
using Reinforcement Learning in Uppaal Stratego
Martin Kristjansen1, Abhijit Kulkarni2, Peter Gjøl Jensen1, Remus Teodorescu2, Kim Guldstrand Larsen1
mk@cs.aau.dk, eku@energy.aau.dk, pgj@cs.aau.dk, ret@energy.aau.dk, kgl@cs.aau.dk
1Department of Computer Science, Aalborg University, Denmark
2Department of Energy, Aalborg University, Denmark
Abstract —Battery packs in electric vehicles are managed by
battery management systems that influence the state of charge
among the cells in the pack, where such systems have received
much attention in research. More recently, balancing the temper-
ature among the cells has become a research topic. In our work,
we consider a dual-balancing problem where we aim to balance
both the parameters of the state of charge and temperature.
We consider a Smart Battery Pack, where individual cells can
be bypassed, meaning that no current is going to or from
the cell, which allows the cell to cool off while the cell does
not charge or discharge. Moreover, a smart battery pack can
estimate each cell’s characteristics, which, in turn, can be used
to define a model of cell and battery pack behavior. We conduct
experiments using the model of a battery pack where each cell
differs in its configuration as an effect of aging. For such a
pack with heterogeneous cells, we use Q-Learning in Uppaal
Stratego to synthesize a controller that maximizes the time spent
in a balanced state, meaning that all cells’ states are within a
specific range of each other. We show significant improvements in
two aspects compared with two threshold-based controllers that
balance either state of charge or temperature. The synthesized
controllers are only unbalanced with the state of charge between
1-4% of the time and for temperature between 15-20% of the
time. The threshold-based controllers are either unbalanced for
the state of charge for as much as 37% of the time or for
temperature for as much as 44% of the time. Finally, the
maximum variations of state of charge and temperature among
the cells are decreased.
Index Terms —Start Battery Pack, Digital Twin, SoC & SoT,
Dual-Balancing, Reinforcement Learning
I. I NTRODUCTION
The amount of electric vehicles is only growing, which
requires an ever-increasing use of Li-ion batteries. These bat-
teries are managed by a Battery Management System ( BMS )
with the responsibility to balance the use of the batteries in the
battery pack and to provide protection in case of undesirable
events such as thermal runaway. A conventional BMS aims
to balance the State of Charge ( SoC ) and relies on an active
cooling system to protect against thermal runaway. Moreover,
theBMS typical for electric vehicles only balances the SoC
during charging and not during discharging.
A Smart Battery (SB) Pack [1] has the potential to balance
both SoC and State of Temperature ( SoT ) with a so-called
bypass. Moreover, an SB Pack has local computation power,
This work was supported by the S40S Villum Investigator Grant (37819)
from VILLUM FONDEN, the Smart Battery Villum Investigator Grant
(222860) from VILLUM FONDEN, and the OPENSRUM grant (223286)
from MSCA-IF European Commission.so sensor data can be used to estimate individual cells’
characteristics [2]. With the help of the bypass, a cell can
decide to either carry the load current or not, thus making
it possible to balance SoC andSoT during both charging
and discharging. Other research has investigated balancing
an unbalanced SB Pack with homogeneous cells without a
cooling system using bypasses [3]. However, the cells in that
paper do not transfer heat to the environment or other cells,
meaning that they reach significantly higher temperatures than
they would in a real system.
Other research focuses on how to make a digital twin of a
battery, which then can be used to evaluate how aspects such
asSoC and State of Health ( SoH ) are affected by different
control algorithms [4], where they use Simulink as the mod-
eling framework. Other work also makes attempts to balance
bothSoC and temperature in electric vehicles by using Model
Predictive Control (MPC) [5]. Here, the model is implemented
and simulated in Matlab, where the control algorithms can
manipulate the voltage of the cells by predicting how the
behavior will be in the near future. Another approach with
MPC uses the modeling tool U PPAAL STRATEGO to model
the battery life-cycles of a nano-satellite in order to synthesize
a controller to optimize its lifetime [6]. Other areas where
UPPAAL STRATEGO has been used to synthesize an optimal
controller via reinforcement learning are, e.g., controllers for
floor heating in private homes [7] and for managing water
ponds [8]. In all cases using U PPAAL STRATEGO , the models
are defined as non-linear systems where a controller optimiz-
ing a given criterion is hard to find.
In this work, we investigate how reinforcement learning in
UPPAAL STRATEGO can synthesize a control strategy for a
BMS to balance both SoC andSoT in a battery pack consist-
ing of heterogeneous cells, meaning that they all have slightly
different characteristics resulting in slightly different behavior.
At the same time, we consider that the cooling of the cells can
affect the individual cells differently, but we cannot measure
the cooling temperature for any given cell. Making actions to
balance either SoC orSoT can have a negative impact on the
other [9], and this problem becomes even more challenging
to solve when the exact cooling temperatures of the cells
are unknown, giving the system a stochastic nature. It is a
complicated problem to solve optimally, so we investigate how
reinforcement learning can aid in synthesizing a controller that
helps balance both SoC andSoT given a system with non-

--- Page 4 ---
linear and stochastic behavior. Using reinforcement learning
also helps us avoid designing the controllers by hand, which
might be far from the ideal balancing algorithm.
Given that a smart battery pack has the computation power
available to estimate the individual cells’ states, we imagine
how an electric vehicle overnight could synthesize a new
balancing controller for its battery pack based on the newly
estimated characteristics. This would help the battery pack as
a whole in terms of uniform aging, where no cells would reach
their end-of-life much faster than the other cells, which has
the potential to extend the lifetime of all cells and, therefore,
the entire battery pack.
In our balancing experiments during discharge, we con-
tribute by showing how our approach based on reinforcement
learning significantly outperforms two hand-made controllers
designed to balance either SoC orSoT . We show that we can
significantly improve the time spent in a balanced state and
reduce the maximum difference in SoC andSoT .
II. B ATTERY MODEL
A smart battery pack consists of n-cells connected in series
as shown in fig. 1. Each ithcell has a half-bridge topology
across it with two complementary switches SiandS′
i. The
bypass operation in a cell in the pack is when the left switch
(e.g., S′
i) is turned on, resulting in bypassing the cell without
affecting the load current. Thus, if a cell has low SoC in the
smart battery pack during discharge mode, it can be bypassed
to prevent its rapid discharge and allow other cells to catch up.
Similarly, if a cell has a higher temperature than the average,
it can be bypassed to cool by transmitting its excess heat to
the surroundings.
The bypass operation naturally leads to a pulsed current
operation of the cells. It is shown in earlier works [10] that
pulsed charging can increase the cells’ lifetime. Thus, the
smart battery architecture is used to improve the cycle life
of the Li-ion battery pack. In this work, we extend its use to
perform SoC and SoT balancing under practical conditions of
mismatch in the cell characteristics.
+
+
+
Fig. 1. Smart Battery Pack
The individual cells we model as a circuit with a single
Resistor-Capacitor (RC) in series with the internal resistance,
as shown in fig. 2, whose behavior can be described with
ordinary differential equations (ODEs). This model is thesimplest form of the equivalent circuit models (ECM) used for
Li-ion cells. The key parameters of the model, R0,R1, and
C1, can be different for different cells, affecting their behavior
in a pack. For example, the parameters R1andC1change with
aging. The cell’s Open Circuit V oltage ( OCV ) is a function of
theSoC , which is modeled as a polynomial function in SoC
based on the laboratory test data. Note that the SoC is just
an integration of the applied current to the cell divided by the
cell’s capacity.
To properly model the temperature of the cell, we define the
terminal voltage ( Vt) of fig. 2 with the following equation:
Vt=OCV−iR0−vc1 (1)
where iis the current and vc1is the voltage drop across the
parallel combination of R1andC1. The current in discharge
mode is considered positive. Thus, eq. (1) describes the cell
operation during discharge. vc1is then further defined with
the following differential equation:
dvc1
dt=−vc1
R1C1+i
C1(2)+− OCVR0R1
C1i
Fig. 2. A Resistor-Capacitor circuit.
We use a thermal model to model the temperature rise at the
cell level. The current iin the cell produces heat due to losses,
which can also be represented via the ohmic components R0
andR1in fig. 2. The rate of temperature rise in the cell dT/dt
depends on the heat generated ( Q), convective heat coefficient
(h), mass ( m), and heat capacity ( Cp). The following thermal
equations represent this:
dT
dt=Q−hA(Tsur−Tamb)
mCp(3)
The heat generated Qis a function of the power losses
defined as:
Q=i(Vt−OCV ) +i×TδOCV
δT(4)
The latter term in eq. (4) can be ignored as its effect is
negligible compared to the first term as the OCV has a strong
correlation with SoC than the temperature [11].
Given all this, we can define the state of a cell as the
following:
Definition 1 (Battery State) .The state of a cell is given by
the tuple B= (C, S, T, R 0, R1, C1), where Cis the cell’s
capacity, Sis the current SoC ,Tis the current SoT , and
where R0,R1, and C1are those shown in fig. 2.

--- Page 5 ---
We then use the definition of the individual cells to define
the state of a battery pack formally:
Definition 2 (Battery Pack State) .The state of a smart battery
pack is given as BP={B1, . . . ,BN}, which is a multi-set of
Ncells.
The set BPthen consists of cells that can be identical or
different in their characteristics, such as the parameters used
in the fig. 2, the cell’s capacity, or the cell’s current SoC and
SoT . We write Bito denote the pack’s ithcell. As a shorthand,
we write SiandTifor the ithcell’s current SoC andSoT ,
respectively.
III. O PTIMIZATION CRITERIA
We aim to balance the SoC andSoT with the bypass action.
For a system to be in SoC and thermal balance, the span of
SoC s and temperatures must not exceed a given threshold
value. We can write this aim formally as:
Definition 3 (SoC Balance) .Given a battery pack BPof size
Nand a threshold value θSoC∈R, the battery pack is in SoC
balance iff ∀i, j∈ {1,2, .., N}.|Si−Sj| ≤θSoC, meaning that
the maximum difference of SoC isθSoC percentage points or
lower.
In our case, we work with a threshold value θSoC= 2,
which is an appropriate choice since the state-of-the-art often
offers a balance between 2-3 percentage points [12]. However,
the threshold value can be chosen to whichever value fits in
the context. Moreover, we have a similar definition for being
in balance with SoT :
Definition 4 (Thermal Balance) .Given a battery pack BPof
sizeNand a threshold value θSoT∈R≥0, the battery pack is
in thermal balance iff ∀i, j∈ {1,2, .., N}.|Ti−Tj| ≤θSoT,
meaning that the maximum difference of temperature is θSoT
degrees or lower.
For the remainder of the paper, we use the threshold value
θSoT= 1 implying a tolerated divergence of up to 1◦Cin
order to be in balance.
Ideally, the battery should always be balanced, but that
might only sometimes be possible. It is possible to have
situations where the bypass action helps one of the definitions
of balance but not the other. We, therefore, have the primary
goal to be in balance, followed by being as close as possible to
a balanced state where the spans of SoC andSoT are limited
as much as possible.
To later synthesize controllers, our definitions 3 and 4 are
not well suited to use directly given their binary nature of
whether a system is in balance or not; however, we want to
distinguish between unbalanced states since some a clearly
closer to be in balance than others. To accommodate a dis-
tinguishing of unbalanced states, we define what is known as
cost functions, which help determine how much it ”costs“ to
be in that state. These cost functions are then used as the
optimization criteria for the synthesis algorithm, as the goalwill be to minimize the expected value of a given fitness over
time.
We define the cost function δSoC for an individual cell’s
SoC as:
δSoC(S, Sσ) =(
0 if|S−Sσ| ≤θSoC
2,
(|S−Sσ| −θSoC
2)2otherwise.
(5)
Here, δSoC takes two arguments: the cell’s current SoC
(S)and the mean of the current SoC(Sσ). The function also
depends on the a priori given threshold θSoCthat defines when
the system is unbalanced. In eq. (5), we compare the given
cell’s current SoC with the mean value of all the cells’ SoC s.
If the cell is within half the current threshold’s value, we
define that as a good fit and return a cost of 0. Otherwise, we
calculate the squared error of the difference to the balancing
threshold. This gives a proportionally larger penalty for more
significant deviations for cells far from the global mean. It
is worth noting that the function does not follow our earlier
definition of balance since it focuses on a cell being close
to the mean rather than based on the entire system’s state
of balance. The assumption is that optimizing the individual
cells’ distance to the mean also optimizes the system’s time
in balance. Finally, if the system is unbalanced, one or more
cells are guaranteed a non-zero cost value.
To calculate the total cost of SoC at any given time, we
define the cost function ∆SoC for all cells’ SoC s as:
∆SoC(⃗S) =∥S∥X
i=1δSoC 
Si,P∥S∥
j=1Sj
∥S∥!
(6)
Here, the input ⃗Sis a vector of SoC s. The result is a
summation of the individual cell’s fitness function.
We have two equivalent cost functions for the temperature,
δSoT(T, Tσ)and∆SoT(⃗T), where the only difference is that
the inputs to the functions are the current temperatures and
that the threshold value used is θSoT.
We then combine them into one cost function for a smarts
battery pack’s state at any given time:
∆(⃗S,⃗T) = ∆ SoC(⃗S)∗(1−α) + ∆ SoT(⃗T)∗α (7)
where αis a constant within in range [0,1]. This allows us to
give different weights to the two different fitness functions, as
different weights are likely to affect the controller synthesis
differently, ending up with controllers that might take actions
that favor one type of balancing more than the other. Of course,
with an αof 0 or 1, the synthesis only considers the fitness
ofSoC orSoT , respectively.
Given ∆(⃗S,⃗T), the function can be integrated to get the
fitness of taking a series of actions (bypass/no bypass). The
rationale is that the lower value a synthesized controller
produces, the better the controller fits to solve the optimization
problem. Then, the optimization criterion of the synthesis
algorithm is to minimize the expected value produced by the
integral of ∆(⃗S,⃗T).

--- Page 6 ---
IV. C ONTROLLER SYNTHESIS
In this work, we leverage Model Predictive Controller
(MPC) via the modeling and synthesis tool U PPAAL STRA-
TEGO [13]. Given a (stochastic) model of the system to
control, U PPAAL STRATEGO can synthesize a (near-)optimal
controller using a combination of partition-refinement and
Q-learning [14], which are techniques designed particularly
for synthesis on models with complex stochastic and non-
linear dynamics. In this paper, we model the battery pack and
effects of a bypass in U PPAAL STRATEGO using Networks of
Hybrid Stochastic Priced Timed Games Automata, a high-level
modeling formalism supporting, e.g., behavioral descriptions
as (networks of) automata and C-style code. As part of the
model, we define what actions are available for any synthe-
sized controller, leaving out the component deciding when and
which cell to bypass. Instead, we rely on the before-mentioned
synthesis techniques for constructing a controller. We refer the
interested reader to [13] for details on U PPAAL STRATEGO and
to [14] for a thorough description of the learning algorithm.
To synthesize a controller, the template used is shown in
fig. 3 as an automaton (in this case, a state machine with clocks
and helper functions), where the red location is the initial
location from which it makes a bypass-decisions. In contrast,
the yellow location is a waiting location. The choice in the red
location is between two different bypass actions and the choice
not to bypass. Rather than allowing the controller freedom of
which cell to bypass, we delimit the controller to the cells
with the most deviating SoC andSoT . The assumption is
that if the controller should make a bypass, a (near-)optimal
choice would be any of those two. This delimitation reduces
the action space and the required training (i.e., computational
effort) to synthesize well-performing controllers. We leave for
future work the study of the impact of this delimitation and
to validate our assumption. As mentioned, the final yellow
location is a waiting location, where a clock must reach the
given frequency before the automaton returns to its deciding
location, which in this case is the red location. The dotted line
represents actions the synthesized controller does not control,
so the synthesized controller does not include the transition
from waiting to deciding. Note that time can only pass in the
yellow location as the red location is called a ”committed“
location, implying that time cannot pass when the automaton
is there. This emulates a ”zero-time“ action, which models a
discrete change in the mode of operation.
To synthesize a controller, we need to not only define
the possible actions but also what information to base the
decision on. The controller observes two parameters for each
battery: its current temperature and its SoC deviation from the
mean SoC . The use of the deviation from the mean is called
symmetry reduction, and we used this since the controller does
not need to know the exact SoC of each battery since the effect
of a bypass is the same at 80% and 20% SoC according to
our model. However, the same is not valid for the temperature;
thus, decisions are based on the absolute temperature value.
Fig. 3. An automata model of the template used to synthesize a controller that
either makes no bypass, bypasses the cell with the worst SoC , or bypasses
the cell with the worst temperature. The controller has a predefined frequency
of when to decide whether or not to make a bypass.
TABLE I
BATTERY CONFIGURATIONS OF THE 5-CELL BATTERY PACK USED IN
LEARNING AND SIMULATIONS
Cell 1 Cell 2 Cell 3 Cell 4 Cell 5
Capacity in Ah 50.32 49.75 49.48 49.7 50.6
R0inmΩ 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0
R1inmΩ 1.01 1.0 1.03 1.08 1.1
C1in kF 29.7 30 29.1 27.8 27.3
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40
Expected % of time with Unbalanced SoC during a discharge01020304050Expected % of time with Unbalanced Temperature
during a discharge
Alpha [0.05,..., 0.95]
Threshold SoC
Threshold Temp
No-Bypass
Fig. 4. Expected percentage of time in an unbalanced state given the use of
one of the synthesized controllers, one of the threshold-based controllers, or
not using any bypasses.
V. E XPERIMENTAL SETUP
We have run simulations of a battery pack consisting of
5 different cells, where all differ slightly in capacities and
the 1RC values R1andC1. Even though a vehicle consists
of battery packs of more than 5 cells, one could imagine a
controller for every pack of 5 cells, such that the balancing
among those cells is optimized. The small but noticeable
variations in the batteries’ configurations result from having
aged a little. The batteries we base the simulations on are
inspired by 50 Ah NMC Lithium-Ion prismatic cells with R0
of1.0mΩ,R1of1.0mΩ, and C1of30kF. In table I,

--- Page 7 ---
0.050.10.150.20.250.30.350.40.450.50.550.60.650.70.750.80.850.90.95
αused in strategy synthesis012345678910111213141516Maximum diﬀerence during discharge in SoC
in percentage points
Maximum diﬀerences in SoC during a discharge
given a synthesized strategyFig. 5. Max different in SoC during discharge under the different synthe-
sized strategies.
Threshold soc Threshold temp No Controller
Baseline Controller Used012345678910111213141516Maximum Diﬀerence in SoC during a discharge
Maximum diﬀerence in SoC in experiments given a baseline controllerFig. 6. Max different in SoC during discharge under the threshold
controllers and no bypasses.
we have a battery pack based on those specifications. R0is
the same for all cells as this parameter changes slowly over
time, while R1has random variation within a 10% range. C1
andR1have a relationship of C1R1= 30 , which is still
there even if the batteries have aged slightly. As mentioned
in the introduction, we assume that the parameters of each
cell can be estimated and, therefore, be used to configure the
model used in training when synthesizing a controller. The
one parameter we cannot measure is the ambient temperature
of the individual cells of the battery pack. However, we
know there can be a slight variance between the batteries’
ambient temperatures as the air heats up when flowing past
the cells. In every simulation, each cell is randomly assigned
an ambient temperature from a uniform distribution in the
range [24.25◦C; 25.75◦C], so there is a maximum difference
of1.5◦C. All cells start with 90% as the initial SoC and25◦C
as the initial temperature. We simulated with 1C discharge for
a duration of 50 minutes. This avoids the SoC ranges from 0-
10% and 90-100% as aging is accelerated within these ranges.
To synthesize control strategies, we use a training budget
of 30k simulations. The learning takes less than 6 hours to
complete on an AMD EPYC 7551 with 32 cores, where each
simulation is restricted to a single core. The timeframe is ap-
plicable if we imagine an electric vehicle’s smart battery pack
synthesizing a new controller during night-time. We synthesize
controllers with several αfrom the series 0.05,0.1, . . . ,0.95
to see how the balancing is affected by different emphasis
onSoC orSoT . As references, we run simulations with
two different baseline controllers based upon the threshold
value θSoC andθSoT. One only balances SoC while the other
balance SoT . They check the span of either SoC orSoT with
a given frequency. If the span exceeds the given threshold, the
SoC controller bypasses the cell with the lowest SoC while
the temperature controller bypasses the cell with the highest
temperature. These approaches follow the na ¨ıve framework
that action should only be taken if there is a problem and not
do anything preemptively.VI. E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS
We collect two metrics for the two threshold controllers
and our synthesized controllers: the time spent in balanced
states and the maximum difference between SoC andSoT
during discharge. We conduct 1000 simulations with each
synthesized controller, where each cell in each simulation
is assigned a random ambient temperature from the range
[24.25◦C; 25.75◦C]. In fig. 4, we see the expected time that
the synthesized controllers and the two threshold controllers
are unbalanced with SoC andSoT , and we also see how the
system is expected to behave if no bypasses are used. As a
reference, if no bypasses are performed, the system is out of
balance with SoC 21% of the time while being out of balance
with temperature 45% of the time. The threshold controller for
SoC is only out of balance for SoC 1% of the time while hav-
ing almost the same expected time of unbalanced temperature
as if not using bypasses. The temperature threshold controller
is only in an unbalanced state for temperature 5% of the time
but is in an unbalanced state for SoC almost 38% of the time1.
Looking at the synthesized controllers plotted in fig. 4, none
of them are expected to have an unbalanced temperature of
more than 20% of the time, while the worst is expected to be
unbalanced 4% of the time with SoC . In terms of balancing
both SoC andSoT , this is a significant improvement, but
it does not tell us anything about how much the SoC s or
temperatures can differ from each other when the system is
in unbalance. Figures 5 and 7 show boxplots of the maximum
differences between SoC s and temperatures, respectively.
The difference in temperature in fig. 7 is not highly affected
byα. For many strategies, the median value is around 1◦C
while the maximum difference is 1.7◦C. Even though the
ambient temperature spans 1.5◦C, all strategies can experience
a higher difference than that due to the generated heat in
cells with a high ambient temperature, different capacitance
1A reproducibility package for the findings can be found here: https:
//zenodo.org/record/8272060

--- Page 8 ---
0.050.10.150.20.250.30.350.40.450.50.550.60.650.70.750.80.850.90.95
αused in strategy synthesis0.00.51.01.52.02.5Maximum diﬀerence during discharge in SoT
in degree Celcius
Maximum diﬀerences in SoT during a discharge
given a synthesized strategyFig. 7. Max difference in SoT during discharge under the different
synthesized strategies.
Threshold soc Threshold temp No Controller
Baseline Controller Used0.00.51.01.52.02.5Maximum Diﬀerence in SoT during a discharge
Maximum diﬀerence in SoT in experiments given a baseline controllerFig. 8. Max difference in SoT during discharge under the threshold
controllers and no bypasses.
among the cells affecting the voltage, and that cells with a low
ambient temperature have a slower increase in temperature.
Figures 6 and 8 show the maximum spans under our
threshold controllers and using no bypasses, where we see
that the maximum difference in SoC andSoT can be higher
than those occurring under any synthesized controller. When
balancing only SoC or not using bypasses, the maximum
span of SoC is consistently at 2% and 2.5%, respectively.
Additionally, the temperature can span as much as 2◦C, which
is0.2◦Chigher than any strategy. Moreover, when balancing
only for temperature, the difference in SoC can be as much
as 15 percentage points, which is 6 percentage points higher
than the worst outlier under a synthesized strategy shown in
fig. 5. Only 3 simulations of the synthesized controllers had a
maximum difference in SoC of more than 5 percentage points.
Our synthesized controllers do not spend more time in
a thermal balance than the temperature threshold controller.
However, some of our synthesized controllers balance SoC
just as well as the SoC -based threshold controller and still
make improvements for SoT , even when that controller is in
SoC balance more than 99% of the time. This can be because
the synthesized controller can take preemptive actions to avoid
imbalance. In the end, all synthesized controllers are better
than the baseline controllers in having a better proportion
between the imbalance of SoC andSoT , and, in addition,
have lesser spans in SoC andSoT .
VII. C ONCLUSION & F UTURE WORK
In this paper, we show that we can utilize reinforcement
learning with U PPAAL STRATEGO and Q-learning to syn-
thesize controllers for a smart battery pack consisting of 5
heterogeneous cells. We show through simulations that we
make significant improvements compared to two threshold-
based controllers in terms of being balanced and reducing the
maximum differences between SoC andSoT .
Part of the future work is to increase the battery pack’s size
and verify the results on a physical system.REFERENCES
[1] R. Teodorescu, X. Sui, S. B. Vilsen, P. Bharadwaj, A. Kulkarni, and D.-
I. Stroe, “Smart battery technology for lifetime improvement,” Batteries ,
vol. 8, no. 10, p. 169, 2022.
[2] A. Kulkarni, H. Sorouri, Y . Zheng, X. Sui, A. Oshnoei, and R. Teodor-
escu, “Li-ion battery digital twin based on online impedance estimation,”
CPE-POWERENG , 2023, Accepted for publication.
[3] R. D. Fonso, X. Sui, A. B. Acharya, R. Teodorescu, and C. Cecati,
“Multidimensional machine learning balancing in smart battery packs,”
inIECON . IEEE, 2021, pp. 1–6.
[4] R. Di Fonso, P. Bharadwaj, R. Teodorescu, and C. Cecati, “A battery
digital twin based on neural network for testing soc/soh algorithms,” in
PEMC . IEEE, 2022, pp. 655–660.
[5] F. Altaf, On modeling and optimal control of modular batteries: Thermal
and state-of-charge balancing . Chalmers Tekniska Hogskola (Sweden),
2016.
[6] E. R. Wognsen, B. R. Haverkort, M. Jongerden, R. R. Hansen, and
K. G. Larsen, “A score function for optimizing the cycle-life of battery-
powered embedded systems,” in FORMATS . Springer, 2015, pp. 305–
320.
[7] K. G. Larsen, M. Miku ˇcionis, M. Muniz, J. Srba, and J. H. Taankvist,
“Online and compositional learning of controllers with application to
floor heating,” in TACAS . Springer, 2016, pp. 244–259.
[8] M. A. Goorden, K. G. Larsen, J. E. Nielsen, T. D. Nielsen, M. R.
Rasmussen, and J. Srba, “Learning safe and optimal control strategies
for storm water detention ponds,” IFAC-PapersOnLine , vol. 54, no. 5,
pp. 13–18, 2021.
[9] D. J. Docimo and H. K. Fathy, “Analysis and control of charge
and temperature imbalance within a lithium-ion battery pack,” IEEE
Transactions on Control Systems Technology , vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 1622–
1635, 2018.
[10] X. Huang, J. Meng, W. Liu, F. Ru, C. Duan, X. Xu, D.-I. Stroe, and
R. Teodorescu, “Lithium-ion battery lifetime extension with positive
pulsed current charging,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics ,
2023.
[11] A. Farmann and D. U. Sauer, “A study on the dependency of the open-
circuit voltage on temperature and actual aging state of lithium-ion
batteries,” Journal of Power Sources , vol. 347, pp. 1–13, 2017.
[12] H. Ren, Y . Zhao, S. Chen, and T. Wang, “Design and implementation of
a battery management system with active charge balance based on the
soc and soh online estimation,” Energy , vol. 166, pp. 908–917, 2019.
[13] A. David, P. G. Jensen, K. G. Larsen, M. Mikucionis, and J. H.
Taankvist, “Uppaal stratego,” in TACAS . Springer, 2015, pp. 206–211.
[14] M. Jaeger, P. G. Jensen, K. G. Larsen, A. Legay, S. Sedwards, and
J. H. Taankvist, “Teaching stratego to play ball: Optimal synthesis for
continuous space mdps,” in ATVA . Springer, 2019, pp. 81–97.
