--- Page 1 ---
Aalborg Universitet
Mutation-Based Test-Case Generation with Ecdar
Larsen, Kim G.; Lorber, Florian; Nielsen, Brian; Nyman, Ulrik M.
Published in:
Proceedings - 10th IEEE International Conference on Software Testing, Verification and Validation Workshops,
ICSTW 2017
DOI (link to publication from Publisher):
10.1109/ICSTW.2017.60
Publication date:
2017
Document Version
Early version, also known as pre-print
Link to publication from Aalborg University
Citation for published version (APA):
Larsen, K. G., Lorber, F., Nielsen, B., & Nyman, U. M. (2017). Mutation-Based Test-Case Generation with
Ecdar. In Proceedings - 10th IEEE International Conference on Software Testing, Verification and Validation
Workshops, ICSTW 2017 (pp. 319-328). Article 7899077 IEEE (Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers).
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSTW.2017.60
General rights
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright owners
and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
            - Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the public portal for the purpose of private study or research.
            - You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit-making activity or commercial gain
            - You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the public portal -
Take down policy
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us at vbn@aub.aau.dk providing details, and we will remove access to
the work immediately and investigate your claim.
Downloaded from vbn.aau.dk on: March 29, 2026

--- Page 2 ---
Mutation-Based Test-Case Generation with Ecdar
Kim G. Larsen, Florian Lorber, Brian Nielsen and Ulrik M. Nyman
Department of Computer Science
Aalborg University
Aalborg, Denmark
{kgl,ﬂorber,bnielsen,ulrik }@cs.aau.dk
Abstract —Model-based testing is a well-known technique for
automating the otherwise tedious process of testing. T est cases
are automatically created from a formal model, according to
some test criterion which determines when the test suite is
complete. In model-based mutation testing, the test criterion
is deﬁned via faulty models, called mutants, which are used
to create test cases that speciﬁcally target the modeled faults.
T o be able to reveal timing related faults, timed automata can
be used as the test model. While model-based mutation testing
has already been applied to timed automata, we show how to
implement the technique more efﬁciently with the tool Ecdar ,
which belongs to the well-known UPPAAL tool family. The tool
is used to perform an unbounded conformance check between the
correct speciﬁcation and the mutants, based on a notion of timed
reﬁnement. If a mutant does not reﬁne the speciﬁcation, Ecdar
creates a strategy for reaching the non-conformance, which can
be used as an adaptive test case. We applied the procedure to the
timed automata model of a car alarm system, which was used in
the previous approach of model-based mutation testing for timed
automata, and compare the two approaches based on the results.
I. I NTRODUCTION
In the last decades testing has proven to be a popular
technique for the veriﬁcation of industrial systems. Via testing
one either detects bugs, or raises the conﬁdence that the system
under test (SUT) works as expected. However, manual test-
case generation is an error prone procedure which does not
comply to safety standards. Thus, the trend went towards
automated test-case generation methods, like model-based test-
ing [24]. In model-based testing, a formal model is produced
from the requirements and used to derive test cases that cover
the interesting aspects. These test cases are usually produced
according to speciﬁed coverage criteria, like for instance state
coverage, where the produced test suite is intended to reach
all states in the model.
In model-based mutation testing [3], [7], the coverage crite-
ria is given via a set of fault models, called mutation operators .
Each fault model speciﬁes a certain type of fault that might
occur in a model, like for instance an off-by-one fault in
the enabling condition of a transition. By applying these
mutation operators to the formal model a set of faulty models,
called mutants , is generated. One can distinguish between
equivalent mutants , where the mutation did not introduce any
faulty behavior, and non-equivalent mutants , which do not
conform to the correct speciﬁcation anymore. For each non-
equivalent mutant, a test case leading to the conformance
violation is generated. If a (deterministic) SUT contains a bugthat correlates to the fault in a mutant, the test generated for
that mutant is guaranteed to detect it.
The technique can be applied to various different formalisms
for the test model, and has, among others, already been
applied to UML state machines [3], probabilistic ﬁnite state
machines [16], and timed automata [5]. The work presented in
this paper builds on the previous work on timed automata [5].
Timed automata extend traditional state machines by a means
for specifying timing behavior, i.e., they are extended by clock
variables which can measure the progress of time. By applying
model-based mutation testing to timed automata, the generated
test suite is able to speciﬁcally target timing faults in the tested
systems, such as delayed outputs.
In the existing approach [5] SMT-solving and bounded
model-checking were used to perform a bounded confor-
mance check between the speciﬁcation and the mutant. In
this paper we propose to perform the conformance check
with Ecdar [11], which allows an unbounded conformance
check, provides a signiﬁcant speedup compared to the previous
approach and enables the generation of adaptive test strategies,
which produce fewer inconclusive test verdicts than straight-
forward methods. We will present how the tool can be called
for a reﬁnement check between a speciﬁcation and its mutant,
and how the conformance check differs from the previous one.
Then, we will show how the strategies produced by Ecdar can
be used as adaptive test cases, which will (if possible) lead to
the mutation despite the choices made by the SUT. Finally, we
will compare the two approaches based on the timed automata
model of a car alarm system, that was used to evaluate the
previous approach, and discuss the pros and contras of the
approaches.
The structure of the paper is as follows: ﬁrst, in Section II
we will present some preliminaries, including the deﬁnition of
timed automata, the tool Ecdar and the workﬂow of model-
based mutation testing. Then, in Section III, we will discuss
some related work. Next, in Section IV we will present
the proposed approach using Ecdar, where we discuss how
the conformance check can be applied in Ecdar, and how
the produced strategies can be used as test cases. Then,
in Section V we will show our evaluation and discuss the
advantages and disadvantages of the new approach compared
to the existing one. Finally, we will conclude the paper and
give an outlook of future work in Section VI.
10th IEEE International Conference on Software Testing, Verification and Validation Workshops
978-1-5090-6676-6/17 $31.00 © 2017 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/ICSTW.2017.60319
10th IEEE International Conference on Software Testing, Verification and Validation Workshops
978-1-5090-6676-6/17 $31.00 © 2017 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/ICSTW.2017.60319
10th IEEE International Conference on Software Testing, Verification and Validation Workshops
978-1-5090-6676-6/17 $31.00 © 2017 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/ICSTW.2017.60319


--- Page 3 ---
II. P RELIMINARIES
A. Timed Automata
Timed automata [6] are extended ﬁnite state machines,
which contain clock variables for measuring the progress of
time. Let Xbe a ﬁnite set of such clock variables. A clock
valuation v(x)is a function v:X→ R≥0assigning a real
value to every clock x∈X . We denote by Vthe set of all
clock valuations and by 0the valuation assigning 0to every
clock. For a valuation vandd∈R≥0we deﬁne v+dto be the
valuation (v+d)(x)=v(x)+dfor allx∈X. For a subset
δofX, we denote by v[δ]the valuation such that for every
x∈δ,v[δ](x)=0 and for every x∈X\δ,v[δ](x)=v(x).A
clock constraint ϕis a conjunction of predicates of the form
x∼n, wherex∈X,n∈Nand∼∈{<,≤,=,≥,>}.G i v e n
a clock valuation v, we write v|=ϕwhenvsatisﬁesϕ.
Deﬁnition 1 ( TA):
A timed automaton Ais a tuple (Q,ˆq,Σ,X,I,G,T), where
1)Qis a ﬁnite set of locations andˆq∈Q is the initial
location;
2)Σis a ﬁnite set of observable actions;
3)Xis a ﬁnite set of clock variables;
4)I:Q→LIis a mapping from locations to location
invariants , where each location invariant li∈LIis a
conjunction of constraints of the form true ,x<n or
x≤n, withx∈X andn∈N;
5)Gis a set of transition guards , where each guard is a
conjunction of constraints of the form x∼n, where
x∈X,∼∈{<,≤,=,≥,>}andn∈N;
6)T⊆ Q × Σ×G×P(X)×Q is a ﬁnite set of transitions
of the form (q,α,g,δ,q/prime), where
a)q,q/prime∈Q are the source and the target locations,
b)α∈Σis the transition action ,
c)g∈G is the transition guard,
d)δ⊆X is the subset of clocks to be reset ;
The semantics of a TA Ais given by the timed transition
system[[A]] = (S,ˆs,R≥0,Σ,T), where
1)S={(q,v)∈Q×V| v|=I(q)};
2)ˆs=(ˆq,0);
3)T⊆S×(Σ∪R≥0)×Sis the transition relation
consisting of timed and discrete transitions such that:
a)Timed transitions (delay): (q,v)d−→(q,v+d)∈T,
whered∈R≥0,i fv+d|=I(q),
b)Discrete transitions (jump): (q,v)α−→(q/prime,v/prime)∈
T, where α∈Σ, if there exists a transition
(q,α,g,δ,q/prime)inT, such that: (1) v|=g; (2)
v/prime=v[δ]and (3)v/prime|=I(q/prime);
We denote by (q,v/prime)=(q,v)afterdthe state reached from
(q,v)by a delay of d, and by(q/prime,v/prime)=(q,v)afterαthe state
reached by performing an αtransition from (q,v). We denote
by(q,v)/negationslashd−→that the delay of dis not possible in (q,v).
Arunρof an TA Ais a ﬁnite sequence of alternating
timed and discrete transitions of the form (q0,v0)d1−→(q0,v0+
d1)τ1−→(q1,v1)d2−→···dn−→(qn−1,vn−1+dn)τn−→(qn,vn),Fig. 1. A timed I/O automaton.
whereq0=ˆq,v0=0,τi=(qi−1,αi,gi,Xrst(i),qi)∈T and
αi∈Σ.
A TA is called deterministic ,i f f(q,v)α−→(q/prime,v/prime)∧(q,v)α−→
(q/prime/prime,v/prime/prime)=⇒(q/prime,v/prime)=(q/prime/prime,v/prime/prime),α∈Σ∪{/epsilon1}.
a) Timed I/O Automata: In Timed I/O Automata
(TIOA), the set of actions Σis split into two disjoint
sets of input actions ΣIand output actions ΣO. Thus, a
TIOAAiois a tuple (Q,ˆq,ΣI,ΣO,X,I,G,T). Figure 1
illustrates a timed I/O automaton for which we have
Q={q0,q1,q2,q3},ˆq=q0,ΣI={c?},ΣO={a!,b!},
X={x},I={q2→x≤5},G={x≥3}andT=
{(q0,a!,true,{x},q1),(q0,b!,true,{x},q2),(q1,c?,x≥
3,{},q2),(q2,a!,x≥4,{},q4)}. The semantics of timed
I/O automata is given by timed input/output transition
systems [[Aio] ]=(S,ˆs,R≥0,ΣI,ΣO,T), where discrete
transitions are split into input actions, hereafter denoted
by(q,v)i?−→(q/prime,v/prime), and output actions, denoted by
(q,v)o!−→(q/prime,v/prime).
We denote by out(q,v)the set of output actions that appear
in any of the transitions leaving (q,v).
A TIOA Ais input-enabled, iff in its underlying TIOTS for
all locations (q,v)and all inputs i?, there exists a transition
(q,v)i?−→(q/prime,v/prime).
A TIOA Asatisﬁes the independent-progress condition, iff
in its underlying TIOTS for all locations (q,v)either∀d≥
0:(q,v)d−→(q,v/prime)or∃d≥0:(q,v)d−→(q,v/prime)∧(q,v/prime)o!−→
(q/prime,v/prime/prime), for some q/prime/prime/negationslash=q/prime. Thus, either the system can stay in
a location forever, or there exists an output transition leaving
the location. Consequently, the system will never block the
progress of time.
In the presented work we only consider deterministic and
input-enabled TIOA satisfying the independent-progress con-
dition. The automaton illustrated in Figure 1 is deterministic
and satisﬁes the independent-progress condition. However,
the transitions for making it input enabled were omitted for
keeping it simple.
b) Ecdar: The tool Ecdar was developed on top of
UPPAAL-TIGA, implementing the timed interface theory pre-
sented by David et al. [11]. It works on timed I/O automata,
where inputs are deﬁned as controllable and outputs are
deﬁned as uncontrollable. The tool implements reﬁnement
checks, consistency checks, composition of models and a
320
320
320

--- Page 4 ---
Requirements
System
Under TestTest Model Mutation Tool
Conformance
Check
Test-Case
Generator
Test CasesMutation Operators
Test Driver VerdictMutated Models
Fig. 2. Model-based mutation testing workﬂow.
quotient operator. In the context of this paper, we will use
the reﬁnement check for checking whether or not a mutant
reﬁnes the correct model.
The notion of reﬁnement used by Ecdar and introduced by
David et al. [11] closely corresponds to the timed input-output
conformance [19], and they coincide for input-enabled models.
It is deﬁned via the reﬁnement between the underlying timed
input/output transition systems:
Deﬁnition 2 (Reﬁnement):
A TIOTS I(SI,ˆsI,R≥0,ΣI,ΣO,TI)reﬁnes a
TIOTS S(SS,ˆsS,R≥0,ΣI,ΣO,TS), written I≤S,i f f
there exists a binary relation R⊆QI×QScontaining
(ˆsI,ˆsS)such that for each pair of states (sI,sS)∈Rwe
have:
1) whenever sSi?−→s/prime
S∈TSfor some s/prime
S∈SSthen
sIi?−→s/prime
I∈TIand(s/prime
I,s/prime
S)∈Rfor some s/prime
I∈SI
2) whenever sIo!−→s/prime
I∈TIfor some s/prime
I∈SIthensSo!−→
s/prime
S∈TSand(s/prime
I,s/prime
S)∈Rfor some s/prime
S∈SS
3) whenever sId−→s/prime
I∈TIfor some d∈R≥0thensSd−→
s/prime
S∈TSand(s/prime
I,s/prime
S)∈Rfor some s/prime
S∈SS
Consequently, a TIOA AIreﬁnes a TIOA ASif the
corresponding TIOTS [[AI]]reﬁnes the corresponding
TIOTS[[AS]].
Thus, if an implementation reﬁnes a speciﬁcation, then 1)
for every input that can be applied to the speciﬁcation, that
input needs to be enabled in the implementation as well, 2)
every output that can be produced by the implementation
needs to be produced by the speciﬁcation as well and 3)
the implementation can only delay time if the speciﬁcation
can. Within the presented approach, the reﬁnement check will
be applied between the original speciﬁcation and the slightly
altered mutant, to check whether the mutant still reﬁnes the
original speciﬁcation. The mutated automaton from Figure 3
does not reﬁne its original speciﬁcation from Figure 1, as
it allows an output at time x=3 in location q2. However,
the speciﬁcation reﬁnes the mutant, as the mutant covers all
outputs allowed by the speciﬁcation.In the case of non-reﬁnement, Ecdar is able to use UPPAAL-
TIGA to produce strategies leading to the non-reﬁnement.
The strategy is produced according to a two player timed
game on the product of the correct speciﬁcation and the
mutant, where the input transitions are controlled by the player,
and the outputs are controlled by the opponent. The goal
of a strategy is to reach some set of goal-states, denoted
byK⊆Q × R≥0, in the TIOTS of a TIOA which in
our case is given by the states that reveal non-conformance.
A run of length nthrough a TIOA is a winning run if
∃k.0≤k≤n∧(qk,vk)∈K). We call the set of all winning
runs and all preﬁxes of winning runs WR. A strategy fis
a function guiding the player of a timed game towards the
winning states K. A strategy can advise the player to either
trigger a speciﬁc input, or to wait, denoted by λ. A state-based
strategyffor a TIOTS (S,ˆs,R≥0,ΣI,ΣO,T)is a partial
function from StoΣI∪{λ}. A run is said to be supervised by
the strategy f, if for every step (qk,vk)dk+1−−−→(qk,vk+dk+1)
we have ∀d/prime∈[0,dk+1).f(qk,vk+d/prime)=λand for every
step(qk,vk)τk−→(qk+1,vk+1)we have αk∈ΣO∨(αk∈
ΣI∧f(qk,vk)=αk). A strategy is a winning strategy on a
TIOAAfor the goal states K, if all supervised runs in A
are inWR. A strategy is a cooperative strategy if it contains
at least one winning run and every supervised run r/∈WR
contains two preﬁxis p1,p2of length k≥0andk+1,s o
thatp∈WR,p1/∈WR andαk∈ΣO. Thus, a cooperative
strategy can guide the player to the goal states, if the opponent
cooperates.
B. Model-based Mutation Testing
Model-based mutation testing is a combination of model-
based testing [24] and mutation testing [17]. However, unlike
most classical mutation testing approaches, the technique is
not used for assessing the quality of an existing testsuite,
but to create a new test suite based on the tests needed to
detect a given set of fault models. The general workﬂow of
model-based mutation testing is depicted in Figure 2. The
321
321
321

--- Page 5 ---
workﬂow starts with the requirements, which are used (usually
by individual teams) to create both the SUT and a formal test
model. The test model is then processed by a mutation tool,
which will insert different kinds of faults into the model. The
types of faults are deﬁned via a set of mutation operators,
which may include changing the target/goal locations of tran-
sitions or the enabling conditions of guards. This produces
a set of faulty test models, called mutants. These mutants
usually contain one fault each, and are thus called ﬁrst-order
mutants . It is however also possible to insert multiple faults
and thus produce higher-order mutants . Figure 3 illustrates a
mutant of the TIOA illustrated in Figure 1, where an off-by-
one fault was introduced into one of the guards, enabling the
corresponding transition early.
After the mutation is done, the core of the test-case gen-
eration is performed, which is mainly the conformance check
between the correct speciﬁcation and each of the mutants. In
case the introduced fault did not insert any detectable faulty
behavior, the mutant is classiﬁed as equivalent with respect
to the used conformance relation and discarded. Otherwise,
the conformance check produces a counterexample to the
conformance, i.e., a trace leading from the initial location to
the transition where the mutation is revealed by the faulty
behavior of the mutant. This counterexample is then turned
into a test case, which means that it is extended by verdicts,
and possibly made more adaptive. E.g., in the previous ap-
proach [5] the test cases were made time-adaptive, by using the
concrete times from the counter example to calculate timing
constraints for the test-case execution which guarantee taking
the same path through the timed automaton even if the test-
execution slightly deviates from the concrete times. Finally,
each created test is executed on the SUT and either reveals
a bug, assigning the verdict fail to the test execution, or
runs through correctly, assigning the verdict pass. In special
cases, when the SUT is allowed to choose between several
outputs, or has a large time frame during which an output
may occur, the system may choose an output (or time for
an output), which is correct but not the one expected by the
test case. In such cases, a non-adaptive test case may not
reach its test purpose, i.e., the mutation, anymore, but also
did not reveal a bug. In this case, most testing frameworks
assign the verdict inconclusive . Depending on the test-case
generation method, the produced test cases may be more or
less adaptive. Non-adaptive test cases only cover the trace of
the concrete counterexample, while adaptive test-cases contain
additional information, in case the speciﬁcation produces a
different output. Thus, adaptive test-cases can steer the test-
case execution back towards the goal of the test case, if a path
back exists.
If the SUT contains a bug that corresponds to any of the
mutations, the produced test suite is guaranteed to detect it, or,
in certain cases, assign the inconclusive verdict. Additionally,
the corresponding mutant can serve as an aid for detecting the
bug, as it shows the location and type of the bug.Fig. 3. A mutant of the timed I/O automaton illustrated in Figure 1.
III. R ELATED WORK
For general information on model-based testing and muta-
tion testing, we refer to the corresponding surveys [24], [17].
Mutations have already been used for the generation of test
cases both on the code level, see e.g. the work by Offutt and
Untch [22], and on the model level, which will be discussed
shortly. Both approaches face a lot of common problems, like
the high number of mutants, or their expansive execution, and
consequently, there is also an overlap in possible solutions. For
instance, Xavier et al. [14] recently proposed a methodology
for generating featured mutant models , which are models
containing all possible mutants of a transition system within
one model. This both enables higher-order mutants and a very
efﬁcient test execution, where the state-space only needs to
be explored once. While they use the approach for validating
existing test suits, the approach is model-based and could be
applied for the test-case generation as well.
Model-based mutation testing was ﬁrst introduced by Budd
and Gobal [8] for predicate-calculus speciﬁcations. Later on,
it was adapted to various formalisms, like probabilistic ﬁnite
state machines [16], action systems [2] speciﬁcations and
UML state machines [3]. The approaches presented so far
mainly focused on testing the functional behavior of the SUT,
while the presented approach uses timed automata to be able
to target timing faults as well.
Timed automata have been used for test-case generation
several times. The tools UPPAAL Cover [15] and UPPAAL
Tron [20] were speciﬁcally developed to provide online and
ofﬂine testing for timed automata. They can be used with
various different testing criteria, however not with a fault-
based approach. Krichen and Tripakis [18] proposed a testing
framework for edge coverage, location coverage and state
coverage for timed automata. Their tool, TTG, can process
non-deterministic timed automata, and produce deterministic
testers. Wang et al. [26] proposed an algorithm and tool
support for a conformance check between timed automata,
allowing non-deterministic but determinizable timed automata.
However, they never applied the approach to test-case gener-
ation. There also have been several approaches using game
strategies for testing of timed systems: David et al. [12]
uses UPPAAL-TIGA for creating winning strategies according
to manually designed test purposes. These strategies were
322
322
322

--- Page 6 ---
then translated into traditional test cases, loosing parts of
their ﬂexibility. In other work David et al. [9] also used the
strategies directly for test-case execution. However, since they
were still created from test purposes instead of mutants, the
test execution varies from the algorithm that will be presented
in Section IV. Additional work by David et al. [10], [13]
extended their approach to partially observable systems and
systems with concurrent behavior. Again, those approaches
were based on manual test purposes and created test strategies
that contain the expected behavior, while our test-strategies in
their last step reﬂect the behavior of the mutant, and thus need
a different test-execution.
Mutation of timed automata has so far been performed by
AbouTrab et al. [1], Nilsson et al. [21] and Aichernig et
al. [5]. AboutTrap et al. used the mutants for classical mutation
testing, i.e., to assess the quality of existing test suites, not for
the generation of new tests. Nilsson et al. used mutations of
timed automata with tasks for test-case generation, however
the mutation operators focused on the tasks, rather then on
the clock resets and guards. The work by Aichernig at al.
is the most related work to the presented approach, and will
be the work that we compare our results with during the
evaluation. They proposed model-based mutation testing for
timed automata, and implemented the approach in the tool
MoMuT::TA. The tool provides a mutator for timed automata,
the conformance check where timed input-output conformance
(tioco) [19] is used a the conformance relation, and in its
initial version also a translation from a counterexample to time
adaptive test cases. They performed the conformance check via
bounded model-checking, using SMT solving. Thus, contrary
to the presented approach that uses UPPAAL’s zone based
algorithms, they only perform a bounded conformance check.
Additionally, the test cases they produced are less adaptive
than the ones created by the presented approach. A closer
comparison of the approaches can be found in Section V.
IV . M ODEL -BASED MUTATION TESTING WITH ECDAR
A. Reﬁnement Check
While Ecdar does not perform mutations on models1,i t
provides full capabilities for the conformance check between
the speciﬁcation and the mutants and the generation of the
strategies used for testing. Conformance is expressed as reﬁne-
ment, using the reﬁnement relation introduced in Deﬁnition 2.
For input-enabled, deterministic models, this reﬁnement rela-
tion corresponds to tioco-conformance. In our approach, input
enabledness is ensured via demonic completion [25] for the
speciﬁcation and via angelic completion [23] for the mutants.
Demonic completion means that for each undeﬁned input we
create a transition with that input, which leads to a universal
state. Thus, if the speciﬁed area is left, every future behavior
becomes possible. Traces leading to the universal state will
never yield a counterexample to the reﬁnement, as everything
reﬁnes the universal state. This ﬁts our needs, since most ioco-
based testing approaches [25] are only interested in testing the
1In our experiments we used mutants generated with MoMuT::TA.speciﬁed parts of the system, allowing the usage of under-
speciﬁed models that do not cover all functionality. These
under-speciﬁed models allow the implementation to react to
additional inputs, while they must produce the correct outputs
for the inputs speciﬁed by the model. Angelic completion
creates self-loops for undeﬁned inputs, indicating that those
inputs are simply ignored. While a mutant is allowed to only
deﬁne partial behavior of the complete speciﬁcation, it is not
allowed to block any input.
To apply the reﬁnement check between a TIOA speci-
ﬁcationSand a TIOA mutant M, the call to the Ecdar
veriﬁer is simply refinement :M<=S. The problem is
solved as a timed game, where the mutant is seen as the
opponent triggering the uncontrollable actions. The goal for
the speciﬁcation is to ﬁnd a strategy that reveals the non-
reﬁnement, regardless of the outputs chosen by the mutant. If
such a strategy exists, it can be stored in a ﬁle or printed to
the console.
Listing 1. The strategy for detecting the mutant of Figure 3.
−State : ( S.q0, M .q0)
W h e n you are in true ,
take M.q0 −>M. q2{,b ! ,x : = 0 }
−State : (S.q1, M .q1)
While you are in (S.x <3),
wait
When you are in (S.x==3),
take S.q1 −>S.q 2{x>=3, c ? , }
−State : (S.q2, M .q2)
While you are in (S.x <3),
wait
When you are in (S.x==3),
take M.q2 −>M. q3{x>=3, a ! , }
A strategy stored by Ecdar consists of a list of pairs of
states, and the corresponding rules for each pair. A rule may
either be a delay rule Rλor an action rule Rαand each
pair may be linked to several of both. Delay rules consist
of a timing condition φδand the command to wait, while the
timing condition holds true. Action rules consist of a timing
condition φαand the transition that shall be taken, as soon
asthe timing condition holds. Listing 1 gives an example
strategy produced for the speciﬁcation S and the mutant M, as
depicted in Figures 1 and 3. While both automata are in the
initial location there are no timing constraints, thus there is no
need to wait and the tuple contains only an action rule. Note,
that thebtransition is uncontrollable and thus triggered by
the mutant, while the action rule associated to (S.q1,M.q 1)
is controllable, and thus associated to the speciﬁcation. The
transitions associated to the mutant are just kept in the strategy
to keep it complete. During the actual test execution, the
SUT will trigger the uncontrollable actions and thus they are
not restricted by the strategy. Note that the clocks of both
speciﬁcations may be used in the timing conditions, and that
they also may be compared among each other.
Contrary to non-adaptive test cases that usually generate
inconclusive verdicts if the test purpose can not be directly
323
323
323

--- Page 7 ---
Fig. 4. A non-adaptive testcase for revealing the mutant from Figure 3.
reached, these strategies allow a far more ﬂexible test-case
execution. Consider the automaton presented in Figure 3
and the non-adaptive testcase from Figure 4, that would be
generated by MoMuT::TA from the shortest counterexample.
The test case reveals the mutation, if the SUT produces a b!
output in the initial location, while the test-case execution is
aborted with an inconclusive verdict if an a!is produced. The
strategy provided by Ecdar is given in Listing 1. The action
rule leaving (S.q0,M.q 0)is uncontrollable, and suggests that
the mutant takes the b!transition. However, during the test
execution, the mutant will be replaced by the SUT, which
has the free choice between producing an a!or ab!.I fi t
decides to produce an a!, this is no problem, as the test
strategy contains instructions for q1, thus guaranteeing the
test execution to reach the mutation. However, it needs to
be mentioned that there exist systems for which a winning
strategy can not be built. Consider the c?transition from q1to
q2did not exist: in that case, there exists no winning strategy
and if the SUT decides to produce an a!our test-case execution
can only assign an inconclusive verdict as well. Thus, we
distinguish three types of outcomes of the reﬁnement check.
The output may be a winning strategy, i.e., the mutation will be
reached regardless of the decisions of the SUT, a cooperative
strategy [12], i.e., the mutation will be reached if the system
produces the right outputs, or no strategy, if the mutant reﬁnes
the original model. In case we produce a cooperative strategy
in a cyclic automata, if the SUT produces the wrong output
during the test execution, the strategy leads back to the initial
location, and tries to reach the mutation again.
An additional advantage of Ecdar is the support for higher-
order mutants, i.e. mutants with multiple faults inserted. The
produced strategies will lead to the reﬁnement violation that
is the easiest to reach, just like MoMuT::TA would. However,
if the test execution can not reach this goal, e.g., due to
uncontrollable choices, like the choice between a!andb!in
Figure 1, the strategies may alternatively lead to the reﬁnement
violation caused by another fault. At the moment we did
not further investigate this topic, yet we plan to perform
experiments with higher-order mutations as future work.
B. Strategy-driven Test Execution
The strategies produced by Ecdar only contain parts of the
information needed for their execution by a test-driver. To
effectively use them as test cases, the original speciﬁcationAlgorithm 1 Test-Case Execution
Input: SUT, Strategy, Spec, Mutant, Bound
Output: Pass / Fail / Inconclusive
1:verdict = {}
2:step = 0
3:((qs,vs),(qm,vm)) = ((ˆqs,0),(ˆqm,0))
4:whileverdict={}do
5: ifstrategy(qs,qm)=∅∨step=bound then
6: verdict = inconclusive
7: break
8: end if
9: forRλ∈strategy(qs,qm)do\\delay
10: whilesat{φδ}do
11: wait and continuously check SUT for outputs
12: ifSUT produces output then
13: break
14: end if
15: end while
16: d=waited time
17: if(qs,vs)/negationslashd−→then
18: return fail
19: end if
20: (qs,vs)=(qs,vs)afterd
21: (qm,vm)=(qm,vm)afterd
22: ifSUT produces output othen\\uncontrollable
23: ifo∈out(qs,vs)then
24: ifo∈out(qm,vm)then
25: (qs,vs)=(qs,vs)afterα
26: (qm,vm)=(qm,vm)afterα
27: else
28: return pass
29: end if
30: else
31: return fail
32: end if
33: end if
34: end for
35: forRα∈strategy(qs,qm)do\\controllable
36: ifsat{φα}then
37: trigger input αon SUT
38: (qs,vs)=(qs,vs)afterα
39: (qm,vm)=(qm,vm)afterα
40: end if
41: end for
42: step = step + 1
43: end while
324
324
324

--- Page 8 ---
and the mutant need to be provided as well. While the strategy
provides the delays and transitions that need to be taken inorder to reach the mutation, the original speciﬁcation is neededto validate all occurring outputs, and the mutant is needed todetect whether an incorrect output of the SUT corresponds tothe mutant, or whether we just revealed another bug. Thus,both the speciﬁcation and the mutant need to be simulatedduring the test-case execution, so their current locations andclock values can be assessed by the test adapter. In case thestrategy is a cooperative strategy, i.e., not a winning strategy, itmay produce a loop, trying to reach the mutation even thoughit might not be reachable. For such cases, we need to providean upper bound for the test-case execution. Algorithm 1gives an abstract overview on how the test execution of astrategy, extended by the speciﬁcation and the correspondingmutant, works. We use the variables (q
s,vs)and(qm,vm)to
keep track of the current states of the TIOTS of both the
speciﬁcation and the mutant and initialize them with theirinitial locations. Then, as long as we did not yet assign any
verdict, we ﬁrst check whether the upper bound is reached,or whether we reached a state tuple which is not speciﬁed
by the strategy. If that happened, it means that we reached astate from which the test goal is unreachable, and we assignthe verdict inconclusive. Otherwise, we look up the delay and
action rules for the current locations of the speciﬁcation and
the mutant.
While the condition of one of the delay rules is satisﬁed,
we wait. During waiting, we continuously check the SUT foroutputs. If it produces an output, we break the waiting. Thewaited time is stored in the delay variable d. If the delay
rule required to wait longer than the current location invariantof the speciﬁcation allows (such strategies are for instanceproduced by mutants were the invariant is violated) and theSUT did not interrupt the waiting with an output, we returnthe verdict fail, otherwise we update the current state variables
according to the delay. If during/after waiting an output was
observed, there are several possibilities: if the output is correct
according to the speciﬁcation, there are two choices: either theoutput is also correct according to the mutant, in which casewe can update the current states and go on with the next stepor the output is correct according to the speciﬁcation, but themutant required a different output. In that case we reached themutation and the SUT behaved according to the speciﬁcation.Consequently, we can terminate the test execution and returnthe verdict pass. If the output was not correct according to thespeciﬁcation, a bug was detected and we issue the verdict fail.
Note that at this point, one could be more ﬁne grained, andcheck whether the mutant would have allowed that output. Ifso, we know that we revealed that particular mutation in theSUT, instead of detecting just any bug.
After the outputs of the SUT are processed, we search for
enabled action rules. Due to the deterministic nature of thestrategies, only one rule is enabled at a time. The action rulecorresponds to a controllable action which is simply executedon the SUT. Additionally the current states of the speciﬁcationand the mutant are updated.flashOn!
open?soundOn!
unlock?unlock?
close?
lock?lock?unlock?
armedOn!soundOff!
open?
open?armedOff!unlock?soundOff!
close?c<=20e<300
e<=0e<=0e<30
e==300e==30
c==20g<=0e<=300e<=0e<=30
d<=0f<=0e<=300 g<=0
flashOff!e:=0d:=0
c:=0 c:=0f:=0g:=0g:=0
c<20
unlock?close?unlock?
armedOff!soundOff!
armedOn!
flashOff!
c<20
Fig. 5. The TIOA of the car alarm system.
The presented algorithm was kept as simple as possible.
Thus, it does not differentiate between catching any bug, and
catching the bug speciﬁed by the mutant, which would requireadding a fourth verdict. We did however already pointedout what would need to be changed, in order to do thisdifferentiation. The big advantage in that would be the aid infault localization. As already discussed in previous work [4],selecting a set of model mutants that directly correspond to the
faulty behavior of an incorrect SUT may aid the programmer
both with regards to the location of the bug, as well as withregards to the type of the bug.
V. E
V ALUATION
A. Car Alarm System
We evaluate our approach by comparison to the results
of the existing model-based mutation testing approach fortimed automata [5]. They applied the technique to a car alarmsystem, modeled as a timed automaton with inputs and outputs.Basically, the car alarm system allows as inputs the unlocking,locking, closing and opening of the cars door, and prompts
325
325
325

--- Page 9 ---
as outputs the signals for arming, unarming, and turning the
sound and ﬂash alarms on and off. We use the same model
and the same set of mutants, even though we had to make
several small adjustments:
•Instead of keeping the mutant and the speciﬁcation in
separate ﬁles, the speciﬁcation was appended to each of
the mutants as a separate template.
•All synchronization channels are transformed to be broad-
cast channels.
•All input transitions are marked as controllable, all output
transitions as uncontrollable.
•In the system declaration, the speciﬁcation and the mutant
are deﬁned as IO automata, including the speciﬁcation of
their inputs and outputs.
The TIOA of the car alarm system is illustrated in Figure 5.
Uncontrollable transitions are marked via dotted lines. The
transitions for making the model input enabled are omitted
for presentational purposes.
We took the mutants that were used for the original
study, adjusted them as already mentioned, and applied the
reﬁnement checks. For the 10752mutants of the car alarm
system speciﬁcation, Ecdar found 677counterexamples to the
reﬁnement and produced the corresponding strategies. 397
mutants reﬁned the original speciﬁcation, which includes 226
inconsistent and 39non-deterministic mutants that could not
be processed. Inconsistent mutants violate properties like for
example the ’independent progress’ property, as the mutation
may remove an output from a time restricted location, allowing
the mutants to block the progress of time. These mutants do
not correspond to real faulty implementations, and are thus not
relevant for the test-case generation anyway. The reﬁnement
check and the creation of the strategies took 164.5seconds.
We also developed a test driver according to Algorithm 1
and applied the test suite to the faulty Java implementations
used in [5] to see whether the test cases produced by the
model mutants are able to detect corresponding faults in real
implementations. We were able to detect every fault, and thus
achieved a 100% mutation score. Table I summarizes the
previous and the new results. While the number of test cases is
in the same order of magnitude for both approaches, and both
approaches were able to detect all faulty Java implementation,
the runtime of the test-case generation is signiﬁcantly faster
for the new approach with Ecdar, giving a speedup factor of
over30for the car alarm system. Due to the fact that some
mutants could not be processed, Ecdar produces a smaller test
suite. Since the test suite was still able to capture all faulty
implementations, the smaller size actually provides a small
advantage, as it reduces the test-case execution time.
The car alarm system is modeled in a very restrictive way.
The guards of input and output transitions are non-overlapping,
to ensure that for each location at any point of time only either
inputs or outputs are enabled. Additionally the model does
224of the original 1099 mutants were discarded, as two mutation operators
produced duplicated mutants, i.e., mutants that were equivalent among each
other, but not necessarily to the original speciﬁcation, where we only kept
one set.not contain any uncontrollable choices. Thus, also via non-
adaptive test-case generation no test cases with inconclusive
verdicts are generated. However, if the restrictions on the
inputs in the model are weakened, 117 of the non-adaptive
test-cases contain traces leading to inconclusive verdicts, while
none of the adaptive test-cases would.
B. Pros and Cons
The results presented in the previous subsection show that
the implementation of model-based mutation testing via Ecdar
is very efﬁcient with respect to runtime, compared to the
previous approach based on bounded model-checking and
SMT solving. However, both approaches have their individual
beneﬁts, which are discussed below:
•Runtime. In terms of runtime, Ecdar deﬁnitely beats
MoMuT::TA. While this may partially be based on the
maturity of the tools, the different programming language
used, and probably other incomparable factors, it still
indicates that bounded model-checking can not compete
with the dedicated zone-based symbolic on-the-ﬂy algo-
rithm implemented in Ecdar.
•Efﬁciency. Both test suites were able to detect all of the
faulty Java implementation, and their size was in the same
order of magnitude. Thus, in terms of efﬁciency, the two
approaches seem to be almost equivalent.
•Expressiveness. The two approaches allow a rather dif-
ferent set of model-elements. While the tool ::TA is
restricted to classical timed automata, it allows any type
of expression that can be processed by the used SMT
solver in the guard, including negation and disjunction.
Ecdar on the other hand allows C-like functions, the
use of data variables and urgent/committed locations.
However, excessive use of data variables in the model
might drastically increase the runtime as the states would
be enumerated explicitly.
•Complexity of test-case execution. The proposed test-case
execution algorithm is more complex than the previous
one, as it needs to simulate both the speciﬁcation and the
mutant in the background, in order to determine the next
states (which are needed to consult the strategy), and to
classify the outputs of the SUT. The previous approach
simply provided a trace leading to the goal state, attached
with the verdicts for the individual outputs.
•Adaptiveness of test-case execution. While the test-cases
described in [5] are time adaptive, and can vary the time
of the inputs, according to the timing of previous outputs,
they will produce an ‘inconclusive’ verdict if the SUT
produces different (but correct) outputs than expected by
the test case. The strategies produced by Ecdar are able
to steer the test-case execution back to the intended path.
•Non-deterministic mutants. In the presented study, all
non-deterministic mutants were simply neglected, as they
do not conform to the restrictions by Ecdar, as some
of the theories implemented by Ecdar only work for
deterministic automata. In the previous work, only the
326
326
326

--- Page 10 ---
# Mutants # Tests TCG Time [sec] Mutation Score
MoMuT::TA 1099 628 3 798 100%
Ecdar 1074 677 164.5 100%
TABLE I
ACOMPARISON OF TEST -CASE GENERATION RESULTS .
Fig. 6. A speciﬁcation and its mutant, demonstrating the capabilities of an
unbounded conformance check.
speciﬁcation was expected to be deterministic, while non-
determinism in the mutants did not pose a problem.
In cases where the faulty SUT shows non-deterministic
behavior, these mutants may reﬂect the behavior of the
SUT more accurate than the deterministic ones. However,
the test cases produced for the non-deterministic mutants
would only cover one deterministic trace, and would need
to be executed multiple times, to ensure capturing the
fault.
•Boundedness. The previous approach computed a
bounded conformance check between the speciﬁcation
and the mutant, thus only checking whether the mutant
conforms for the ﬁrst ksteps of the execution. While the
bound can usually be set high enough for the detection of
all mutants, an upper bound has to be approximated, and
if some mutants exceed it, their corresponding test cases
will not be generated. Consider the example presented
in Figure 6. The mutant could only be detected with a
search depth of at least 100. For more realistic examples,
the needed search depth may be a lot harder to determine
and increasing the depth drastically increases the runtime,
which is avoided by Ecdar.
VI. C ONCLUSIONS
In this paper we have demonstrated how to implement
model-based mutation testing via the tool Ecdar. We showed
how to use its reﬁnement check for model-based mutation
testing, how the produced strategies can be interpreted as
adaptive test cases, and deﬁned an algorithm for the test-
case execution. We compared the approach to an existing
implementation of model-based mutation testing for timed
automata which showed a high speedup, while maintaining
the quality of the test suite with respect to the mutation score
and improving its quality with respect to adaptiveness.
In future work we intend to provide further features to
Ecdar, including an automated way for turning models input-
enabled, providing more information in the produced strate-gies and a model-mutator. We also plan further experimental
evaluations, including higher-order mutants.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The research leading to these results has received funding
from the Danish Innovation Center DiCyPS (www.dicyps.dk),
the ERC Advanced Grant LASSO: ”Learning, Analysis, Syn-
thesis and Optimization of Cyber Physical Systems” as well
as the H2020-ECSEL-JU ENABLE-S3 European Initiative
to Enable Validation for Highly Automated Safe and Secure
Systems under grant agreement No692455.
REFERENCES
[1] M. S. AbouTrab, S. Counsell, and R. M. Hierons. Speciﬁcation
mutation analysis for validating timed testing approaches based on
timed automata. In 2012 IEEE 36th Annual Computer Software and
Applications Conference , pages 660–669, July 2012.
[2] Bernhard K. Aichernig, Harald Brandl, Elisabeth J ¨obstl, and Willibald
Krenn. Uml in action: A two-layered interpretation for testing. SIGSOFT
Softw. Eng. Notes , 36(1):1–8, January 2011.
[3] Bernhard K. Aichernig, Harald Brandl, Elisabeth J ¨obstl, Willibald
Krenn, Rupert Schlick, and Stefan Tiran. Killing strategies for model-
based mutation testing. Softw. Test. V erif. Reliab. , 25(8):716–748,
December 2015.
[4] Bernhard K. Aichernig, Klaus H ¨ormaier, and Florian Lorber. Debugging
with Timed Automata Mutations , pages 49–64. Springer International
Publishing, Cham, 2014.
[5] Bernhard K. Aichernig, Florian Lorber, and Dejan Ni ˇckovi ´c.Time for
Mutants — Model-Based Mutation Testing with Timed Automata , pages
20–38. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2013.
[6] Rajeev Alur and David L. Dill. A theory of timed automata. Theor .
Comput. Sci. , 126(2):183–235, April 1994.
[7] Angelo Brillout, Nannan He, Michele Mazzucchi, Daniel Kroening,
Mitra Purandare, Philipp R ¨ummer, and Georg Weissenbacher. Mutation-
based test case generation for simulink models. In Proceedings of the
8th International Conference on F ormal Methods for Components and
Objects , FMCO’09, pages 208–227, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2010. Springer-
Verlag.
[8] Timothy A. Budd and Ajei S. Gopal. Program testing by speciﬁcation
mutation. Computer Languages , 10(1):63 – 73, 1985.
[9] A. David, K. G. Larsen, S. Li, and B. Nielsen. A game-theoretic
approach to real-time system testing. In 2008 Design, Automation and
Test in Europe , pages 486–491, March 2008.
[10] A. David, K. G. Larsen, S. Li, and B. Nielsen. Timed testing under
partial observability. In 2009 International Conference on Software
Testing V eriﬁcation and V alidation , pages 61–70, April 2009.
[11] Alexandre David, Kim G. Larsen, Axel Legay, Ulrik Nyman, and
Andrzej Wasowski. Timed i/o automata: A complete speciﬁcation theory
for real-time systems. In Proceedings of the 13th ACM International
Conference on Hybrid Systems: Computation and Control , HSCC ’10,
pages 91–100, New York, NY , USA, 2010. ACM.
[12] Alexandre David, Kim G. Larsen, Shuhao Li, and Brian Nielsen.
Cooperative testing of timed systems. Electronic Notes in Theoretical
Computer Science , 220(1):79 – 92, 2008.
[13] Alexandre David, Kim Guldstrand Larsen, Shuhao Li, Marius Miku-
cionis, and Brian Nielsen. Testing real-time systems under uncertainty.
InProceedings of the 9th International Conference on F ormal Meth-
ods for Components and Objects , FMCO’10, pages 352–371, Berlin,
Heidelberg, 2011. Springer-Verlag.
327
327
327

--- Page 11 ---
[14] Xavier Devroey, Gilles Perrouin, Mike Papadakis, Axel Legay, Pierre-
Yves Schobbens, and Patrick Heymans. Featured model-based mutation
analysis. In Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on
Software Engineering , ICSE ’16, pages 655–666, New York, NY , USA,
2016. ACM.
[15] Anders Hessel and Paul Pettersson. Cover-a test-case generation tool for
timed systems. Testing of Software and Communicating Systems , pages
31–34, 2007.
[16] R. M. Hierons and M. G. Merayo. Mutation testing from probabilistic
ﬁnite state machines. In Testing: Academic and Industrial Confer-
ence Practice and Research Techniques - MUTATION (TAICPART-
MUTATION 2007) , pages 141–150, Sept 2007.
[17] Yue Jia and Mark Harman. An analysis and survey of the development
of mutation testing. IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng. , 37(5):649–678, September
2011.
[18] Moez Krichen and Stavros Tripakis. Real-Time Testing with Timed
Automata Testers and Coverage Criteria , pages 134–151. Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2004.
[19] Moez Krichen and Stavros Tripakis. Conformance testing for real-time
systems. F orm. Methods Syst. Des. , 34(3):238–304, June 2009.
[20] Marius Mikucionis, Brian Nielsen, and Kim G. Larsen. Real-time system
testing on-the-ﬂy. In Kaisa Sere and Marina Wald ´en, editors, the 15th
Nordic Workshop on Programming Theory , number 34 in B, pages 36–
38, Turku, Finland, October 29–31 2003. Abo Akademi, Department of
Computer Science, Finland. Abstracts.
[21] Robert Nilsson, Jeff Offutt, and Jonas Mellin. Test case generation for
mutation-based testing of timeliness. Electronic Notes in Theoretical
Computer Science , 164(4):97 – 114, 2006.
[22] A. Jefferson Offutt and Roland H. Untch. Mutation 2000: Uniting the
Orthogonal , pages 34–44. Springer US, Boston, MA, 2001.
[23] Jan Tretmans. Formal methods and testing. chapter Model Based Testing
with Labelled Transition Systems, pages 1–38. Springer-Verlag, Berlin,
Heidelberg, 2008.
[24] Mark Utting, Alexander Pretschner, and Bruno Legeard. A taxonomy of
model-based testing approaches. Softw. Test. V erif. Reliab. , 22(5):297–
312, August 2012.
[25] Machiel van der Bijl, Arend Rensink, and Jan Tretmans. Compositional
testing with ioco. In A. Petrenko and A. Ulrich, editors, F ormal
Approaches to Software Testing , volume 2931 of Lecture Notes in
Computer Science , pages 86–100, Berlin, Germany, 2004. Springer
Verlag.
[26] Ting Wang, Jun Sun, Yang Liu, Xinyu Wang, and Shanping Li. Are
Timed Automata Bad for a Speciﬁcation Language? Language Inclu-
sion Checking for Timed Automata , pages 310–325. Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2014.
328
328
328
