--- Page 1 ---
Toolchain for User-Centered Intelligent Floor
Heating Control
Mads Kronborg Agesen, Kim Guldstrand Larsen, Marius Miku ˇcionis,
Marco Mu ˜niz, Petur Olsen, Thomas Pedersen, Ji ˇr´ı Srba, Arne Skou
Department of Computer Science
Aalborg University, Denmark
fkronborg,kgl,marius,muniz,petur,tp,srba,ask g@cs.aau.dk
Abstract —Floor heating systems are important components of
nowadays home-automation setups. The control of a ﬂoor heating
system is a nontrivial task and the present solutions essentially
implement variants of a simple bang-bang controller that opens
for a hot water circulation in a room if its current temperature
is below the user deﬁned target temperature, otherwise it closes
for the heating in the room. The disadvantage is that the heat
exchange among the rooms, outside weather conditions, weather
forecast and other factors are not considered. We propose a
novel model-driven approach for intelligent ﬂoor heating control
based on a chain of tools that allow us to gather the sensor
readings from the actual hardware and use the state-of-the-art
controller synthesis tool UPPAAL Stratego in order to synthesise
abstract control strategies that are then executed on the real
hardware platform provided by the company Seluxit. We have
built a scaled demonstrator of the system and the experimental
results document a 38% to 52 % increase in user satisfaction,
moreover with additional energy savings between 2% to 12%.
Keywords —Home automation, energy efﬁciency, hybrid sys-
tems, strategy synthesis.
I. I NTRODUCTION
The number and the variety of use of control systems in
the context of home automation is continuously increasing.
Usual applications include heating systems, lightning systems,
ﬁre alarm systems, etc. Common goals of these systems are
to optimize the energy consumption and to improve the user
comfort, which gives rise to new challenging research prob-
lems in the areas of control and optimization. In addition, these
systems are usually produced by different companies, and most
companies tend to use their own proprietary protocols. As a
consequence there is a need for a middleware to interface
heterogeneous home automation networks.
Floor heating systems are widely used for thermal comfort.
We focus here on a ﬂoor heating controller offered by the
Danish company Seluxit1. The system involves a large number
of components e.g. temperature sensors, communication gate-
ways, relay boxes and valves. The system is inﬂuenced by vari-
ous factors such as outside temperature, adjacent rooms, status
of the doors (open/closed) and the present weather conditions.
The system implements a proprietary communication protocol
which provides a control interface. Currently the system uses
a “Bang-Bang” controller which only considers the current
1www.seluxit.comroom temperatures and disregards other important factors,
hence resulting in poor controlling performance. In order to
provide better controlling, there is a need to integrate relevant
information (weather forecast, user temperature proﬁles, etc.)
with tools for optimal controlling of the ﬂoor heating system.
In the context of the ﬂoor heating, we have previously
demonstrated by model-based performance analysis [1] that
the control strategies obtained by the new tool U PPAAL
STRATEGO [2] signiﬁcantly improves upon the currently ap-
plied “bang-bang” control strategies. The focus of this paper is
on the complete toolchain architecture which allows for these
strategies to be executed in order to control the heating in
real houses through communication with real devices used in
the house. Besides U PPAAL STRATEGO the main component
of the toolchain is that of the H OME PORT [3] middleware
implementing a common interface to heterogeneous home
automation networks. The main novelty of the present work is
the automatic integration with web-services providing weather
forecast, user-deﬁned temperature proﬁles, the actual con-
struction of a working system in our demonstrator (using
the hardware components present in the real house) and the
integration of abstract control strategies synthesize by the tool
UPPAAL STRATEGO into a real executable code.
Related Work
A key feature of the toolchain is that of improved con-
trolling. For this we use a novel approach presented in [1].
In [4] a formal approach for automatic synthesis of an off-
line controller for ﬂoor heating is proposed. The authors
consider the same real house as we consider. The time cost of
computing such an off-line controller was approx. 20 hours.
Model predictive controllers (see e.g. [5]) are suitable for
systems with enormous state space. However, they usually do
not allow to model stochastic systems and are computationally
expensive. Since the system requires a control input every 15
minutes, the previous approaches are not feasible. We use a
very fast and computationally inexpensive approach. In [6]
a synthesis tool PESSOA controlling cyber-physical systems.
Similarly in [7] a subclass of hybrid systems is presented with
a focus on controlle synthesis via abstraction techniques. In [8]
a combination of statistical model checking with ANOV A has
been suggested for synthesis of various control strategies. The

--- Page 2 ---
main novelty of our work is that we deal with an industrial-
size case study with huge state-space complexity where the
other studied methods and approaches do not scale.
II. C ORE TECHNOLOGIES
A key element in the toolchain is the ability to directly
translate commands described in abstract models into sen-
sor/actuator commands on physical devices. In this section,
we provide a short description of the applied modelling
notation (timed automata in U PPAAL ), the platform for device
management (HomePort), and the method for linking the two.
A.UPPAAL and UPPAAL STRATEGO
UPPAAL [9], [2] is a toolbox for modelling, simulation,
synthesis and optimization of real-time systems. It is com-
posed of three parts: a description language, a simulator,
and analysis engines including a model checker, a statistical
model checker, a timed game synthesizer and an optimizer.
The description language uses communicating state machines
with timers. The simulator enables exploration of possible
executions of a model. The model checker can check safety,
liveness and reachability properties on a model. The synthe-
sizer can synthesize winning strategies of timed game models.
The statistical model checker can estimate probabilities of
reachability based on statistical simulation of models. The
optimizer, U PPAAL STRATEGO , can identify optimal control
strategies for stochastic priced timed games through simulation
and machine learning and even do optimization under safety
constraints deﬁned by winning game strategies [10].
Processes communicate through channels and shared vari-
ables. A channel synchronizes a sender and a receiver process.
A transition involving synchronization on a channel can only
be taken when both the sender and receiver are able to perform
the synchronization. Broadcast channels can also be used to
synchronize a sender with multiple receivers. To exchange
values between processes, synchronous value passing [9] is
used. Synchronous value passing is a modelling technique
where a sender and a receiver synchronize on a channel and
exchange a value by using a shared variable. Transitions can
be guarded by boolean expressions over clocks and discrete
variables. A transition with a guard can only be taken when
the guard evaluates to true. Transitions can also update the
values of variables through update statements and reset clocks.
Finally, hybrid phenomena can be expressed in models via
differential equations as shown in Figure 1, which models the
temperature development in a speciﬁc room taking various
heat exchange relations into account.
In the toolchain, U PPAAL is ﬁrst used to model the rooms
through a graphical user interface. The optimizer U PPAAL
STRATEGO is then used to generate a near-optimal strategy at
regular time intervals through a series of steps to be explained
in the technology section. The generated strategy is executed
via the HomePort gateway on the actuators of the ﬂoor heating
system and the current room temperatures are received from
the sensors. The sensor readings are then applied as a basis
for the next strategy generation.
Fig. 1. Room model
B.HOME PORT
HOME PORT [3] is a middleware implementing a common
interface to heterogeneous home automation networks. It fa-
cilitates the tasks of the control system by enabling it to
access and modify the services of the environment in a uniﬁed
manner, regardless of the protocol or technology that a speciﬁc
device is using. Moreover, its REpresentational State Transfer
(REST) application is easy to interface with. It also provides
an event mechanism allowing the control system to receive
notiﬁcations when the state of a service changes. The overall
architecture is described in Figure 2.
Adapter1 Adapter2...AdapternHomePort API
Discovery
ServiceEvent
HandlerRequest
Handler
Data ModelApplication1 Application2...Applicationm
Logging
ServiceDaemon
Service
Devices
Devices
Devices ...
Clients
Clients
Clients ...
Fig. 2. Homeport architecture
HOME PORT plays two roles in the toolchain: to provide a
list of available services and to provide read and write access
to these services. Access to the services of a H OME PORT
instance is available through its web interface and the available
services may be linked to simulated U PPAAL time automata
through dedicated channels as described in [3]. However,
in this case study, the generated strategy simply consists
of temperature readings followed by a timed sequence of
open/close actuator commands, so a more simplistic approach
has been chosen by interpreting the strategy directly.

--- Page 3 ---
sleeping
rooms 24h 0h18C
14h21C
22h18C
24h
living
rooms 0h18C
14h22C
24h
kitchen
0h18C
7h21C
9h18C
16h21C
20h18C
24h
corridor
0h18C
7h20C
9h18C
14h20C
24h
bath-
rooms 0h20C
7h22C
9h20C
14h23C
22h20C
24h
other
0h19C
24h
Fig. 3. User deﬁned temperature proﬁle for 24 hour cycle
III. F LOOR HEATING CASE STUDY
The heating system consists of a number of heated water
pipes going through the rooms under the ﬂoor. The water
supply is controlled via valves at the pipe entrance to the
building and the heating can be directed to each room indi-
vidually. Some older houses may have poorer pipe insulation
and hence the heat may leak to neighboring areas on transit,
thus limiting the direct control. The heat can be lost to the
outside environment through the roof, windows and walls,
and it is also exchanged between the rooms through walls
and doors. The purpose of the heat controller is to maintain
the temperature in each individual room based on the user
demands. We assume that the user can supply a temperature
proﬁle for each room. Figure 3 shows an example room
temperature proﬁle provided by the user: a desired temperature
setting speciﬁed for each day time interval in each room. Our
experiments use exactly this proﬁle, however in practice it can
be adjusted on-demand. As the outside temperature has the
major impact on the inner climate, we also equip the controller
with a weather forecast web-service so that it can prepare and
adjust its heat supply in advance.
Most of control context (temperatures and forecast) cannot
be ﬁxed for long time horizons in advance, therefore the con-
troller must be adaptive. We propose an online strategy synthe-
sis where the controller is synthesized periodically based on
the current situation and the new forecast information, details
about the underlying game theoretical foundation of the model
can be found in [1].
The controller ﬁtness is then evaluated after time interval 
based on the importance Wiof the room iand the distance
between the goal Tg
iand actualTitemperatures:
D() =Z
0X
iWi 
Ti(t) Tg
i(t)2dt (1)
IV. T OOL CHAIN
We shall now describe the components of the toolchain
used for automatic synthesis of a smart controller for the ﬂoor
heating, focusing on the communication with real devices used
in the house. Figure 4 shows an overview of the architecture.
The system is based around the HomePort middleware [3]
mentioned earlier, used for solving heterogeneity issues in
HomePort LibraryRest
WebserviceSimulink
to
Seluxit
Seluxit
AdapterHouse
GFX
(SDL2)
Simulink
ERT
AdapterForecast
AdapterController
Simulink
ModelLCD Screen UPP AAL
STRATEGO
Seluxit
Gateway
Setpoint Ctrl
Relay Box Valve1..nFig. 4. Toolchain architecture
distributed systems, and in particular home automation sys-
tems. Heterogeneity arises in home automation due to the
difference in the requirements of the subsystems and the vari-
ety of incompatible communication protocols and web-service
interfaces. Heterogeneity is thus not only a problem, but also
a necessity in order to satisfy different sets of requirements.
To solve this issue, there is a need to adapt the information
transmitted from one subsystem to another. HomePort provides
this functionality. In our case, we have devices from the
real house including the Seluxit gateway, temperature sensors,
valve actuators as well as weather forecast web-services and
front-end GUI designed by Seluxit for setting up the target
temperatures and the temperature proﬁles for each room. The
chosen approach enables also future support for devices from
other vendors (e.g. ZigBee or Z-Wave), and allows for easy
switching between real and virtual devices (as shown in our
demonstrator that replaces the actual house with a Simulink
simulator of the house termodynamics).
In HomePort, all devices from the underlying protocols
are abstracted and exposed through a heterogeneous RESTful
HTTP interface. The translation from the messages transmitted
over the Web to the ones transmitted in the subnetworks
is performed by adapters. The graphics application provides
graphical interface showing the ﬂoor plan. It monitors the other
adapters and updates the interface based on the dynamics of
the system. The Simulink adapter runs the simulations of the
ﬂoor heating (it is replaced by the actual temperature readings
in the real house). The Seluxit adapter provides access to
real physical devices. In our case it includes the temperature
sensors, set-point control for target temperatures via graphical
user interface or stand-alone set-point devices placed in the
house and a relay box for controlling the ﬂoor heating valves.
To generate control strategies for the ﬂoor heating, U PPAAL
STRATEGO [2] is interacting with HomePort on the HTTP
interface, and is intended to run either locally on the Seluxit
gateway or centrally outside the house in a cloud. Through the
HomePort interface U PPAAL STRATEGO can interact with the
devices, read temperature sensors and set valve positions.
The HTTP interface can also be used to develop a graphical
web interface for showing e.g. the live temperatures in the

--- Page 4 ---
Fig. 5. Seluxit devices: gateway (top right), relay box (top left), valve (bottom)
house, as exploited by the company Seluxit. This is then acces-
sible through smartphones or tablets, such that the inhabitants
can monitor and control the house.
A. The Setup
HomePort including all adapters and the graphical interface
runs on a Raspberry Pi. To illustrate the connection with
real devices a Seluxit gateway is wirelessly connected with
a relay box for controlling the valves. These valves are
set synchronously with the virtual valves in the simulation.
Figure 5 shows the Seluxit gateway (without cover), the relay
box and one connected valve.
B. Graphical User Interface
For the use in the demonstrator, the graphical user interface
is written in C++using SDL2. Figure 6 shows the GUI. A
Fig. 6. The GUI showing the ﬂoor plan
ﬂoor plan of the house contains gray walls separating brown
ﬂoors. The ﬂoors are colored according to the temperature;
blue rooms are cold, red rooms are warm as illustrated in
Figure 6 (the scenario is not a realistic one and it is used
only for presentation purposes). The pipes of the ﬂoor heating
system are shown throughout the ﬂoor. When a valve is open
the pipe turns red, illustrating that the pipe is heating the room.
When the valve is closed the pipes turn gray and slightly
transparent.
For each room two temperatures are shown. On top is
the target temperature, shown in integer numbers without
decimals. Below is the actual room temperature shown withone decimal. The temperature gauge next to the numbers also
illustrates the temperature. In the bottom right is the outside
temperature (currently 20:5) and the time of day in hours in
24-hour format (currently 12h). In the middle top the status
of the valves is shown as light gray boxes. A red ﬂame icon
illustrates that the valve is on, an empty gray box means that
the valve is off. The green area at the bottom shows the lawn
in front of the house.
C. Simulink Adapter
The thermo-dynamics of the ﬂoor heating system are mod-
eled in Simulink in the demonstrator (these are replaced
by the actual temperature readings in the real house). This
model includes the thermal capacity of the walls and the heat
dissipation between rooms and from the outside. The doors
between rooms open and close stochastically (in the current
version this is not shown on the GUI). Since a real ﬂoor
heating system runs very slowly, the simulation is running at
an increased speed. Currently the speed is set to one minute per
second. This can be changed, and the demonstrator is planned
to support replaying of previously simulated scenarios, at
speeds in the order of days per minute.
From the Simulink model, code is automatically generated
using Embedded Coder. This outputs C code which is com-
piled into a dynamically linked library. A small HomePort
adapter is written which interacts with this library and ex-
poses it as HomePort devices. This allows us to monitor the
temperature developments and control the target temperatures
and valve positions in the simulation.
D. Seluxit Adapter
The Seluxit adapter exposes the Seluxit devices though the
HomePort interface, allowing the monitoring and control. As
physical devices are connected, these can be used instead of
the virtual Simulink devices. HomePort connects to the Seluxit
gateway through an Ethernet connection, using Seluxit’s new
JSON web interface. This interface allows reading and setting
values using simple JSON messages. For example, turning on
valve with id "1234" is done by sending value 1, as shown
below.
{ ":type": "urn:seluxit:xml:bastard:value-1.0",
":id": "1234", "data":"1" }
The real temperature sensors intended to run with the system
are wireless, and thus need to conserve energy. They therefore
operate in a sleep mode, where they wake up every 15 minutes
and report the current temperature. The gateway caches this
value and presents it to the HomePort adapter when it asks.
E. Weather Forecast Adapter
Weather forecast data as well as real measured outside
temperature is exposed through a weather forecast adapter. The
data is fetched from the HTTP API from Weather Underground
(www.wunderground.com). Historical data is fetched from ﬁve
different locations, in order to try different weather scenarios
as discussed in our experiments later on. The adapter can also
be set to deliver live data. During the simulation, the forecast

--- Page 5 ---
Fig. 7. Overview of Simulink rmodel.
adapter reads the simulated time from the Simulink adapter
and provides forecast and temperatures for the matching time,
this way the historical data is replayed at simulated time.
F . Stratego Interface
UPPAAL STRATEGO is intended to run off-site and therefore
does not run on the same Raspberry Pi as the rest, typically
on a server in a real setup. U PPAAL STRATEGO connects to
HomePort through the web interface. It checks for available
devices by getting the devices list, an excerpt is shown below.
<configuration>
<adapter id="dt" network="Simulink">
<device desc="Valve1" id="EjSb"
location="Room1" type="Valve">
<service desc="Valve Position" id="9vPF"
uri="/Valve/EjSb/ValvePos/9vPF"
isActuator="0" type="ValvePos">
<parameter max="100" min="0"
type="double" unit="%"/>
</service>
</device>
...
</adapter>
</configuration>
This shows a valve device available on URI
"/Valve/EjSb/ValvePos/9vPF" . UPPAAL STRATEGO
can change the position of this valve by making a PUT
request on this URI with the following XML message:
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><value>1.0</value>
UPPAAL STRATEGO continuously reads the current temper-
atures and target temperatures and uses these to compute a
good strategy for valve conﬁgurations, that will optimally keep
the rooms as close to the target as possible. The HomePort
web interface is easily accessible and allows other control
strategies to access the devices. This opens possibilities to try
different strategies and visualize the results. Once deployed in
a real setting, this can also be used for dynamical switching
of control strategy.
V. D EMONSTRATOR
A physical demonstrator around the architecture shown in
Figure 4 has been developed. HomePort including SIM-, SLX
adapters and the GFX-, SDL2 graphics visualizing the ﬂoor
plan are compiled and deployed as one binary on a raspberry
PI running Linux. The Simulink rmodel is deployed as a
shared library using Embedded Coder rand a slightly cus-
tomized standard Linux target. The customization integrates
the interface to Homeport and the ability to specify the
execution interval. For demonstratrion purposes, a Simulink rTABLE I
EVALUATION IN DIFFERENT WEATHER SCENARIOS .
WeatherDistance Energy
Bang-Bang S TRATEGO imp. Bang-Bang S TRATEGO imp.
Aalborg 14583 8342 43% 14180 12626 10%
Anadyr 2385515 1483272 37% 23040 22475 2%
Ankara 17985 10464 41% 17468 15684 10%
Minneapolis 22052 12175 44% 18165 15882 12%
Murmansk 399421 187941 52% 22355 21011 6%
model of the house thermodynamics is derived based on the
following differential equations:
d
dtTi(t) =nX
j=1Ad
i;j(Tj(t) Ti(t))+Bi(Te(t) Ti(t))+Hv
j;ivj
(2)
whereTiis the room temperature of room i,Ad
i;jcontains
the heat exchange coefﬁcients between room iand roomj,
given the door conﬁguration d. The vector Bcontains the heat
exchange coefﬁcients between the outside temperature Teand
each room, and Hvcontains the heat exchange coefﬁcients for
each pipe and the rooms it traverses.
An overview of the Simulink rmodel is given in Figure 7,
showing the input/output, implementation of fallback con-
troller and thermodynamics in the subsystems. The majority
of the signals used in the Simulink rmodel are vectors repre-
senting e.g. 11 room temperatures in one signal. To interface
the model, when deployed as a shared library, the HomePort
adapter utilizes root-level input/output blocks, which are inten-
tionally keep off the ﬁgure and represented as signal routing
blocks. Differential equations are implemented as a part of
the ThemoDynamics block. The core model is implemented
as an m-function taking valve position, door opening, outside
temperature and the room temperature as input, calculating
delta temperature for each model time step which is feed
into an integrator to calculate the current room temperature.
Having all major components of the demonstrator connected
through H OME PORT makes it easy to share data. For instance,
the Simulink rmodel room temperatures are accessible for
UPPAAL STRATEGO . Similarly, the GFX adapter is capable of
visualizing data from all sources, including states of physical
connected valves and the modeled room temperature.
STRATEGO interfaces the simulated house and real valves
through HomePort RESTful HTTP interface, fetching current
state each 15 min, calculating a new control strategy and
applying the optimal valve conﬁguration and the period of
validity of the given strategy. In case the period of validity
is exceeded, a simple fallback control strategy (bang-bang) is
enforced by the Simulink rmodel. In normal circumstances,
STRATEGO applies a new strategy within the period of validity.
VI. E XPERIMENTS
The applicability and efﬁciency of the toolchain has been
evaluated on ﬁve different weather scenarios for different cities
in the world and for a ﬁxed user temperature proﬁle presented
in Figure 3. The weather forecast was dynamically updated by

--- Page 6 ---
TABLE II
EVALUATION WITH APPROXIMATE CONSTANTS (DEVIATING UP TO 20%)
IN THE MATRICES A;B ANDHFROM EQUATION 2.
WeatherDistance Energy
Bang-Bang S TRATEGO imp. Bang-Bang S TRATEGO imp.
Aalborg 14583 8552 41% 14180 12590 11%
Anadyr 2385515 1503448 36% 23040 22371 2%
Ankara 17985 10511 41% 17468 15697 10%
Minneapolis 22052 12725 42% 18165 15837 12%
Murmansk 399421 191441 52% 22355 20923 6%
repeatedly consulting a Weather Underground web-service and
sending the weather forecast data to U PPAAL STRATEGO . The
actual data that show the computed distance (see Equation (1)
for the bang-bang controller implemented by the company
Seluxit and the strategy synthesized by U PPAAL STRATEGO
are presented in Table I. We would like to emphasize that
the actual distance function (user discomfort Equation 1) was
computed using the real historical temperature data for the
three day period that was explored (January 29th to February
2nd, 2016) and not the data sent to U PPAAL STRATEGO about
the weather forecast. The actual house thermodynamics was
then simulated using Simulink in order to evaluate the actual
performance at several different weather scenarios. Clearly,
UPPAAL STRATEGO produces a strategy that follows more
closely the user set temperature proﬁle with the relative
improvement between 37 to 52 percent. This is due to the
predictive strategy that is aware of the user temperature proﬁle
and the expected weather conditions.
As a side effect we measured also the energy requirements
for the bang-bang strategy versus U PPAAL STRATEGO strat-
egy. The energy corresponds to the volume of hot water used
to heat up the rooms (larger rooms require more water volume
than smaller rooms). Also here we can see considerable
savings ranging from 2 up to 12 percent.
Finally, in the actual house we might not have the access
to the precise heat exchange constants among the rooms and
the environment. Hence in Table II we randomly change
these constants in our model by up to 20% and the achieved
performance of our controller is still almost as good as in
the system with the exact knowledge of these constants. This
demonstrates the robustness of our approach.
VII. C ONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
We have presented a framework for intelligent ﬂoor heating
control based on a chain of tools that allows us to connect
the different hardware and software components via a uniﬁed
interface and hence enable an online use the state-of-the-art
synthesis tool U PPAAL STRATEGO for automatically produc-
ing efﬁcient control strategies. The synthesized strategies are
then executed on the actual hardware as documented by a
physical demonstrator that we built. As a result, our approach
signiﬁcantly increases the user satisfaction with the system
(the distance from the user target temperatures in the 24 hour
temperature proﬁle is smaller than in the currently employed
control system designed by Seluxit engineers). As a side effect,taking into account the weather forecast and the heat exchange
among the rooms depending on their actual placement in the
house, we are able to decrease also the energy needed for
heating up the house, often saving around 10% of the heated
water consumption.
While our method scales well for the short term ﬂoor heat-
ing control, some optimization questions (like e.g. optimizing
in 70% for the user comfort and 30% for energy savings as
a combined criterium) require to look several days ahead in
order to produce a globally optimal controller strategy. The
tool does not currently scale to such long look-ahead horizons
and the construction of the composed short term strategies may
not necessarily achieve an optimal behaviour. As a future work
we are working on improving the learning algorithms used in
UPPAAL STRATEGO in order to handle even more complex
problems with longer time horizons.
Acknowledgments. The research leading to these results has
received funding from the EU FP7 FET projects CASST-
ING and SENSATION, the project DiCyPS funded by the
Innovation Fund Denmark, the Sino Danish Research Center
IDEA4CPS and the ERC Advanced Grant LASSO. The author
J. Srba is partially afﬁliated with FI MU, Brno.
REFERENCES
[1] K. Larsen, M. Mikucionis, M. Muniz, J. Srba, and J. Taankvist, “Online
and compositional learning of controllers with application to ﬂoor heat-
ing,” in Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference on Tools and
Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis of Systems (TACAS’16) ,
ser. LNCS, vol. 9636. Springer-Verlag, 2016, pp. 244–259.
[2] A. David, P. Jensen, K. Larsen, M. Miku ˇcionis, and J. Taankvist, “Uppaal
stratego,” in Tools and Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis of
Systems , ser. LNCS. Springer, 2015, vol. 9035, pp. 206–211.
[3] T. Le Guilly, P. Olsen, A. Ravn, J. Rosenkilde, and A. Skou, “Homeport:
Middleware for heterogeneous home automation networks,” in Pervasive
Computing and Communications Workshops (PERCOM Workshops),
2013 IEEE International Conference on , 2013, pp. 627–633.
[4] A. Le Co ¨ent, L. Fribourg, N. Markey, F. De Vuyst, and L. Chamoin,
“Distributed Synthesis of State-Dependent Switching Control,” ArXiv
e-prints , Apr. 2016.
[5] E. Camacho, D. Ramirez, D. Limon, D. M. de la Pea, and T. Alamo,
“Model predictive control techniques for hybrid systems,” Annual Re-
views in Control , vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 21–31, 2010.
[6] P. Roy, P. Tabuada, and R. Majumdar, “Pessoa 2.0: a controller synthesis
tool for cyber-physical systems,” in 14th ACM International Conference
on Hybrid Systems: Computation and Control (HSCC’11) , M. Caccamo,
E. Frazzoli, and R. Grosu, Eds. ACM, 2011, pp. 315–316.
[7] E. Hahn, G. Norman, D. Parker, B. Wachter, and
L. Zhang, “Game-based abstraction and controller synthesis
for probabilistic hybrid systems,” in Eighth International
Conference on Quantitative Evaluation of Systems (QEST’11) .
IEEE Computer Society, 2011, pp. 69–78. [Online]. Available:
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpl/mostRecentIssue.jsp?punumber=6041098
[8] A. David, D. Du, K. Larsen, A. Legay, and M. Miku ˇcionis, “Optimizing
control strategy using statistical model checking,” in NASA Formal
Methods (NFM’13) , ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, G. Brat,
N. Rungta, and A. Venet, Eds., vol. 7871. Springer, 2013, pp. 352–367.
[Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-38088-4
[9] G. Behrmann, A. David, and K. G. Larsen, “A tutorial on UPPAAL ,”
inSFM-RT 2004 , ser. LNCS, M. Bernardo and F. Corradini, Eds., no.
3185. Springer, 2004, pp. 200–236.
[10] A. David, P. Jensen, K. Larsen, A. Legay, D. Lime, M. Sørensen, and
J. Taankvist, “On time with minimal expected cost!” in Automated
Technology for Veriﬁcation and Analysis (ATVA’14) , ser. LNCS, vol.
8837. Springer, 2014, pp. 129–145.
