--- Page 1 ---
 
Optimal spare management via statistical model checking
Citation for published version (APA): 
Soltani, R., Volk, M., Diamonte, L., Lopuhaä-Zwakenberg, M., & Stoelinga, M. (2025). Optimal spare
management via statistical model checking: a case study in research reactors. International Journal on Software 
Tools for Technology Transfer , 27(3), 361-376. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10009-025-00791-4 
Document license: 
CC BY
DOI:
10.1007/s10009-025-00791-4
Document status and date: 
Published: 01/06/2025
Document Version: 
Publisher’s PDF, also known as Version of Record (includes final page, issue and volume numbers)
Please check the document version of this publication: 
• A submitted manuscript is the version of the article upon submission and before peer-review. There can be
important differences between the submitted version and the official published version of record. People
interested in the research are advised to contact the author for the final version of the publication, or visit the
DOI to the publisher's website.
• The final author version and the galley proof are versions of the publication after peer review.
• The final published version features the final layout of the paper including the volume, issue and page
numbers.
Link to publication
General rights 
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright owners
and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
            • Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the public portal for the purpose of private study or research.
            • You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit-making activity or commercial gain
            • You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the public portal.
If the publication is distributed under the terms of Article 25fa of the Dutch Copyright Act, indicated by the “Taverne” license above, please
follow below link for the End User Agreement:
www.tue.nl/taverne
Take down policy 
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us at:
openaccess@tue.nl
providing details and we will investigate your claim.
Download date: 31. Mar. 2026

--- Page 2 ---
International Journal on Software Tools for Technology Transfer (2025) 27:361–376
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10009-025-00791-4
GENERAL
Special Issue: FMICS 2023
Optimal spare management via statistical model checking:
a case study in research reactors
Reza Soltani1·Matthias Volk2·Leonardo Diamonte3·Milan Lopuhaä-Zwakenberg1·Mariëlle Stoelinga1,4
Accepted: 4 April 2025 / Published online: 22 April 2025
© The Author(s) 2025
Abstract
Systematic spare management is important to optimize the twin goals of high reliability and low costs. However, existing
approaches to spare management do not incorporate a detailed analysis of the eﬀect on the absence of spares on the system’s
reliability. In this work, we combine fault tree analysis with statistical model checking to model spare part management
as a stochastic priced timed game automaton (SPTGA). We use Uppaal Stratego to ﬁnd the number of spares that
minimizes the total costs due to downtime and spare purchasing. The resulting SPTGA model can then additionally be
analyzed according to a wide range of other metrics, including expected availability. We apply these techniques to the
emergency shutdown system of a research nuclear reactor. In this case study, the failure probability is low, so we change the
settings of Uppaal Stratego setting to obtain reliable results about rare events. We consider both a single subsystem
and the combination of two subsystems. In both situations, our methods ﬁnd the optimal number of spares, minimizing cost
while ensuring an expected availability of 99.96% and 99.93%, respectively.
Keywords Spare management ·Fault tree ·Statistical model checking ·Research reactor ·Uppaal
1 Introduction
Proper spare management is of crucial importance for safety
critical systems: when a component breaks, it must be re-
placed in a timely manner.
At the same time, spare management is costly: spare parts
need not only be purchased, but they must also be main-
tained and administered. Therefore, spare management poli-
cies must carefully trade reliability/availability versus costs.In practice, spare management is often ad hoc, based on
intuition rather than on systematic analysis. Nevertheless,
spare parts optimization is a well-studied topic, especially
in optimization research [ 1]. These approaches use multiob-
jective optimization to meet the goals of low costs and high
reliability; spare management can also be combined with the
maintenance policy which also aﬀects these goals [ 2], to ﬁnd
an optimal joint spare/maintenance policy.
However, in many works reliability is closely linked to
the availability of spare parts, rather than based on a de-
tailed analysis of the eﬀect of the absence of spares on the
system’s reliability. To overcome this shortcoming, this pa-
per aligns spare management with a popular reliability en-
gineering framework, namely fault tree analysis [ 3]: many
companies already use fault trees as a part of their design
process. By equipping the fault trees with a minimal amount
of additional information (namely, the costs of downtime and
spares), we support a more systematic method of studying
tradeoﬀs between costs and reliability [ 4].
Our approach We exploit statistical model checking
(SMC) to support spare parts optimization, and especially
the tool Uppaal Stratego [ 5], to automatically synthe-
size an optimal number of spare parts for a system modeled
as a fault tree. Statistical model checking [ 6] is a state-of-the-/LetterR. Soltani
r.soltani@utwente.nl
M. Volk
m.volk@tue.nl
L. Diamonte
ladiamonte@invap.com.ar
M. Lopuhaä-Zwakenberg
m.a.lopuhaa@utwente.nl
M. Stoelinga
m.i.a.stoelinga@utwente.nl
1University of Twente, Enschede, the Netherlands
2Eindhoven University of Technology, Eindhoven, the Netherlands
3INVAP SE, Bariloche, Argentina
4Radboud University, Nijmegen, the Netherlands
Springer

--- Page 3 ---
362 R. Soltani et al.
art methodology for Monte Carlo simulation. Our key model
is a stochastic priced timed game automaton (SPTGA), i.e.,
a transition system that models the evolution of probabilityand costs over time. Monte Carlo simulation can estimate (up
to a conﬁdence interval) the probability and expected values
for a wide variety of random variables. In many applications,failure events have very small probabilities, so many simu-
lation runs are needed to obtain reliable results. Therefore,
the number of simulations need to be tailored to the speciﬁcsetting.
When the model involves decisions, simulations can also
be used to estimate the probability of desirable outcomes
for a given strategy. In [ 4] this is used to ﬁnd the reliability
of a fault tree model given a ﬁxed number of spares. More
recently, however, developments in the area of machine learn-
ing allow SMC to not only analyze given strategies, but alsoautomatically synthesize optimal strategies [ 7].
We start with a fault tree extended with costs for downtime
and spare management, as well as the dependability metricof interest. Via statistical model checking, we synthesize astrategy for spare management that is optimal under the given
dependability metric, e.g., the reliability. We further analyze
this optimal strategy with respect to other metrics, such asthe availability.
The case study We apply our approach to a section of
the emergency shutdown system of a research reactor, de-
veloped by the company INVAP, Argentina. The section of
interest of the system consists of three main subsystems: thereactor protection system, the neutron ﬂux instrumentation,
and the temperature diﬀerence at the reactor core (DTCore).
Each subsystem is implemented in triple modular redun-dancy. Cost is incurred by buying spares and by suﬀeringdowntime due to unreliability; the optimal spare strategy is
one that balances these to obtain the lowest total cost.
Results We consider a single subsystem of the emergency
shutdown system, as well as a combination of two subsys-
tems. In both cases, we determine the optimal spare man-agement by modeling it as a fault tree and translating it
into a SPTGA. The optimal spare problem then becomes a
strategy synthesis query in Uppaal Stratego, which wesolve using Monte Carlo simulation, coupled with rare event
simulation techniques tailored to our setting. For the single
subsystem, this is solved in 7 min, giving 6 spares as theoptimal balance between reliability and spare part costs. Un-der this strategy, the probability of any downtime during the
research reactor’s 40-year lifespan is less than 9E −4, with
an expected availability of 99 .96%. Our results for the two
subsystems combined provide 6 spares for the ﬁrst compo-
nent and 140 spares for the second component as an optimal
balance between reliability and cost of spare parts. Underthis strategy, the probability of any downtime during the re-
search reactor’s 40-year lifespan increases to 86 .59%, with
an expected availability of 99 .93%.
Contributions Summarizing, our contributions are a sys-
tematic way to ﬁnd optimal spare management strategies by
combining the detailed reliability analysis of fault trees with
the strategy synthesis tools of statistical model checking, to-
gether with increased simulation sizes to account for rare
events. The resulting timed game automaton allows for arange of queries for further analysis of the optimal strategy.
We show the validity of this method on a case study coming
from nuclear research reactors.
Extension from conference paper This work is an ex-
tended version of a previous paper [ 8] presented at Interna-
tional Conference on Formal Methods for Industrial Critical
Systems 2023. Compared the conference paper, we added a
Uppaal model for a system with two components and pro-
vide the subsequent analysis determining the optimal number
of spares for both types of components, see Sect. 8. Further,
we provide a detailed discussion on handling rare events dur-
ing the Monte Carlo simulation and our choice of parametersfor model checking, see Sect. 7.2.
Artefact We provide all Uppaal models, queries and re-
sults in a publicly available artefact on Zenodo: https://doi.
org/10.5281/zenodo.7970835 [9].
1.1 Related work
Spare management Spare parts management is an active
area of research, cf. [ 10,11] for overviews. Hu et al. [ 1]
surveyed the gap between the theory and practice of spareparts management. According to this work, from a product
lifecycle perspective, there are three kinds of forecasting
tasks, namely forecasting initial demand, ongoing demand,
and demand over the ﬁnal phase. There are techniques for
predicting the need for spare parts based on neural networks[12–16]. The neural network based forecasting is most often
used to predict continuing need and demand throughout the
ﬁnal phase. It can rarely be applied in predicting the initial
demand since there is limited historical data on the spares’
consumption when new equipment is introduced.
Zheng et al. [ 17] consider reordering of spare parts from
dual sources, with diﬀerent lead times and costs. The ap-
proach uses Markov decision processes to model the sparemanagement and synthesizes optimal strategies through an
exact algorithm. In [ 4], the impact of diﬀerent numbers of
spares is investigated. Given a dynamic fault tree with spare
components, the model is translated into a probabilistic timed
automata (PTA). The unavailability is then calculated byanalysis of the PTA via Uppaal. In contrast to our approach,
the number of spare parts is manually ﬁxed beforehand, and
no automatic synthesis is performed.
Springer

--- Page 4 ---
Optimal spare management via statistical model checking: a case study in research reactors 363
Translation from fault trees to timed automata There
are studies on optimization using timed automata. The au-
thors of [ 18,19] study the optimization of cyber-physical
system behavior regarding energy consumption and its ef-
fect on system reliability by Uppaal. Translating the fault
tree into timed automata can help in better analysis and opti-
mization. Several methods have been developed for fault treeanalysis using timed automata.
In [20,21], the authors introduced a framework for
converting fault trees and attack trees to timed automata.
In [20], the authors translated attack tree gates and leaves
into timed automata and deﬁned the properties in weighted
CTL queries to perform model checking analysis. They used
the Uppaal CORA model checker to obtain the optimalpath of the attacks. In [ 21], each element of an attack-fault
tree is translated into a stochastic timed automaton [ 22]. As
a result, the authors calculated the costliest system failure by
equipping the attack-fault tree with stochastic model check-
ing techniques. Ruijters et al. [ 23] presented a translation
from fault maintenance trees – fault trees with maintenance
aspects – to priced timed automata, and then applied sta-
tistical model checking for analysis. In all these papers, the
authors only check the dependability metrics, such as sys-
tem reliability, but do not perform any synthesis on speciﬁc
parameters. In contrast, our approach allows automatically
synthesizing parameters which are optimal under a given de-pendability metric. Furthermore, these works are less ﬂex-
ible than our model. In previous works, the size of a gate
automaton grew linearly with the number of its children.
In contrast, the size of our automata is independent of the
number of children, and remains constant. The modular andconﬁgurable nature of our proposed approach aligns with In-
dustry 4.0 principles, which emphasize ﬂexible production
environments capable of adapting to dynamic demands and
shared resource utilization [ 24].
2 Spare management for a research reactor
2.1 Research reactor
We investigate optimal spare management for research re-
actors. The case study stems from INVAP S.E. based in
Bariloche, Argentina. This high-tech company develops –
among others – research reactors, satellites, and radars.
Research reactors are nuclear reactors which are used for
research purposes and not for power generation. Applica-
tion areas of research reactors include research and training,
analysis and testing of materials, and the production of ra-
dioisotopes used in medical diagnoses and cancer treatment.
In contrast to power reactors, research reactors are smaller,
operate at lower temperatures, require less fuel, and produce
less ﬁssion products.Emergency shutdown system We consider part of the
emergency shutdown system of a research reactor. In case of
an emergency, the system automatically stops the nuclear ﬁs-sion chain reaction within the reactor. This process is called
“trip” or “scram.” The ﬁssion reaction is stopped by insert-
ing neutron-absorbing control rods into the reactor core. Byabsorbing neutrons, the control rods stop the nuclear chainreaction and shut down the reactor. The emergency shutdown
system is designed as a fail-safe mechanism: if it fails due to
internal subsystem failures, operation of the whole researchreactor is immediately stopped. In this case study, we focuson the unavailability of the research reactor operation due to
the unavailability of the emergency shutdown system caused
by internal failures. In particular, we do not consider the tripof the research reactor – through the emergency shutdown
system – triggered by the violation of safety thresholds.
The emergency shutdown system (depicted in Fig. 1) con-
sists of three main subsystems: (1) the reactor protection sys-tem (RPS), the (2) neutron ﬂux instrumentation, and (3) the
delta temperature reactor core (DTCore). Both the neutron
ﬂux instrumentation and the DTCore feed into the RPS viaanalog channels. If any of the two inputs or the RPS itself is
unavailable, the emergency shutdown system becomes un-
available. The reactor protection system consists of three
redundant subsystems, also called trains. The RPS signals atrip of the reactor if two out of the three trains are above the
safety threshold or if the trains are unavailable due to internal
failures. The neutron ﬂux instrumentation consists of three
ionization chambers. Each ionization chamber measures theneutron ﬂux outside the core and generates an alarm if safety
thresholds are violated. The neutron ﬂux instrumentation
fails if two of the ionization chambers are failed. The Delta
Temperature Reactor Core (DTCore) consists of three redun-
dantthermocouples which measure temperature diﬀerences.
DTCore fails if two thermocouples are unavailable.
Figure 2depicts a fault tree model of the emergency shut-
down system. The logical OR-gate Tripmodels that the sys-
tem fails if any of the three main subsystems fails. Each
subsystem is modeled by a 2/3 voting-gate which fails if atleast two out of the three inputs fail. The leaves represent theredundant subsystems which fail according to an associated
failure distribution.
In the following, we mainly focus our analysis on the
neutron ﬂux subsystem (marked by the box in red) because
it has signiﬁcantly higher costs than the other components.
Thus, optimal spare management is most crucial here.
2.2 Optimal spare management
Redundancies of the subcomponents ensure that the researchreactor operates safely and reliably. The safety and reliabil-
ity of the reactor can be analyzed with standard techniques
such as fault tree analysis [ 3]. However, the redundancies
Springer

--- Page 5 ---
364 R. Soltani et al.
Fig. 1 Schematic of the
emergency shutdown system
Fig. 2 Fault tree model of the
emergency shutdown system
do not prevent failures, they only mitigate them. In case of
a subcomponent failure, the subcomponent should be eitherrepaired or replaced by another spare component. It is there-
fore crucial that enough spare components are available to
allow for quick replacement of failed components. On theother hand, ordering and storing a large number of sparecomponents costs a signiﬁcant amount of money. A pressingquestion is therefore to ﬁnd an optimal spare management
policy, e.g., “how many spare components should be on stock
at a given time?” The number of spares on stock should besmall to minimize purchasing and storage costs but suﬃ-ciently large such that the research reactor stays operational,especially in case of component failures. The optimal strat-egy needs to consider various aspects: costs of spare com-
ponents, warehouse capacity, delivery times for new orders,
reliability requirements on the reactors, etc.
Initial stock We consider the setting where all necessary
spare parts must be initially on stock. Thus, no intermedi-
ate ordering is considered. This setting is important in thecontext of research reactors as ordering additional spare com-ponents can take a long time or components may no longerbe produced at all. The ordering process involves multiple
steps such as (possibly) manufacturing the component on
demand, transportation and testing of the component. Thus,the initial stock is crucial to guarantee high availability ofthe research reactor.Current spare management strategies Currently, the
number of spare components is often based on experience,such as keeping the square root of used components on stock.For𝑛components which are in use, ⌈√
𝑛⌉components are
kept on stock as spare parts. Another approach is manuallyconsidering diﬀerent numbers of spare parts and calculatingthe system reliability with respect to each conﬁguration. In
the end, the best number of spare parts from all considered
conﬁgurations is selected. However, this approach is verytime-consuming as a large number of spare parts need to beconsidered. Furthermore, if parts of the system change, thewhole process has to be performed again.
2.3 System parameters
We consider a remaining lifetime of 40 years for the researchreactor. We assume a gross proﬁt of $1 million Argentinepesos per day of operation for the research reactor. Con-versely, this means each day where the research reactor isunavailable, costs of $1 million are accumulated.
Failure rates and costs Component failures occur ac-
cording to a given failure rate. The failures can be mitigatedby replacing the component with a spare one. The replace-ment time is given by a replacement rate. Table 1provides
the failure rates, replacement rates, and the costs for a singlecomponent of each type. The values were provided by ourindustrial partner INVAP S.E.
Springer

--- Page 6 ---
Optimal spare management via statistical model checking: a case study in research reactors 365
Table 1 Failure rates,
replacement rates, and costs of
componentsComponent RPS Train Ionization chamber Thermocouple
Failure rate [per hour] 1 ×10−41×10−61×10−5
Replacement rate [per hour] 1 ×10−23×10−33.5×10−3
Costs [in $ Argentine pesos] 8k 80k 1.2k
2.4 Performance metrics
In our analysis, we are interested in optimizing for two met-
rics: (1) high availability of the research reactor with (2) min-imal cost. The unavailability is calculated for a lifetime of40 years. As unavailability is also associated with costs – theloss of proﬁt – it suﬃces to optimize for cost. We therefore
want to ﬁnd the number of initial spares such that the costs
of the spares plus the costs due to system unavailability isminimal. This yields the metric 𝑄
𝑂we want to optimize for:
QO.What number of spare components minimizes total
cost?
After ﬁnding the optimal number of spares, we further
want to analyze the availability of the system under this con-ﬁguration. To this end, we are also interested in the followingmetrics:
Q
A
1.Given a number of spares, what are the costs, i.e., costs
of spares plus costs through unavailability?
QA
2.Given a number of spares, what is the availability of
the system within its lifetime of 40 years?
QA
3.Given a number of spares, what is the probability that
the system is down for less than a given threshold, e.g.,a downtime of at most 30 days in total?
3 Preliminaries
3.1 Fault trees
Fault trees (FT) are a common reliability model [ 3] applied
in diverse industries such as automotive, aerospace, and nu-clear sectors [ 25]. A fault tree is a directed acyclic graph
that serves as a model for determining the causes of system
failures. It identiﬁes how failures at lower levels propagatethrough the system, ultimately leading to a system-level fail-ure. The leaves in a fault tree, called basic events (BE),
represent atomic components that fail according to an as-
sociated failure rate. Inner nodes, called gates, model how
failures propagate. The voting gate (also known as 𝐾/𝑁gate)
indicates that the associated event occurs if at least 𝐾out of
its𝑁input events have failed. The AND and OR gates are
special cases of the voting gate, corresponding to 𝑁/𝑁and
1/𝑁, respectively. A failure of the root node, called top event ,
represents a system failure.3.2 Stochastic priced timed-game automata
AStochastic Priced Timed-Game Automaton (SPTGA) is
a Timed Game Automaton (TGA) [ 26] with probabilities
associated to transitions between states. For each state, a
price is given that represents the cost/beneﬁt of being in
that state, and there may be a cost for taking a transition. In
SPTGA, there are two types of transitions, controllable anduncontrollable. A controllable transition refers to a transi-
tion that can be controlled or inﬂuenced by the system under
consideration. The system has control over the timing and
occurrence of the transitions, and their execution can impact
the outcome of the game or the behavior of the system. Un-
like controllable transitions, uncontrollable transitions can-
not be inﬂuenced by the system under consideration. By
distinguishing between controllable and uncontrollable tran-
sitions, SPTGA provides a framework for analyzing systems
where both the player’s (system’s) decisions and external un-
controllable events play a role in determining the system’sbehavior and evolution over time. Figure 3shows an example
of SPTGA. In SPTGA, the opponent can be an antagonist,
which will be a 2-player game, or stochastic, then the game
will be a 1
1
2-player game.
Given an SPTGA, we can split the problems of interest
into two diﬀerent categories. The ﬁrst is the control synthesis
problem whose input is a model of the system Gand a
property 𝜑. The goal is to compute a strategy 𝜎–i fs u c h
a strategy exists – such that G|𝜎satisﬁes𝜑. Here,G|𝜎
represents the system composed with the strategy 𝜎, modeled
as the synchronous product of the automaton Gand the
strategy𝜎. The second category is the veriﬁcation problem
(or model checking problem). Its input is a model of the
systemG(orG|𝜎, if subjected to a strategy) and a property
𝜑, and its problem is determining whether Gsatisﬁes𝜑.
While the veriﬁcation problem is concerned with whether
a system meets a set of requirements or not, the control
synthesis problem is concerned with whether the system canberestricted to satisfy the requirements.
Automaton symbology The automata ﬁgures use spe-
ciﬁc symbols to represent diﬀerent types of states and tran-
sitions (cf. Fig. 6):
•Committed states. Represented with a Cinside the
state, committed states are temporary states that cannot
delay. Transitions from these states must occur imme-diately, ensuring the automaton progresses without any
time elapsing.
Springer

--- Page 7 ---
366 R. Soltani et al.
Fig. 3 The SPTGA consists of two controllable transitions (straight
arrow) and four uncontrollable transitions (dashed arrow). This exam-
ple shows a component that needs to be replaced when it fails. When
we are in theChoice state, we can choose one of the two controllable
transitions. One of the transitions is to use a component with a higher
cost (50 units) but a lower failure rate. Another choice is a component
with a lower cost (10 units) but a higher failure rate ( 𝜆bad>𝜆 good).When the selected component fails, it will be replaced within MinTime
andMaxTime replacement time based on a uniform distribution, result-
ing in a cost of 1 per time-unit while the component is being replaced.With the help of SPTGA, we can synthesize a strategy to minimize theexpected cost, where the choices are made in such a way that we incurthe least cost
•Urgent states. Represented with a Uinside the state,
urgent states cannot delay time either. However, if both
urgent and committed transitions are available, commit-ted transitions take priority and must be taken ﬁrst.
•States with inner circles. States with a small circle
drawn inside indicate initial states. These states denote
the starting point of the automaton’s execution.
3.3 Uppaal Stratego
Uppaal Stratego [ 5] is a powerful tool that enables
users to generate, optimize, compare, and explore the eﬀectand performance of strategies for stochastic priced timed
games. It integrates the various components of Uppaal
and its two branches – Uppaal SMC (statistical modelchecking) [ 27] and Uppaal Tiga (synthesis for timed
games) [ 28] – as well as the optimization method proposed
in [29] (synthesis of near optimal schedulers) into one tool
suite. Recently, Uppaal Stratego has become a part of
Uppaal 5.0.
In Uppaal Stratego, the query language contains
a subset of Time Computational Tree Logic to verify the
requirements of the model. We focus on the following two
types of queries for a given SPTGA and a strategy. ThevariableNis the number of simulations to be performed and
bound shows the time bound on the simulations.
1.Probability Estimation Pr[bound]( 𝜓) under
Strategy_Name estimates the probability of a require-
ment property 𝜓being satisﬁed for a given SPTGA and
strategy within a time bound.
2.Expected Value E[bound;N]( 𝜓) under
Strategy_Name evaluates the minimum or maxi-
mum value of a clock or an integer value while
Uppaal Stratego checks the SPTGA with respect
to a strategy.
In this context, simulations refer to the execution of the model
under diﬀerent conditions and scenarios to observe its behav-
ior and gather information about its properties. Estimation inthis context refers to the process of determining or approx-
imating numerical values or probabilities associated withspeciﬁc aspects of the system’s behavior or performance.
4 Methodology
Figure 4outlines our approach for spare parts optimization
via statistical model checking. The inputs to the framework
are a fault tree Frepresenting the system under consider-
ation, and the metrics 𝑄𝑂and𝑄𝐴
1,...,𝑄𝐴
𝑚. The approach
returns the number of spare parts which optimizes 𝑄𝑂, e.g.,
minimizes cost. Additionally, the framework also outputs themodel checking results for 𝑄
𝐴
1,...,𝑄𝐴
𝑚when using the op-
timal number of spares, e.g., the expected cost for having aspeciﬁc amount of spares, the system’s availability over its
lifetime and the probability of the downtime being less than
a deﬁned threshold. The synthesis of the optimal number ofspares as well as the analysis via statistical model checkingare performed using Uppaal Stratego [ 5].
The framework consists of ﬁve steps as indicated by the
blue boxes in Fig. 4. We present each step in the following:
Step 1. First, we translate the given FT Fto an SPTGA
G. Following [ 23,30], we employ a compositional
translation methodology. That is, we translate each
FT element (i.e., basic events and gates) into a sep-
arate SPTGA. Then, by combining these diﬀerentcomponents (automata), we obtain one SPTGA G
capturing the complete FT behavior. Details on thetranslation from FT to SPTGA are given in Sect. 5.
Step 2. The optimization metric 𝑄
𝑂and the analysis met-
rics𝑄𝐴
1,...,𝑄𝐴
𝑚are formalized as temporal logic
formulas 𝜑and𝜓1,...,𝜓𝑚, respectively. Details are
given in Sect. 6.
Step 3. Given the SPTGA G, we use Uppaal Stratego
to synthesize a strategy 𝜎that is optimal for the given
synthesis query 𝜑, e.g., minimizes cost. The synthe-
sized strategy 𝜎then encodes the optimal number
of spares to have on stock in the beginning.
Springer

--- Page 8 ---
Optimal spare management via statistical model checking: a case study in research reactors 367
Fig. 4 Overview of the
methodology
Step 4. Applying the synthesized strategy 𝜎on the SPTGA
Gyields the induced model G|𝜎that represents the
system’s behavior when using the optimal numberof spare parts.
Step 5. Lastly, we use statistical model checking via
Uppaal Stratego to calculate the desired anal-
ysis queries 𝜓
1,...,𝜓𝑚on the induced model G|𝜎.
The analysis yields e.g., the system’s availability orthe probability of an overall downtime less than agiven threshold.
5 INVAP emergency shutdown system as an
SPTGA
In the following, we present the SPTGA model for the IN-
VAP emergency shutdown system. In this section, we con-sider only one component in order to make the methodologyeasier to understand. In Sect. 8, we extend the SPTGA model
to two components. In this case study, we do not fully con-sider the third component, the delta temperature reactor core.Spare management for this component type has less impor-tance because the thermocouple is extremely inexpensive andmanufactured by INVAP S.E. itself.
Following [ 30,31], we obtain the SPTGA model from
t h ef a u l tt r e ei nF i g . 2through a compositional translation
methodology. That is, we translate each FT element (i.e.,
basic event or gate) into a separate SPTGA. Then, by com-
bining these diﬀerent SPTGA components (automata), weobtain one SPTGA Gcapturing the complete FT behavior.
In contrast to previous works, e.g., [ 23], our translation is
agnostic to the number of inputs in the FT. For example,we translate the behavior of a voting gate ( 𝐾/𝑁gate) to
SPTGA regardless of the number of children 𝑁or thresh-
old𝐾. These values are dynamically deﬁned in the system
declaration without changing the model. A larger FT canbe modeled by creating an instance of a translated automa-ton. For this, the values associated with each gate, e.g., thechildren’s ID, can be speciﬁed in the system declaration.
Fig. 5 SPTGABE[id] for basic events, parameterized with their ID
id. Each BE has an exponential failure rate of 0 .000024
For simplicity, we start by presenting the translation of
the Ionization chamber component, marked with a dashedbox in Fig. 2. Later in Sect. 8, we extend the model to two
components. However, our method can easily be extended
for other types and is applicable to fault trees in general.
The SPTGA consists of four types of automata, which can
be instantiated multiple times: BErepresents a basic event,
SGmodels the spare management, VOTrepresents a voting
gate, andWmodels the warehouse storing the spares. Each
element in the FT can have diﬀerent states, and in SPTGA, werepresent them with locations. For example, BEs are either
operational or failed, so we have two diﬀerent states for the
associatedBE. We use synchronization channels to show the
link between diﬀerent FT elements.
Basic events Figure 5shows the SPTGA model for a BE.
This automaton consists of two states: BE_operational de-
notes that the component is operational, whereas BE_failed
denotes its failure. Since we have several BEs, the SPTGA
is parameterized by ID [id] with the same failure rate for
the same type of components. The BE’s failure rate (perday) is an exponential rate of 0 .000024 (cf. Table 1column
“Ionization chamber”). In Table 1, failure rates and replace-
ment rates are given per hour, while here we converted theminto per day for convenience. When a BE fails, it commu-
nicates with the spare management automaton SGthrough
the communication channel request_replace[id]! .T h e
messagereplaced[id]? can be received from SGwhen the
failed BE has been replaced.
Springer

--- Page 9 ---
368 R. Soltani et al.
Fig. 6 The automaton for the spare management. Here
request_replace[id]? andreplaced[id]! are signals to commu-
nicate with the corresponding BE. The demand! andsupplied? aresignals to communicate with the warehouse; lenholds the length of
the queue. Thereplacement_failed? signal will be received if no
spare is available in the warehouse
Fig. 7 The automaton for the
spare warehouse. The variable
Spare stores the initial amount
of spares in the warehouse, SP
represents the number of
available spares in the
warehouse, andCost represents
the cost. Thedemand? ,
supplied! ,a n d
replacement_failed! are
signals to communicate with the
SG
Spare management For simplicity, the Spare gates are
not explicitly shown in the FT in Fig. 2. However, each ba-
sic event (BE) is connected to a Spare Management gate,
which ensures that failed components are replaced by spare
components when available. Figure 6shows the SPTGA
representing the spare management. When SGreceives the
request_replace[id]? message – modeling that BE[id]
has failed – it stores the ID [id] in the queue, then com-
municates with the warehouse through the communication
channeldemand! . If there is a spare part in the warehouse,
then the replacement will be done, and SG will be informed
by the communication channel supplied? . If there is no
spare in the warehouse, then the replacement_failed?
message will be received and the state Out_of_spares is
entered. Theenqueue() anddequeue() are functions to
enqueue the ID of the failed BE or remove the successfully
replaced BE from the queue, respectively. The variable len
holds the length of the queue. If lenequals zero, no failed
BE is waiting to be replaced.
Warehouse The Warehouse automaton handles the inven-
tory of spares and facilitates replacements by interacting with
the Spare Management automaton, shown in Fig. 7. There
are two diﬀerent types of transitions in this automaton. Solidlines indicate controllable transitions and dashed lines in-
dicate uncontrollable transitions. The Spare Warehouse isthe only automaton with controllable transitions. The initial
state in this automaton is a committed state . A committed
state cannot delay, and the outgoing transition of this statehas the highest priority – even higher than the urgent state.
As a result, outgoing transitions from this location are the
ﬁrst transitions made in the entire SPTGA, which is the ini-tial decision for the spare quantity in the warehouse. This
decision is the only one we can control. Normally, one of
these transitions is chosen in a nondeterministic way. Butif we synthesize a strategy, we can have control over these
transitions (in the next section, we will discuss the strategy
synthesis for determining the spare number). After decid-ing on the initial amount of spares Spare in the warehouse,
this value cannot be changed later on. The variable SPrep-
resents the number of available spares in the warehouse. Inthe beginning,SP’s value equalsSpare . The variableCost
represents the cost, which is the total cost of buying spares
and the cost of system failure. Each spare costs 0 .08 units
(one unit is equivalent to $1 million Argentine pesos). This
cost is stored in the variable Cost at the beginning, and the
cost of system failure is added later.
Springer

--- Page 10 ---
Optimal spare management via statistical model checking: a case study in research reactors 369
Fig. 8 TheKout ofNvoting automaton. The counter keeps
track of failed children. Variables Operational andlossRate
are used only for monitoring and cost calculation purposes. Therequest_replace[id]? is the received signal from the correspond-
ing BE. Thereplaced[id]? is the received signal from SG
During system operations, if a replacement is needed for a
failed BE, the warehouse receives the request demand? from
SG. If a spare is available in the warehouse, the failed BEwill be replaced according to an exponential rate of 0 .072 per
day, and the warehouse sends the supplied! signal to SG. If
no spare is available anymore, the replacement_failed!
signal will be transmitted.
Voting gate Figure 8shows the SPTGA model for
a𝐾/𝑁voting gate. This automaton consists of two
states,System_Operational andSystem_failure .T h e
counter keeps track of failed children.
When a BE fails ( request_replace[id]? ), the
counter value is incremented. If the counter value is
at leastK, then the voting gate is failed and the automa-
ton goes into the System_failure state. When a failed
BE is replaced ( replaced[id]? ), thecounter value
is decremented. If the total number of failed BEs (the
counter value) is less than K, then the automaton goes
into theSystem_working state. VariablesOperational
andlossRate are used only for monitoring and cost cal-
culation purposes. The monitoring automaton is not shownfor a single-component analysis since it only has one state to
keep track of costs.
For the OR gate, which is a 1 /𝑁voting gate, the same au-
tomaton can be used with the parameter Kset to 1. However,
the speciﬁcORgate automaton discussed later in Sect. 8has
been separately modeled to address additional system-levelinteractions unique to that context.
6 Formal queries
This section will explain the queries we have used inour model veriﬁcation. After modeling the fault tree usingSPTGA, we use these queries to analyze the model further.We use two types of queries for statistical model checking tocalculate the desired dependability metrics, namely strategy
queries andstatistical queries .6.1 Strategy queries
By giving them names, strategy queries make it possible
to save, load, reuse, and modify the strategies. We use this
query in two ways, with the controller synthesis queries or
learning queries .
Strategy as controller synthesis query Controller syn-
thesis queries synthesize a strategy that makes a given con-
trol objectivegoal true, i.e., regardless of the environment
choice, thegoal predicate is always true. If no such strategy
exists, thenfalse is returned. The format of this query for
our case is
strategy SPCount# = control: A[] Spares == i
This query computes a strategy where, regardless of the
environment choice, goal predicate – the number of the pri-
mary spares must be equal to i– is always true. Such a query
allows manually ﬁxing the number of spares. For example,
in Fig. 7, which depicts the Warehouse automaton, the ini-
tial state contains controllable transitions that determine the
number of spare parts in the warehouse. The controller syn-
thesis query selects one of these transitions based on the
speciﬁed optimization criteria, such as minimizing the over-
all cost.
Strategy as a learning query A learning query speci-
ﬁes the objective for which an optimal strategy should be
synthesized. We use the following query:
strategy MinCost = minE(Cost) [<=lifetime]:
<>GlobalTime==lifetime
StrategyMinCost minimizes the expected Cost value
within the givenlifetime (e.g., 40 years which is equiv-
alent to 14,600 days). In order to determine the strat-
egy for exactly the given lifetime, we use the predicate
GlobalTime==lifetime that stops together with the sim-
ulation time bound. GlobalTime is a clock that is never
reset.
Springer

--- Page 11 ---
370 R. Soltani et al.
Table 2 Changed settings in
UppaalNumber of
successful runsMaximum
number of runsNumber of
good runsNumber of
runs to evaluateProbability
uncertainty
Default value 200 500 100 100 0.05
Our value 20,000 50,000 10,000 1,000,000 0.01
6.2 Statistical queries
We use statistical queries to formally specify the analysis
metrics𝑄𝐴
1,...,𝑄𝐴
𝑚from Sect. 2.4:
E [<=lifetime;100000] (max: Cost) under
Strategy_Name
This query estimates the maximal value of Cost within the
given time span by running 100,000 simulations. The under
Strategy_Name indicates that the query is subjected to the
strategyStrategy_Name ,
E [<=lifetime;100000] (max: ODay/lifetime)
under Strategy_Name
This query is similar to the previous one, except that the
estimated value is the system’s availability. Variable ODay
stores the operational time of the system. It is important to
note that usingmininstead ofmaxin these two queries would
return the overall minimal value, which initially would be 0.This is because, at the start of the simulation, no uptime hasaccumulated, yet. Since our goal is to estimate the expectedavailability under the given strategy, we use maxto capture
the best-case operational performance rather than the trivial
lower bound:
Pr[<=lifetime] (<> DTime>0) under
Strategy_Name
This query estimates the probability that the system is
down at all within its lifetime. Variable DTime stores the
downtime of the system.
7 Analysis of a single-component system
This section presents the analysis of the system with a sin-gle component. The statistical model checking results wereobtained using Uppaal Stratego and its requirement
speciﬁcation language [ 32].
7.1 Analysis results
In this section, we limit our following analysis to the neu-
tron ﬂux subsystem. This component type has signiﬁcantlyhigher costs than the other subsystems and thus, optimal
spare management is most crucial here.
Settings We run our experiments on a MacBook Air with
M1 chip and 16 GB RAM. We use Uppaal 5.0, which in-cludes Uppaal Stratego. We run the statistical querieswith a conﬁdence interval of 95%. We changed some of
Uppaal’s default settings to capture rare events and in-
crease accuracy, see Table 2for the details. The parameters
listed in this table are speciﬁc to the learning algorithm and
statistical model checking in Uppaal Stratego. Below
is a brief explanation of each parameter:
•Number of successful runs speciﬁes the minimum
number of successful simulation runs required to con-
sider the learning process valid.
•Maximum number of runs deﬁnes the maximum num-
ber of simulation attempts allowed during the learning
process.
•Number of good runs speciﬁes the number of simula-
tion runs in which the selected strategy performs well
according to the optimization criteria (e.g., minimizing
cost or maximizing availability). These runs contributeto reﬁning the strategy by reinforcing successful deci-
sion patterns. This term does not speciﬁcally originate
from rare event simulation but rather from the reinforce-ment learning process used in Uppaal Stratego.
•Number of runs to evaluate determines the number
of simulations used to evaluate the synthesized strategy
during validation.
•Probability uncertainty represents the acceptable mar-
gin of error for probability estimates. This parameter
applies only to the last statistical query, which calcu-lates the probability of downtime, as the other statisti-
cal queries explicitly declare the number of simulations
(100,000).
These adjustments ensure accurate results, particularly forrare-event scenarios, by increasing the number of simulations
and reﬁning the uncertainty bounds. Except for the probabil-
ity uncertainty, which is related to statistical model checking,the other four parameters relate to Uppaal Stratego’s
learning algorithm.
Results Table 3shows the results of the strategy and sta-
tistical queries performed on the SPTGA from Sect. 5.F i r s t ,
learning queryMinCost is used to synthesize the optimal
number of spares needed to reduce the cost. In this case,the strategy identiﬁes six as the optimal number of spares
for the neutron ﬂux subsystem. However, MinCost does not
directly modify model parameters such as the initial numberof spare parts. The optimal spare quantity is a result of strat-
egy synthesis, but the model itself still allows ﬂexibility in
its initial conﬁguration. To explicitly enforce a ﬁxed number
Springer

--- Page 12 ---
Optimal spare management via statistical model checking: a case study in research reactors 371
Table 3 Veriﬁcation results for the neutron ﬂux subsystem
Query Result Comp. time
strategy MinCost = minE(Cost) [<=14600]: <> GlobalTime==14600 ✓ 411.00 s
E [<=14600;100000] (min: Spare) under MinCost 60 . 0 1 s
strategy SPCount6 = control: A[] Spare==6 ✓ 0.01 s
E [<=14600;100000] (max: Cost) under SPCount6 0.488±0.0030 2.46 s
E [<=14600;100000] (max: ODay/14600) under SPCount6 0.99965±0.00009 2.45 s
Pr[<=14600] (<> DTime>0) under SPCount6 ≤0.0009 0.02 s
Fig. 9 Probability of any system failure within 40 years
of spares, a separate controller synthesis query ( SPCount6 )
is required. This approach ensures that we can analyze bothunconstrained and constrained scenarios under the learned
strategy. The controller synthesis query ( SPCount6 ) explic-
itly ﬁxes the number of spares to 6 for further analysis. After
ﬁnding the optimal number of spares, we use a controller
synthesis query to obtain a new strategy SPCount6 that ﬁxes
the number of spares to 6. Afterwards, we analyze this con-
ﬁguration with respect to the given statistical queries. The
expected cost – the sum of the spares’ cost and the cost due
to unavailability – with six spares is $488k. Most of the
cost stems from the cost of the spares ($480k). The system’s
availability is 99 .96% which corresponds to an expected
downtime of 6 days. The probability of encountering a sys-
tem failure within 40 years is less than 9E −4. This can also
be seen in Fig. 9which shows the probability of having any
downtime for diﬀerent spare numbers.
Figure 10shows the overall cost (on logarithmic scale)
for diﬀerent number of spares. We see that six spares indeed
minimize the cost. For fewer than six spares, the cost due to
system failure is too large, whereas for more than six spares,
the cost of the spares becomes the major factor. In particular,
buying more than six spares incurs more expenses but only
marginally decreases downtime.Fig. 10 Costs for diﬀerent number of spares
7.2 Discussion
Rare events For six spares, the probability of any down-
time within 40 years is less than 9E −4. Thus, a system failure
is a rare event and most of the time, the system will not be
down at all. However, even one system failure has drastic
consequences ($1 million loss per day). It is, therefore, cru-
cial to take these rare events into account. However, statistical
model checking has issues with rare events and we had to sig-
niﬁcantly increase the number of runs in Uppaal to obtain
correct results. With the default settings of Uppaal Strat-
ego, the strategy synthesis via the learning query returned
an incorrect number of spares – due to not encountering the
rare events during the limited number of simulation runs.
For instance, the model provides two spares as the optimal
solution in the default settings. We discovered this issue byperforming standard statistical model checking for a ﬁxed
number of spares, similar to Fig. 10. By increasing the num-
ber of simulation runs (cf. Table 2), we obtained the correct
number of spares, again validated by statistical model check-
ing.
Model ﬂexibility In our SPTGA model, we use control-
lable transitions to choose the initial number of spares. This
allows using controller synthesis queries to manually ﬁx the
Springer

--- Page 13 ---
372 R. Soltani et al.
Fig. 11 SPTGA model for the OR gate
number of spares instead of creating multiple models for dif-
ferent numbers of spares. This modeling choice also provides
ﬂexibility for future extensions where a larger number of con-
ﬁgurations need to be considered, such as synthesizing sparenumbers for multiple components. Instead of exhaustivelychecking all possible conﬁgurations, this approach allowsthe use of Uppaal Stratego’s optimization algorithms
to ﬁnd the best conﬁguration.
Performance We started with Uppaal Stratego ver-
sion 4.1.20 but switched to the recently released Uppaal5.0 as the latter performed signiﬁcantly faster. The MinCost
strategy synthesis took several days in Uppaal Stratego4.1.20, but only minutes in Uppaal 5.0.
8 Analysis of a two-component system
In Sect. 5, for the convenience of presenting the methodology,
we model the emergency shutdown system by only consider-ing the neutron ﬂux instrumentation component. The analysisand implementation of the model are presented in Sect. 7.
In this section, we will examine the emergency system with
two components. As mentioned earlier, this study does not
consider the third component of the emergency shutdownsystem, the thermocouple. Spare management for this com-ponent type has less importance because the thermocouple
is extremely inexpensive and manufactured by INVAP S.E.
itself.
The neutron ﬂux instrumentation feeds into the RPS Train
via analog channels. The emergency shutdown system be-comes unavailable if two out of the three components of
either the Ionization chambers (components for the neutron
ﬂux instrumentation) or the RPS Train itself are unavail-able. This section considers the neutron ﬂux instrumentation(Ionization chamber) and the RPS Train together.
8.1 SPTGA models
OR gate In two-component modeling, we have an addi-
tional automaton, the ORgate. Figure 11shows the SPTGAmodel for anORgate. This automaton has two states,
eitherOperational orFailure .T h eORgate SPTGA
is connected with the voting gates through four com-
munication channels: VOToperational1, VOTfailure1,
VOToperational2, and VOTfailure2 . Variables
Operational andlossRate are used only for monitor-
ing and cost calculation purposes. The Boolean variablesvot1 andvot2 represent the failure of the voting gates
associated with each of the components.
Alternatively, the need for a separate ORgate automaton
can be eliminated by enhancing the VOTautomaton with an
additional communication channel. This channel would in-form its parent gate when the voting gate recovers from afailure, allowing the parent gate to track subsystem statusesdynamically. Such an approach could streamline the mod-eling process by reducing the number of distinct automata
required, albeit at the cost of added complexity within the
voting gate automaton itself.
Extended warehouse In modeling the reactors’ emer-
gency shutdown system with two components, the SPTGAfor the warehouse diﬀers. The warehouse is currently conﬁg-ured in such a way that only one repair team is operational,and only one part can be replaced at any given moment. Fig-ure12shows the warehouse SPTGA. At ﬁrst, we have three
states with committed locations. The three initial committedstates in the extended warehouse automaton are used to ex-plicitly manage the initialization of spare parts for multiplecomponents, ensuring ﬂexibility in future extensions whereinitialization logic may diﬀer between components. Whilethese states could be compressed into a single committed
state with assignments of variables ( Spare1 ,Spare2 )a se f -
fects of outgoing transitions, this approach was chosen tomaintain clarity and modularity in the current implementa-tion.
There are both controllable and uncontrollable transitions
in this automaton. By synthesizing a strategy, we can con-trol the controllable transitions. After deciding on the initialamount of spares for both components in the warehouse, thisvalue cannot be changed later on. Note that the RPS train isconsidered in groups of ten. The reason for this is that manyof them will be needed in the given time frame, and due totheir lower cost compared to the Ionization chamber, it ispossible to buy (slightly) more of them.
In the current model, replacements are performed sequen-
tially by a single repair team, regardless of whether multi-
ple components fail simultaneously. This decision reﬂects a
practical constraint in many real-world systems, where repairresources are limited. However, if the system allows for par-allel replacements by diﬀerent teams, the warehouse automa-ton could be modiﬁed to include separate repair processesfor each component type. This would require extending theautomaton to track multiple parallel replacement activities.
Springer

--- Page 14 ---
Optimal spare management via statistical model checking: a case study in research reactors 373
Fig. 12 SPTGA model for the warehouse gate (considering two components)
Fig. 13 SPTGA model for the monitoring automaton
Figure 12’s warehouse SPTGA shares many similarities
with Fig. 7’s warehouse SPTGA. In the new warehouse
model, the two states Replacing1 andReplacing2 , with
rates of 0 .072 and 0 .24, respectively, indicate the replace-
ment rate of two distinct components, the Ionization chamber
and RPS train. In this model, the Boolean variable FCheck
indicates the failure of another component (of a diﬀerent
type) while the present component is being replaced. The
main goal of using FCheck is to follow a “fairness policy”
which alternates between the components of both types when
performing the replacements.
Monitoring automaton Figure 13shows the SPTGA
model for a monitoring automaton. This automaton is solelyfor the purpose of monitoring the system’s cost and availabil-
ity. The monitoring process begins with the Start? commu-
nication channel once the warehouse automaton has ﬁxed thequantity of spare components. The Cost variable takes the
value ofScost , which is equivalent to the cost of purchasing
spare components. Depending on whether the system failedor not, the variables LossRate andOperational receivevalues of 0 or 1. The variables Cost ,ODay , andDtime mod-
ify their values on a continuous basis.
8.2 Results
Similar to Sect. 6, we use two types of queries for model
checking and calculate the desired dependability metrics,namely strategy queries and statistical queries. In Table 3,
we used a diﬀerent approach to calculate the maximum cost
and availability of the system by using the strategy as a
controller synthesis query, as discussed in Sect. 6,t oﬁ xt h e
number of spare parts on the optimal number. In Table 4,w e
did not use a controller synthesis query because the learning
query stores the model with the optimal number of spares.We use statistical queries to formally specify the analysismetrics𝑄
𝐴
1,...,𝑄𝐴
𝑚from Sect. 2.4for two components.
Table 4shows the results of the strategy and statistical
queries performed on the SPTGA based on two components.T h eﬁ r s tq u e r yi nT a b l e 4is a learning query that is used
to synthesize the optimal number of spares needed for both
components to reduce the cost. This query is the same asbefore. In the two-component system, the MinCost strat-
egy synthesizes the optimal number of spares, determining 6
spares for the ionization chamber and 140 spares for the RPS
train. As with the single-component case, MinCost identi-
ﬁes the optimal conﬁguration but does not directly enforce
it in the model. Subsequent statistical queries are performed
under the strategy to evaluate the associated cost and avail-ability metrics. We use the second and third queries to obtain
Springer

--- Page 15 ---
374 R. Soltani et al.
Table 4 Veriﬁcation results for the two-component system
Query Result Comp. time
strategy MinCost = minE(Cost) [<=14600]: <> GlobalTime==14600 ✓ 45,995.00 s
E [<=14600;100000] (min: Spare1) under MinCost 60 . 0 1 s
E [<=14600;100000] (min: Spare2) under MinCost 140 0.01 s
E [<=14600;100000] (max: Cost) under MinCost 10.400±0.140 2 s
E [<=14600;100000] (max: ODay/14600) under MinCost 0.99932±0.00013 2 s
Pr[<=14600] (<> DTime>0) under MinCost 0.8659±0.0009 4.12 s
the optimal number of spares per component type from the
synthesized strategy. The analysis yields that 6 is the optimalnumber of spares for the ionization chamber and 140 spares
should be on stock for the RPS train.
We further analyze the optimal conﬁguration using sta-
tistical queries. The system’s availability is 99 .93%, which
corresponds to an expected downtime of 11 days. The prob-
ability of encountering a system failure within 40 years is86.59%. The results reveal a substantial increase in the prob-
ability of downtime when comparing single and combined
subsystems. This is primarily due to shared constraints, such
as a single repair team handling multiple subsystem failures,
and higher failure rates in certain subsystems like the RPStrain.
8.3 Discussion
Comparison to single component For the ionization
chamber, we obtain the same number of spares (6) through
both the single component and the two-component system,
see Tables 3and4. This indicates that the spare management
for both component types could be considered independently
in this case. However, such an independence does not hold ingeneral: if one component is signiﬁcantly more failure-prone,
the other component becomes less important and thus, might
require less spares.
System downtime The two-component system exhibits a
dramatic increase in the probability of failure (0.866) com-pared to the one-component system (9E −4). One reason is
that only one replacement per time unit is considered in the
warehouse model. Another reason is that the failure rate ofRPS train is two orders of magnitude larger than the ioniza-
tion chamber. RPS train components therefore fail more often
and it is more likely that two of the components are failedsimultaneously—even with the higher replacement rates. The
higher failure rates of RPS train is also reﬂected by the fact
that 140 spares need to be on stock.9 Conclusion and future work
We presented an approach for optimal spare management by
combining fault tree analysis and statistical model checking.Our approach ﬁnds the optimal number of spares as a trade-oﬀ between costs and reliability. Given fault trees equippedwith costs and spares, we translate them into stochastic pricedtimed game automata (SPTGA) and use Uppaal Strat-
ego to synthesize an optimal strategy, i.e., the optimal num-
ber of spares. We applied our approach to two subsystems ofthe emergency shutdown system of a research reactor. Us-ing Uppaal Stratego, we found the optimal number ofspares for both a system with one component and a systemconsisting of two diﬀerent types of components.
Future work There are multiple directions for future ex-
tensions. First, we can take advantage of Uppaal’s mod-eling ﬂexibility to extend the SPTGA modeling techniquesand include, e.g., a dynamic warehouse model allowing on-demand ordering, variable delivery times, or use dynamicfault trees [ 23] as the initial model. These extensions allow
for more realistic modeling of more complex spare manage-ment scenarios.
A second follow-up to the current work would be to auto-
mate the translation from fault trees to SPTGAs. This trans-lation would provide a convenient way to analyze larger sys-tems consisting of various types of components. Uppaal
oﬀers extensive language for deﬁning templates in the form
of extended timed automata. It supports template instantia-tion. The grammar for Instantiation can deﬁne new templatesbased on preexisting ones. This allows for such an automatedprocess. In order to extend the translation to spare manage-ment, however, one needs to develop a standardized formatto express spare management scenarios.
Another follow-up to the current work could extend this
framework to more complex tree-based risk analyses, such asAttack-Fault-Defense Trees (AFDT), which integrate safety,security, and countermeasure modeling into a uniﬁed struc-ture [33]. Such extensions could provide deeper insights into
the interdependencies between failures and adversarial ac-tions in cyber-physical systems.
Springer

--- Page 16 ---
Optimal spare management via statistical model checking: a case study in research reactors 375
Lastly, in order to analyze larger systems, a closer look
into performance improvements in Uppaal 5.0 compared
to Uppaal Stratego is needed. In particular, one needsto study what causes the increase in computation timeseen for the two-component system. Regarding the analy-sis, dedicated methods to support rare-event simulation with
Uppaal are beneﬁcial to keep the number of simulation
runs at a feasible level.
Funding information This work has been partially funded by the
NWO grant NWA.1160.18.238 ( PrimaVera ), by the ERC Consolidator
Grant 864075 ( CAESAR ) and by EU Horizon 2020 project MISSION,
number 101008233.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons At-
tribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adap-
tation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source,
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicatedotherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in
the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a
copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ .
References
1. Hu, Q., Boylan, J.E., Chen, H., Labib, A.: OR in spare parts man-
agement: a review. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 266(2), 395–414 (2018).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2017.07.058
2. Zhang, X., Zeng, J.: Joint optimization of condition-based oppor-
tunistic maintenance and spare parts provisioning policy in mul-
tiunit systems. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 262(2), 479–498 (2017). https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2017.03.019
3. Ruijters, E., Stoelinga, M.: Fault tree analysis: a survey of the state-
of-the-art in modeling, analysis and tools. Comput. Sci. Rev. 15,
29–62 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cosrev.2015.03.001
4. Heijblom, R., Postma, W., Natarajan, V., Stoelinga, M.: In: 2018
Annual Reliability and Maintainability Symposium (RAMS),
pp. 1–7 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1109/RAM.2018.8463074
5. David, A., Jensen, P.G., Larsen, K.G., Mikucionis, M., Taankvist,
J.H.: In: TACAS. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 9035,
pp. 206–211. Springer, Berlin (2015). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-
3-662-46681-0_16
6. Legay, A., Delahaye, B., Bensalem, S.: In: RV, Lecture Notes
in Computer Science, vol. 6418, pp. 122–135. Springer, Berlin
(2010). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-16612-9_11
7. Chatain, T., David, A., Larsen, K.G.: In: ADHS, IFAC Proceed-
ings Volumes, vol. 42, pp. 238–243. Elsevier, Amsterdam (2009).
https://doi.org/10.3182/20090916-3-ES-3003.00042
8. Soltani, R., Volk, M., Diamonte, L., Lopuhaä-Zwakenberg, M.,
Stoelinga, M.: In: International Conference on Formal Methods for
Industrial Critical Systems, pp. 205–223. Springer, Berlin (2023).
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-43681-9_12
9. Soltani, R., Volk, M., Diamonte, L., Lopuhaä-Zwakenberg, M.,
Stoelinga, M.: Artefact for “optimal spare management via statis-
tical model checking: a case study in research reactors” (2023).
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.8199172
10. Zhang, S., Huang, K., Yuan, Y.: Spare parts inventory management:
a literature review. Sustainability 13(5) (2021). https://doi.org/10.
3390/su1305246011. Tusar, M.I.H., Sarker, B.R.: Spare parts control strategies for
oﬀshore wind farms: a critical review and comparative study.Wind Eng. 46(5), 1629–1656 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1177/
0309524X221095258
12. Chen, F., Chen, Y., Kuo, J.: Applying moving back-propagation
neural network and moving fuzzy-neuron network to predict therequirement of critical spare parts. Expert Syst. Appl. 37(9),
6695–6704 (2010). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2010.04.037
13. Gutierrez, R.S., Solis, A.O., Mukhopadhyay, S.: Lumpy demand
forecasting using neural networks. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 111(2),
409–420 (2008). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2007.01.007 .S p e -
cial Section on Sustainable Supply Chain
14. Kourentzes, N.: Intermittent demand forecasts with neural net-
works. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 143(1), 198–206 (2013). https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ijpe.2013.01.009
15. Li, S.G., Kuo, X.: The inventory management system for automo-
bile spare parts in a central warehouse. Expert Syst. Appl. 34(2),
1144–1153 (2008). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2006.12.003
16. Wu, P., Hung, Y., Lin, Z.: Intelligent forecasting system based on
integration of electromagnetism-like mechanism and fuzzy neuralnetwork. Expert Syst. Appl. 41(6), 2660–2677 (2014). https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.eswa.2013.11.007
17. Zheng, M., Ye, H., Wang, D., Pan, E.: Joint optimization of
condition-based maintenance and spare parts orders for multi-unit
systems with dual sourcing. Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 210, 107512
(2021). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ress.2021.107512
18. Soltani, R., Kang, E.Y., Mena, J.E.H.: Veriﬁcation and optimiza-
tion of cyber-physical systems: Preprint for FedCSIS (2021). arXiv:
2109.01574 . arXiv preprint
19. Soltani, R., Kang, E.Y., Mena, J.E.H.: In: FedCSIS (Position Pa-
pers), pp. 205–210 (2021). https://doi.org/10.15439/2021F125
20. Kumar, R., Ruijters, E., Stoelinga, M.: In: FORMATS. Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, vol. 9268, pp. 156–171. Springer,Berlin (2015). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-22975-1_11
21. Kumar, R., Stoelinga, M.: In: HASE, pp. 25–32. IEEE Com-
put. Soc., Los Alamitos (2017). https://doi.org/10.1109/HASE.
2017.12
22. David, A., Larsen, K.G., Legay, A., Mikucionis, M., Poulsen, D.B.,
van Vliet, J., Wang, Z.: In: FORMATS. Lecture Notes in ComputerScience, vol. 6919, pp. 80–96. Springer, Berlin (2011). https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-642-24310-3_7
23. Ruijters, E., Stoelinga, M.: In: ISoLA (1). Lecture Notes in Com-
puter Science, vol. 9952, pp. 151–165 (2016). https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-3-319-47166-2_10
24. Jepsen, S.C., Worm, T., Johansen, A., Lazarova-Molnar, S., Kjær-
gaard, M.B., Kang, E.Y., Friederich, J., Heredia Mena, J.E.,Soltani, R., Sørensen, S.L., Hjort Schwee, J.: In: 2021 Interna-
tional Symposium ELMAR, pp. 143–150 (2021). https://doi.org/
10.1109/ELMAR52657.2021.9550961
25. Kabir, S.: An overview of fault tree analysis and its application
in model based dependability analysis. Expert Syst. Appl. 77,
114–135 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2017.01.058
26. Maler, O., Pnueli, A., Sifakis, J.: In: STACS. Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, vol. 900, pp. 229–242. Springer, Berlin (1995).https://doi.org/10.1007/3-540-59042-0_76
27. Bulychev, P.E., David, A., Larsen, K.G., Mikucionis, M., Poulsen,
D.B., Legay, A., Wang, Z.: In: QAPL, EPTCS, vol. 85, pp. 1–16(2012). https://doi.org/10.4204/EPTCS.85.1
28. Behrmann, G., Cougnard, A., David, A., Fleury, E., Larsen, K.G.,
Lime, D.: In: CAV. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 4590,
pp. 121–125. Springer, Berlin (2007). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-
3-540-73368-3_14
29. David, A., Jensen, P.G., Larsen, K.G., Legay, A., Lime, D.,
Sørensen, M.G., Taankvist, J.H.: In: ATVA. Lecture Notes in Com-puter Science, vol. 8837, pp. 129–145. Springer, Berlin (2014).https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-11936-6_10
Springer

--- Page 17 ---
376 R. Soltani et al.
30. Boudali, H., Crouzen, P., Stoelinga, M.: In: DSN, pp. 708–717.
IEEE Comput. Soc., Los Alamitos (2007). https://doi.org/10.1109/
DSN.2007.37
31. Ruijters, E., Guck, D., van Noort, M., Stoelinga, M.: In: DSN,
pp. 662–669. IEEE Comput. Soc., Los Alamitos (2016). https://
doi.org/10.1109/DSN.2016.67
32. UPPAAL requirements speciﬁcation language. https://docs.
uppaal.org/language-reference/requirements-speciﬁcation/ .A c -
cessed: 2023-05-2633. Soltani, R., Lopuhaä-Zwakenberg, M., Stoelinga, M.: In: Cecca-
relli, A., Trapp, M., Bondavalli, A., Bitsch, F. (eds.) Computer
Safety, Reliability, and Security, pp. 218–232. Springer, Cham
(2024)
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to ju-
risdictional claims in published maps and institutional aﬃliations.
Springer
