--- Page 1 ---
Using Timed Model Checking for Verifying Workﬂows
V
olker Gruhn and Ralf Laue
Chair ofApplied Telematics / e-Business⋆
Computer Science Faculty, University of Leipzig, Germany
Klostergasse 3, 04109 Leipzig, Germany
Abstract. Thecorrectnessofaworkﬂowspeciﬁcationiscriticalfortheautoma-
tion of business processes. For this reason, errors in the speciﬁcation should be
detected and corrected as early as possible- at speciﬁcation time.
In this paper, we present a validation method for workﬂow speciﬁcations using
model-checking techniques. A formalized workﬂow speciﬁcation, its properties
and the correctness requirements are translated into a timed state machine that
can be analyzed with the U PPAALmodel checker. The main contribution of this
paper is the use of timed model checking for verifying time-related properties of
workﬂow speciﬁcations.
Using only one tool (the model checker) for verifying these different kinds of
propertiesgivesanadvantageoverusingdifferentspecializedalgorithmsforver-
ifying different kinds of properties.
1 Introduction& Related Work
Inrecentyears,interestinbusinessprocessautomationhasraised.Onereasonforthisis
that the concept of web services allows integrating web-based applications using open
standards.
Developingalargesystemusingwebservicesstartswithspecifyingtheﬂowofcon-
trol and information between these services - the workﬂow. This task should be done
by domain experts. Different business process deﬁnition languages have been devel-
opedforspecifyingworkﬂows,themostimportantonesareBPML,BPEL4WS,XPDL
and UML2 activity diagrams. An increasing number of software tools abstract from
the syntax of the business process deﬁnition language, allowing the business process
analysts who specify the workﬂow to use a graphical notation (for example BPMN).
It should be possible to eliminate errors (like deadlocks or missed deadline con-
straints) in a workﬂow speciﬁcation at speciﬁcation time. Model checkers are sophis-
ticated tools that are able to ﬁnd exactly this kind of errors for a given system. What
remains to do is to translate the workﬂow speciﬁcation and the requirement we are
interested in into the input language of a model checker.
Our paper shows how this ”translation” can be done. Similar approaches were pro-
posed by several other authors: [1] starts with an informal description of a business
process. This description is being translated into the input language of the NuSMV
model checker which can check basic properties like liveness and reachability. [2]
⋆TheChair of Applied Telematics / e-Businessisendowed by Deutsche Telekom AG
Gruhn V. and Laue R. (2005).
Using Timed Model Checking for Verifying Workﬂows.
InProceedings of the 2nd International Workshop on Computer Supported Activity Coordination , pages 75-88
DOI: 10.5220/0002559500750088
Copyright cSciTePress

--- Page 2 ---
checks various properties of business process speciﬁcatio ns modelled in Testbed, a
framework for business process reengineering. The busines s process speciﬁcation can
be deﬁned by business process analysts using the Testbed too l, while the model check-
ing must be done outside the tool by model checking experts. A follow-up paper [3],
identiﬁessomepatternsofpropertiesforbusinessprocess speciﬁcations.Queriesabout
thesepatternsaretransformedautomaticallyintoanLTLfo rmula,allowingpeoplewho
are not familiar with the details of model checking to test pr operties of the business
processspeciﬁcationbasedonthesepatterns.[4]translat esbusinessprocessmodelsde-
ﬁnedintheXPDLlanguageintotheinputlanguageoftheSPINm odelcheckerinorder
tocheck their properties.
Inallthesepublications,thepropertiesthancanbechecke dbyamodelchecker,de-
pendsonlogicalorderbetweenactivities,notontheirtimi ng.Otherthantheseexisting
approaches, wetake intoaccount time-relatedproperties ( deadlines etc.).
Wegiveanexampleforcheckingverydifferentworkﬂowprope rties:structuralcor-
rectness, resource constraints, deadlines and dependence s between different activities.
In the overview below, we will refer to algorithms that allow to check these different
classes of properties. The main contribution of this paper i s to exploit only onetool for
checking the different properties instead of using one algo rithm to check the structural
correctness,asecondoneforverifyingthedeadlinesandot heronesforreasoningabout
deadlocks, reachability or resource conﬂicts.
Scheduling of activities under resource constraints is a we ll-studied problem in op-
erationsresearch,knownas ResourceConstraintProjectSchedulingProblem (RCPSP).
The general problem - ﬁnding a feasible schedule for a set of a ctivities such that the
time for completing the project is minimized - has shown to be NP-hard [5], therefore
different heuristic algorithms have been suggested for sol ving it [6]. Finding resource
conﬂicts in a given workﬂow is much easier than solving the RC SP. [7] presents an al-
gorithm to ﬁnd such conﬂicts. (Our example workﬂow is based o n the example used in
this paper.) This is done by simply ﬁnding the earliest start ing time and the latest com-
pletion time of each activity. However, the dependencies be tween the activities are not
taken into account which leads to many false positives. Our m odel checking approach
gives a moreaccurate result than[7].
[8] discusses the use of timed automata for solving the sched uling problem, which
isalsothekeyideaforourmodel-checkingapproach.[9]has expandedthenetdiagram
technique PERT toePERT which can be used forworkﬂow speciﬁc ations.
Structural correctness can be veriﬁed using graph analyzin g techniques [10,11],
which require the use of special-purpose nontrivial algori thms. Graph analyzing tech-
niques can also be used for answering ”basic questions” abou t reachability and depen-
dencebetweenactivities(”Willareceiptbesentforeveryo rder?”,”Isitguaranteedthat
no receipt can be sent iftheordered item isout of stock?” etc .)
With our model checking approach, such specialized algorit hms for checking spe-
cialized requirements (resource constraints, structural correctness etc.) can be substi-
tutedbyusingonlyonetoolthatcanbeusedforverifyingdif ferentkindsofproperties.76


--- Page 3 ---
2 Deﬁnitions
2.1 Workﬂow Speciﬁcation
The Workﬂow Managemant Coalition deﬁnes a workﬂow as the com puterized facilita-
tionorautomationofabusinessprocess,inwholeorpart[12 ].AWorkﬂowManagement
System (WfMS) is deﬁned as a system that completely deﬁnes, ma nages and executes
workﬂows through the execution of software whose order of ex ecution is driven by a
computer representation of the workﬂow logic.
In order to be processed by a WfMS, a workﬂow has to be speciﬁed i n a formal
language that can be executed by computers. This language mu st deﬁne the order of
activation of activities and theinformation ﬂow between th em.
Before we give a formal deﬁnition of a workﬂow, we have to intr oduce the basic
concepts:
Anactivityis a description of a piece of work that forms one logical step within
a process[12]. Activities are scheduled by a WfMS. Their exec ution order is speciﬁed
bytransitions . In the simple case of a (sequential) transition between act ivities, one
activity completes and the thread of control is passed to ano ther one, which starts. To
be able to deﬁne more complex business cases, we further need the control structures
AND-split ,OR-split,AND-join andOR-join, withthe usual semantics [12].1
Wedeﬁne a workﬂow speciﬁcation as follows:
Deﬁnition 1 Aworkﬂow speciﬁcation isa4-tuple (N,n0,f,T), where:
– N is a set of nodes which is deﬁned as the union N=A∪C, where A=
{a1,... ,a n}is a ﬁnite set of activities and C={c1,... ,c m}is a ﬁnite set of
control nodes. Each control node is either an AND-split, an O R-split,an AND join
or an OR-join, which isdenoted bythe type function type:C→ {as,os,aj,oj }.
– Therearetwodistinguishednodes:Thestartnode n0∈Aandtheendnode f∈A.
–T⊆(N\ {f})×(N\ {n0})isa setof transitions between the nodes, where:
If(a∈A)∨(a∈C∧type(a) =as)∨(a∈C∧type(a) =os), then there
existsoneandonlyonenodebsuchthat (b,a)∈T.(Thesenodeshaveexactlyone
predecessor.)
If(a∈A)∨(a∈C∧type(a) =aj)∨(a∈C∧type(a) =oj), then there
existsoneandonlyonenodebsuchthat (a,b)∈T.(Thesenodeshaveexactlyone
successor.)
Theusualsemanticsapply:Theworkﬂowstartsinitsstartno den0.Duringawork-
ﬂow execution, activities are executed with respect to the t ransitions between them.
Split nodes allow us to specify concurrency and alternative and join nodes allow us to
specifysynchronizationbetweenincomingﬂows.Finally,t heworkﬂowexecutionstops
when theﬁnal node fisreached.
To illustrate a workﬂow, we use a simple graphical represent ation with these sym-
bols:
1ThenameOR-splitin[12]isalittlebitmisleading:XOR-splitwouldbeabetterna me,because
one andonly one transitionto thenext node isselected.77


--- Page 4 ---
OR Activity 1 AND AND OR
Activity           Transition  AND−Split   OR−Split    AND−Join       OR−Join
Signature from
Manager
Payment
RequestORPrepare Check
for ANZ Bank
Approvalfrom Finance
DirectorOR
Reject
Requestfor CITIBANKPrepare CheckANDSignature from
Finance
Director
Transfer Funds
to US−AccountAND
AND
CheckIssue
ANDAccountUpdate
RequestFilePayment
ORUS−$A$
Approved
RejectedOR
done
Fig.1.Sample workﬂow: Payment Requests
Splitnodeshaveatleasttwooutgoingtransitions(arrows) ,whilejoinnodeshaveat
least two incoming transitions. Outgoing arrows from an OR- split node can be labeled
with a short text describing a decision being made in the OR-s plit that leads to the
selection of one of theoutgoing arrows.
Figure 1 shows an example workﬂow taken from [10] and [7]. It s hows a business
process model for expense request payments with an option to differ between payment
inUS-$ orinAustralian $.
2.2 Structural Correctness
While def. 1 deﬁnes the syntax of a workﬂow speciﬁcation, it do es not say anything
about its semantics. Not every workﬂow speciﬁcation that ca n be constructed using
deﬁnition 1 makes sense when the semantics for splits and joi ns is considered. An
exampleisshowninFig.2:Onlyoneoftheactivities2and3wi llbeperformedafterthe
OR-split, but the following AND-join would wait for both act ivities being completed.
Even if the end node will be reached anyway via activity 1, it i s very unlikely that this
is the behavior intended by the person who has speciﬁed the wo rkﬂow. For this reason
itisreasonable tocall sucha workﬂow speciﬁcation structu rallyincorrect.78


--- Page 5 ---
ORActivity 2
Activity 3START NODEActivity 1
AND
ANDEND NODE
... (part after
the AND−join
omitted)
Fig.2.Semantically incorrect workﬂow
We will see later in this paper that structural correctness o f a workﬂow can be de-
cided with our model checking approach. In fact, this is even possible without much
reasoning about possible sources of structural conﬂicts. W e just have to take into ac-
count that the result of structural incorrectness is that ei ther a possible execution exists
that does not reach the end node or there are still ”uncomplet ed things to do” when the
end node isreached. This leads us to:
Deﬁnition 2 Aworkﬂow speciﬁcation w= (N,n0,f,T)isstructurallycorrect if
– everyworkﬂowexecutionreachestheendnodefafteraﬁnite numberoftransitions.
– when the end node isreached, all other activities that have been startedbefore are
completedandtherearenoremainingjoinnodeswaitingfori ncomingtransitions.
Becauseofthelimitedspaceinthispaper,weomittheformal deﬁnitionof”aworkﬂow
execution”and”takingatransition”,butitshouldbeintui tivelyclearwhatthosephrases
stand for with respect to transitions and the semantics of sp lit- and join-nodes2. Def.
2 simply requires that every sequence of nodes and transitio ns ﬁnally reaches the end
nodefafteraﬁnitenumberoftransitions,andtherearenore mainingjoinnodeswaiting
for an incoming ﬂow when the end node is reached. Inﬁnite loop s, AND-joins waiting
for an incoming ﬂow inﬁnitely long and similar problems must not occur. Sadiq and
Orlowska [13] have identiﬁed ﬁve types of possible structur al errors in a workﬂow
speciﬁcation.Forallﬁvetypesoferrors,theworkﬂowspeci ﬁcationwillbeidentiﬁedas
notbeingcorrectusingdef.2oritisalreadydisallowedbyt herequirementsforunique
predecessors and successors indef. 1.
2.3 Timed Workﬂow Speciﬁcations withRessource Constraint s
Activities can require human, material or machine resource s, for example a director
who has to sign a bill (human resource), a vehicle to transpor t heavy goods (material
resource) or write-access toadatabase (machine resource) .
2The only point that needs some clariﬁcation is that activities after an OR-join shouldnotbe
activated more than once if more than one incoming ﬂow reaches the OR-jo in. In this point,
the semantics usedinthis paper differsfromtheone usedin[10]79


--- Page 6 ---
Payment
RequestOR
Approvalfrom Finance
Director
Reject
Requestfor CITIBANKPrepare CheckAND
ORAND
CheckIssue
ANDAccountUpdateFile
Payment
RequestPrepare Check
for ANZ BankSignature from
Manager
ORSignature from
Finance
Director
AND
Transfer Funds
to US−Account{r1, r7}
{r2, r7}A$
US−$
Approved
Rejected{r1, r3, r7}
{r6, r10} {r3, r7, r10}{r3, r8}[1,3] [1,2][4,6] [4,8][2,3]
[1,2]{r1, r3, r7}{r4, r8}[1,2][1,2]
[2,3]
doneOR{r5, r8}
[3,8]
{r8, r9}[1,2]
Fig.3.Workﬂow withinformation abouttime andresources
Often, these resources cannot be shared between different a ctivities: When a work-
ﬂow isexecuted, only one activity can access aresource excl usively.
Thisleadsustoanotherpossiblesourceofincorrectworkﬂo wspeciﬁcations:When
oneactivityneedsaresourcethatisoccupiedexclusivelyb yanotheractivity,thework-
ﬂow is deadlocked and cannot proceed. In real life, we can for mulate the previous sen-
tenceevenmorestrictly:Iftheotheractivityoccupiesthe requiredresourceexclusively
until some deadline is reached , the workﬂow cannot be completed in time and hence
does not fulﬁll itspurpose.
Toﬁndoutwhethersuchasituationcanoccur,weneedtoknows omethingaboutthe
usageofresourcesbytheactivitiesandaboutthedurationo ftheexecutionofactivities.
Deﬁnition 3 LetR=R1,... R nbeasetofresources,whichcannotbesharedbetween
different activities. For each activity a∈A, r(a) is the set of resources needed by this
activity.
Deﬁnition 4 The minimum time (expressed in some time unit like seconds, h ours or
days)thatwillbeneededtoexecuteanactivity a∈Aisdenotedbym(a),themaximum
execution timewillbedenoted by M(a).
We call a workﬂow speciﬁcation with the information about mi nimum and maxi-
mum execution time of its activities a timed workﬂow speciﬁcation . This information
abouttimingisrathersimple,butithasbeenshowntobesufﬁ cientforansweringbasic80


--- Page 7 ---
questions about deadlines and resource conﬂicts (for examp le by applying the Criti-
cal Path Method [14]). Additional elements like an interrup t construct can be added if
necessary.
InFig.3,weaddinformationabouttimingandresourcestoth egraphicalrepresen-
tation of the sample workﬂow. For each activity a∈A, m(a) and M(a) are given as
an ordered pair [m(a),M(a)] above the activity box, the set r (a) is given below the box.
Emptysetsr(a)areomitted.Wehavetakenthisexamplefrom[ 7],withsmallmodiﬁca-
tions.
3 ModelCheckingof TimedWorkﬂowSpeciﬁcations
3.1 The Model Checker UPPAAL
To verify properties of a workﬂow speciﬁcation, we use the re al-time model checking
tool UPPAAL[15]. We show how to translate a workﬂow speciﬁcation into a t imed
automata speciﬁcation that can beprocessed by U PPAAL.
An UPPAALmodel is a set of timed automata, clocks, channels for handsh ake-
synchronization, variables and additional elements. Info rmation about the syntax for
UPPAALmodels can be found in[15].Here wedescribe someelements on ly.
Each U PPAALmodel is a set of processes (timed automata) which are depict ed as
states (circles)and transitions(arrows)between them.3
For each automaton, one state is marked as initial state (two concentric circles). A
graphic representation of an U PPAALprocess can look likeFig. 4:
idle logging in transferring data abort connection
Fig.4.Simple graphic representationof a process in U PPAAL
States can have the attribute ”committed”, depicted by the l etter C inside the cir-
cle. If a state is marked as ”committed, no time may pass in thi s state, and it must be
left immediately (i.e. no interleavings with non-committe d states in other automata are
allowed).
Whenatransitionistaken,clockscanbereset.(InFig.5thec locknamed clock1
will be reset to 0 when the transition from ”idle” to ”logging in” is taken), and global
orlocalvariablescanbemanipulated.(InFig.5,avariable namedactive ischanged
whenthetransitionfrom”loggingin”to”transferringdata ”orfrom”abortconnection”
to”idle” istaken).
3Note that the meaning of an arrow in the U PPAALmodel is different from the meaning of an
arrow in the graphical workﬂow representation. Also a circle in the U PPAALmodel does not
stand for an activity like the rectangle in the graphical workﬂow represen tation does. Instead,
one UPPAALprocess (depicted bysomearrows and circles) stands foran activity.81


--- Page 8 ---
idle logging in transferring data abort connection
clock1:=0 active:=1
active:=0
Fig.5.clocks, variables and anurgent location
Synchronization between different processes can take plac e using channels. When
a transition is taken, a channel can be written into (written aschannelname! ). To
achieve a handshake-synchronization, the corresponding r eading operation (written as
channelname? ) can serve as a so-called guard of another transition which c an not
be taken unless reading from the channel is actually possibl e. If a channel is deﬁned as
urgent channel, the reading operation must be performed as s oon as possible, i.e. im-
mediatelyandwithoutadelay.Fig.6showsasynchronizatio nbetweenaserverprocess
and a client process:
idle need new data accept upload
waiting uploadinglisten!
listen?
Fig.6.Usingchannels for handshake-synchronization
Conditions on clocks or variables can also be used as guards f or transitions. This
means that a transition cannot be taken until some condition (for example an equation
for some variable) holds. Finally, invariants can be added t o a state. We will use invari-
ants of the type "clock<=m" which means that the system is not allowed to remain
inthis statefor more than m timeunits.InFig. 7, the transit ionwillbe taken when the
clocknamed timeisintheinterval[2,4]andthevalueofthevariable active fulﬁlls
the equation active == 1 .
state 1
time <= 4state 2 time >=2,
active == 1
Fig.7.Guards and invariants82


--- Page 9 ---
3.2 Workﬂow Elements in UPPAAL
Using the elements introduced in the last section, we can deﬁ ne templates for the dif-
ferentkindsofnodesinaworkﬂowspeciﬁcation(asdeﬁnedin def.1).Urgentchannels
are usedtomodel the transitionsbetween the nodes.
Start Node The start node process does nothing else than writing into a c hannel
letsstart and setting the variable running (which stands for the number of cur-
rentlyrunning activities) to0:
letsstart!
running := 0
Fig.8.StartNode
Activity Node The UPPAALprocess for an activity node waits until it becomes acti-
vated by being able to read from a channel inchannel . When it is activated, it sets
alocalclockto0andincrementsthevariable resource .Thevariable running (the
number of currently running activities) is incremented. Af ter staying in the next state
for at least mintime, but not longer than maxtime, the proces s comes to and end which
it signalizes by writing to the channel outchannel . When the channel can be read
by another U PPAALprocess, the variable running (the number of currently running
activities) isdecremented.
AND-Split When activated (by the ability to read from inchannel ), the U PPAAL
process for an AND-split writes repeatedly to the channel outchannel , thus being
abletoactivatemorethanonefollowingnode.ForAND-split swithtwoincomingﬂows
as used inour deﬁnition, thishappens twice.
OR-Split Other than theAND-split,an OR-splitprocess writestothec hannel
outchannel only once, thus only one following node can be activated by re ading
from thischannel.
AND-Join AnAND-joinprocesstriestoreadfromtwochannels, inchannel1 and
inchannel2 , and proceeds if and only if both of them are readable. (Note t hat it is
notrequiredthat inchannel1 isreadable beforeinchannel2 .Ifinchannel2
is the ﬁrst of the two channels being readable, it just ”waits ” and the reading operation
can be performed after inchannel1 became readable as well.)
OR-Join An OR-join process tries to read from two channels, inchannel1 and
inchannel2 . Itproceeds ifitcan read from one of them.83


--- Page 10 ---
working
processclock <= maxtimefinished processclock >= mintime
ressource--out_channel!
running-- in_channel?
processclock := 0,
ressource++,
running++
Fig.9.Activity Node
in_channel?
out_channel!
Fig.10.AND SplitNode
in_channel? out_channel!
Fig.11.ORSplitNode
in_channel1? in_channel2? out_channel!
Fig.12.AND JoinNode
in_channel1?
in_channel2?out_channel!
Fig.13.OR JoinNode
End-node The UPPAALprocess end stands for the end node. This process will reach
the statusnamed finished at theend ofthe model’s execution.
finished
in_channel?
Fig.14.EndNode84


--- Page 11 ---
working
processclock <= maxtimefinished clock9 >0 4
r8--running--a10_channel!
s6_channel?
clock9:=0,
r8++,
running++
Fig.15.”IssueCheck” -an instance of theActivity template
3.3 Translating TimedWorkﬂow Speciﬁcations to UPPAALModels
Intheprevioussectionwehaveshownhowthegeneralelement sofaworkﬂowspeciﬁ-
cationcanbeexpressedasU PPAALmodels.To”translate”aspecialworkﬂowspeciﬁca-
tion into an U PPAALmodel, we make use of U PPAALtemplates. The U PPAALmodels
of workﬂow nodes given in the last section are regarded as tem plates. This means that
the names for variables, clocks and channels in the U PPAALmodel are placeholders
(called parameters in U PPAAL). To deﬁne an instance of an activity, we use this tem-
plate withparameters asfollows:
Activity(processclock, mintime, maxtime, resource,
inchannel, out channel) , where
– processclock isaplaceholder for alocal clock variable,
– mintimeand maxtime areplaceholders for numeric constant s,
– ressource is the placeholder for a name of a single resource (For the sake of sim-
plicity, we assume that each process uses at most one resourc e from the resource
setR.Byaddingmoreplaceholders,wecaneasilyexpandourm odeltothegeneral
case.)
– inchannel and out channel areplaceholders for urgent channels,
To instantiate the model for an actual workﬂow activity from the template, the place-
holders aresubstitutedby actual variables:
For example, the deﬁnition of the activity ”Issue Check” fro m the example shown
inFig. 3 can bedone by deﬁning an instance of thetemplate Act ivity as follows:
IssueCheck := Activity(clock9,4, 6, r8, s6 channel,
a10channel); (compare Fig.15 with Fig.9). The activity ”File Payment Req uest”
can be deﬁned as:
FilePaymentRequest := Activity(clock11,1, 2, r10,
a10channel, a11 channel); Note that synchronization between the both ac-
tivities can take place using channel a10channel , which replaces the parameter
outchannel in the ”Issue Check” activity, but inchannel in the ”File Payment
Request” activity.
Instances of control nodes can be built from the template in t he same way. If a
workﬂowspeciﬁcationisgivenaccordingtodef.1,thetrans lationtotheU PPAALmodel
can be done automatically . For each node, an instance of an U PPAALtemplate will
be generated. This means that in general, only one line of cod e will be added to the
UPPAALmodel for each node in the workﬂow speciﬁcation4. Split nodes with n >2
4plusdeclarationsofusedvariables,channelsandclocksandtheinform ationaboutthefactthat
the instantiatedprocess is partof thesystem.85


--- Page 12 ---
outgoing transitions or join nodes with n >2incoming transitions can be transformed
intoa sequence of n-1split/joinnodes withtwooutgoing/in coming transitions.
The complete U PPAALmodel of our example workﬂow can be downloaded from
ebus.informatik.uni-leipzig.de/ ∼laue.
3.4 Checking the Correctness of Timed Workﬂows
Having built the U PPAALmodel of the workﬂow, we can use the model checker to
verify the required properties. The property speciﬁcation language used in U PPAALis
a subset of Timed Computational Tree Logic (TCTL) ([16].) Pr operties that could be
checked include:
”The end node willalways be reached” (part 1of def. 2):
A<> end.finished
(The state ”ﬁnished” in the process end will always be reache d). This property can be
checked tobe trueforour example workﬂow.
”Whentheendnodeisreached,noactivitiesarewaitingforb eingﬁnished” (part2
of def. 2):
A[] end.finished imply running == 0
Thispropertycanbecheckedtobetrueforourexampleworkﬂo w.(Notethat running
willnot bedecremented untilthe outgoing channel can be wri tteninto.)
”There areno resource conﬂicts for resource r10”
A[] r10<2
Can be checked to be true. Note that this requires reasoning a bout time: There are
no resource conﬂicts, because ”Update Account” is always ﬁn ished when the activity
”File Payment Request” starts. (Using the knowledge that ”U pdate Account” and ”File
Payment Request” are the only activities that use resource r 10, we will get the same
veriﬁcation result by checking the property A[] UpdateAccount.working +
FilePaymentRequest.working <2 . This makes use of the trick that boolean
values like UpdateAccount.working are converted to number s (0 or 1). We would not
need thevariables r1,...,r10,which helps toreduce thesta tespace of themodel.)
”There areno resource conﬂicts for resource r8”
A[] r8<2
The model checker does not only ﬁnds out that the property is v iolated, it also gives
a counterexample: a resource conﬂict between the activitie s ”Signature From Finance
Director” and ”Transfer Funds toUS-Account”
”Ifarequest has been rejected, no check willbe issued.”
RejectRequest.finished --> not IssueCheck.finished
Can be checked tobe true.
”The whole process willbe completed inno more than 30timeun its”
A<> end.finished and clock1<30
To check this deadline constraint, we use clock1, the local c lock of the ﬁrst activity
”Payment Request”. It is started at the begin of the whole wor kﬂow. This property can
be checked to be true. If we replace ”30” by a smaller value, a c ounterexample of a
process that needs 29 timeunitstocomplete willbe given.86


--- Page 13 ---
3.5 Remarks
Resource Pools The approach can not only be expanded to multiple resources ( if r(a)
has more than one element, the model just needs more placehol ders for resources used
by activities), it can also be used for checking the usage of r esource pools, for example
adatabasethatallowsupto10parallelconnections.Wewoul dhavetocheckaproperty
likeresourcecounter<=10 .
Abstraction The timed workﬂow speciﬁcation can be transformed automati cally into
an UPPAALmodel which can be used as the input of the model checker. Howe ver, a
complete translation of the workﬂow speciﬁcation, preserv ing all its properties, does
notnecessarilyhavetobewhatwereallywant:Toomanydetai lsinthemodelcanlead
to too many states the model checker has to examine.5Instead of translating a work-
ﬂow speciﬁcation while preserving all its properties, it ma y be a good idea to do some
abstraction before by asking which parts of the system are re levant with respect to the
propertybeingchecked.Ifwecheckforresourceconﬂictsfo rr10intheexamplework-
ﬂow, information about other resources can be ignored. In fa ct, even only the model
built from the very last part of the workﬂow (”Issue Check”, ” Update Account” and
”File Payment Request”) isrelevant. Often, this abstracti on can be done automatically.
4 Conclusion
Theuseofonly onetoolforverifyingdifferentkindsofproperties(withorwi thouttim-
ing information) and the simplicity of translating workﬂow speciﬁcations to U PPAAL
models arethe mainbeneﬁts fromthe resultspresented inour paper.
Wehavehighlightedreasoningaboutstructuralcorrectnes sandresourceconstraints,
but using the given approach, various other properties of wo rkﬂow speciﬁcations can
becheckedaswell.Thisincludesthepatternsidentiﬁedin[ 3]and[17],includingexis-
tence,absence,precedenceandresponsepatterns.Inourfu rtherresearch,wewillinves-
tigate such patterns, including patterns for time-related properties (see [18]). Another
direction of our work will be to enable the business architec ts who are responsible for
deﬁningworkﬂowspeciﬁcationstospecifysuchpropertiesw ithoutadeeperknowledge
inmodel checking or temporal logics.
References
1. Koehler,J.,Tirenni,G.,Kumaran,S.: Frombusinessprocessm odeltoconsistentimplemen-
tation:A casefor formalveriﬁcation methods. In:EDOC.(2002) 96–
2. Janssen, W., Mateescu, R., Mauw, S., Springintveld, J.: Verifyin g business processes using
SPIN(1998)
5Ingeneral,modelswithalargenumberofclocksleadtoastate-spaceexp losionintimedmodel
checking.Pleasenote,however,thatthisisnotthecaseinourmodel(w hereeachactivityadds
a clock): When an activity is completed, its clock is not used actively in comp arisons and
cannot lead tonew states.87


--- Page 14 ---
3. Janssen, W., Mateescu, R., Mauw, S., Fennema, P., van der Sta ppen, P.: Model checking for
managers. In:5th and6thInternational SPINWorkshops. (1999) 92 –107
4. Matousek,P.: Veriﬁcation of BusinessProcessModels. PhDthesis ( 2003)
5. Blazewicz, J., Lenstra, J., Kan, A.R.: Scheduling subject to reso urce constraints. Discrete
Appl. Math. 5(1983) 11–24
6. Kolisch,R.,Hartmann,S.: Heuristicalgorithmsforsolvingtheresour ce-constrainedproject
scheduling problem:Classiﬁcationand computational analysis (1999)
7. Li, H., Yang, Y., Chen, T.Y.: Resource constraints analysis of wo rkﬂow speciﬁcations. J.
Syst.Softw. 73(2004) 271–285
8. Norstr ¨om, C., Wall, A., Yi, W.: Timed automata as task models for event-driven systems.
In:ProceedingsoftheSixthInternationalConferenceonReal-TimeCo mputingSystemsand
Applications. (1999) 182
9. Pozewaunig,H.,Eder,J.,Liebhart,W.: ePERT:ExtendingPERTf orworkﬂowmanagement
systems. In:FirstEastEuropeanSymposiumonAdvancesinDatabase andInformationSys-
tems ADBIS.(1997) 217–224
10. Sadiq, W., Orlowska, M.E.: Analyzing process models using grap h reduction techniques.
InformationSystems 25(2)(2000) 117–134
11. Onoda, S., Ikkai, Y., Kobayashi, T., Komoda, N.: Deﬁnition of d eadlock patterns for busi-
ness processes workﬂow models. In: Proceedings of the 32nd Annu al Hawaii International
Conference onSystemSciences-Volume 5, IEEEComputer Society(19 99) 5065
12. Workﬂow Management Coalition: Terminology and glossary. Techn ical report, Workﬂow
Management Coalition(1999)
13. Sadiq, W.: On correctness issuesinconceptual modeling of workﬂ ows (1997)
14. Hillier,F.S., Lieberman, G.J.: Introduction tooperations researc h. Holden-Day, Inc.(1986)
15. Larsen, K.G., Pettersson, P., Yi, W.: U PPAALin a Nutshell. Int. Journal on Software Tools
for Technology Transfer 1(1997) 134–152
16. Henzinger, T.A., Nicollin, X., Sifakis, J., Yovine, S.: Symbolic Mo del Checking for Real-
TimeSystems. In:7th.SymposiumofLogicsinComputerScience,IEEEC omputerScienty
Press(1992) 394–406
17. Dwyer, M.B., Avrunin, G.S., Corbett, J.C.: Property speciﬁca tion patterns for ﬁnite-state
veriﬁcation. In: FMSP ’98: Proceedings of the second workshop on F ormal methods in
softwarepractice, ACM Press(1998) 7–15
18. Gruhn, V., Laue, R.: Patterns for timed property speciﬁcation. In : 3rd Int. Workshop on
Quantitative Aspects of Programming Languages (QAPL 05), Edinburg h, Scotland, April
2005, toappear. (2005)88

