            UPPAAL - Now, Next, and Future


 Tobias Amnell1 Gerd Behrmann2 Johan Bengtsson1 Pedro R. D'Argenio3
  Alexandre David1 Ansgar Fehnker4 Thomas Hune5 Bertrand Jeannet2
  Kim G. Larsen2 M. Oliver Moller5 Paul Pettersson1 Carsten Weise6
                                  Wang Yi1
      1 Department of Information Te hnology, Uppsala University, Sweden,
                [tobiasa,johanb,adavid,paupet,yi℄do s.uu.se.
       2 Basi Resear h in Computer S ien e, Aalborg University, Denmark,
                      [behrmann,bjeannet,kgl℄ s.au .dk.
      3 Fa ulty of Computer S ien e, University of Twente, The Netherlands,
                             dargenio s.utwente.nl.
     4 Computing S ien e Institute, University of Nijmegen, The Netherlands,
                                ansgar s.kun.nl.
       5 Basi Resear h in Computer S ien e, Aarhus University, Denmark,
                           [baris,omoeller℄bri s.dk.
                 6 Eri sson Eurolab Deuts hland GmbH, Germany,
                         Carsten.Weiseeed.eri sson.se.




      Abstra t     Uppaal is a tool for modeling, simulation and veri ation
      of real-time systems, developed jointly by BRICS at Aalborg University
      and the Department of Computer Systems at Uppsala University. The
      tool is appropriate for systems that an be modeled as a olle tion of
      non-deterministi pro esses with nite ontrol stru ture and real-valued
        lo ks, ommuni ating through hannels or shared variables. Typi al ap-
      pli ation areas in lude real-time ontrollers and ommuni ation proto-
        ols, in parti ular those where timing aspe ts are riti al.
      This paper reports on the urrently available version and summarizes de-
      velopments during the last two years. We report on new dire tions that
      extends Uppaal with ost-optimal exploration, parametri modeling,
      stop-wat hes, probablisti modeling, hiera hi al modeling, exe utable
      timed automata, and a hybrid automata animator. We also report on
      re ent work to improve the eÆ ien y of the tool. In parti ular, we out-
      line Clo k Di eren e Diagrams (CDDs), new ompa t representations
      of states, a distributed version of the tool, and appli ation of dynami
      partitioning.
      Uppaal has been applied in a number of a ademi and industrial ase
      studies. We des ribe a sele tion of the re ent ase studies.


1   Current Version of          Uppaal
In the following, we give a brief overview on Uppaal's maturing over the years
and explain the ore fun tionalities of the urrent release version.
1.1 Ba kground
Uppaal    [LPY97℄ is a tool for modeling, simulation and veri ation of real-time
systems, developed jointly by BRICS at Aalborg University and the Depart-
ment of Computer Systems at Uppsala University. The tool is appropriate for
systems that an be modeled as a olle tion of non-deterministi pro esses with
  nite ontrol stru ture and real-valued lo ks, ommuni ating through hannels
or shared variables. Typi al appli ation areas in lude real-time ontrollers and
 ommuni ation proto ols.
    Uppaal onsists of three main parts: a des ription language, a simulator and
a model he ker. The des ription language is a non-deterministi guarded om-
mand language with real-valued lo k variables and simple data types. It serves
as a modeling or design language to des ribe system behavior as networks of
automata extended with lo k and data variables. The simulator is a validation
tool whi h enables examination of possible dynami exe utions of a system dur-
ing early design (or modeling) stages. It provides an inexpensive mean of fault
dete tion prior to veri ation by the model he ker whi h overs the exhaustive
dynami behavior of the system. The simulator also allows visualization of er-
ror tra es found as result of veri ation e orts. The model he ker is to he k
invariant and bounded-liveness properties by exploring the symboli state-spa e
of a system, i.e., rea hability analysis in terms of symboli states represented by
 onstraints.
    Sin e the rst release of Uppaal in 1995, the tool has been further developed
by the teams in Aalborg and Uppsala. The run-time and spa e improvements in
the period De ember 1996 to September 1998 are reported in [Pet99℄. Figures 1
and 2 show the variations of time and spa e onsumption in the period from
November 1998 until January 2001 in terms of four examples: Fis her's mutual
ex lusion proto ol with seven pro esses [Lam87℄, a TDMA start-up algorithm
with three nodes [LP97℄, a CSMA/CD proto ol with eight nodes [BDM+ 98℄, and
the FDDI token-passing proto ol with twelve nodes [Yov97℄. We noti e that the
time performan e has improved signi antly whereas the spa e improvement is
only marginal.
    In July 1999 a new version of Uppaal, alled Uppaal2k, was released. This
new version, whi h required almost two years of development, is designed to
improve the graphi al interfa e of the tool, to allow for easier maintenan e, and
to be portable to the most ommon operating systems while still preserving
Uppaal's ease-of-use and eÆ ien y. To meet these requirements, it is designed
as a lient/server appli ation with a veri ation server providing eÆ ient C++
servi es to a Java lient over a so ket based proto ol. This design also makes it
possible to exe ute the server and the GUI on two di erent ma hines.
    The new GUI, shown in Figure 3, integrates the three main tool omponents
of Uppaal, i.e., the system editor, the simulator, and the veri er. Several new
fun tionalities have been implemented in the tool. For example, the new system
editor has been tailored and extended for the new system des ription language
of Uppaal2k (see below), the simulator an be used to display error tra es
generated by the veri er, and the veri ation interfa e has been enri hed with a
            100
                                                                  TDMA Start-up
                                                                   FDDI Protocol
             90                                                Fischer’s Protocol
                                                              CSMA/CD Protocol

             80


             70


             60
 Time (s)




             50


             40


             30


             20


             10


              0
                  1999                         2000                                 2001
                                            Date


Figure1.    Time (in se onds) ben hmarks for the Uppaal version 3.x, from internal
version November 1998 to January 2001. Up to the se ond version in year 2000 the
settings '-WA' (i.e. no warnings and onvex-hull approximation) were used. For the
later versions the settings '-WAa' (where '-a' a tivates the (in-)a tive lo k redu tion)
were used. All tool versions were ompiled with g 2.95.2 and exe uted on the same
Sun UltraSPARC-II, 400 MHz ma hine.


requirement spe i ation editor whi h stores the previous veri ation results of
a logi al property until the property or the system des ription is modi ed.


1.2 The Latest Uppaal Release Version
The urrent Uppaal version has a ri h modeling language, that supports pro ess
templates and (bounded) data stru tures, su h as data variables, onstants, ar-
rays, et . A pro ess template is a timed automaton extended with a list of formal
parameters and a set of lo ally de lared lo ks, variables, and onstants. Typi-
 ally, a system des ription will onsist of a set of instan es of timed automata
de lared from the pro ess templates, and of some global data, su h as global
 lo ks, variables, syn hronization hannels, et . In addition, automata instan es
may be de ned from templates re-used from existing system des riptions. Thus,
the adopted notion of pro ess templates (parti ularly when used in ombination
with the possibility to de lare lo al pro ess data) allows for onvenient re-use of
existing models.
             10
                                                               TDMA Start-up
                                                                FDDI Protocol
                                                            Fischer’s Protocol
                                                           CSMA/CD Protocol

              8




              6
Space (MB)




              4




              2




              0
                  1999                       2000                                2001
                                          Date


Figure2. Spa e (in MB) ben hmarks for Uppaal version 3.x, from internal version
November 1998 to January 2001. Up to the se ond version in year 2000 the settings
'-WAS' (where '-S' a tivates ontrol-stru ture redu tion [LLPY97℄) were used. For the
later versions the settings '-WAaS 2' (where '-S 2' is similar to '-S') were used.


    The simulator allows both random and guided tra ing through the model.
One symboli state is displayed at a time, where the ontrol lo ations are visual-
ized with red bullets in the timed automata graphs and data is shown by means
of equations and lo k onstraints. Sub-windows an be s aled or dragged out,
and the level of detail an be adjusted for user onvenien e. In the simulator,
the user an steer to any point of an elapsed tra e and save/load tra es of the
model. If the model he king engine dete ts an error tra e, it an be handed over
to the simulator for inspe tion.
    The Uppaal model- he king engine is the working horse of the tool. There-
fore it is implemented in C++, whereas the GUI of the tool is implemented in
Java. To interfa e the model- he king server, the GUI uses a so ket-based pro-
to ol. This means that the GUI and veri ation server an be exe uted on two
di erent ma hines. The veri ation server an also handle several simultaneous
 onne tions to serve several GUI lients running on di erent ma hines. By de-
fault the GUI automati ally spawns a veri ation server pro ess on the lo al
ma hine 1 .
1 The ommand line options -serverHost host -serverPort port an be used to in-
  stru t the GUI to onne t to a server at ma hine host on port port.
                 Figure3.   Uppaal2k's simulation tool on s reen.

    At the ore of Uppaal veri ation engine we nd a forward-style state-spa e
exploration algorithm. In prin ipal, we might think of this as a variation of
sear hing the states (nodes) of a dire ted graph. For this, two data stru tures
are responsible for the potentially huge memory onsumption. The rst { the
Waiting list { ontains the states that have been en ountered by the algorithm,
but have not yet been explored, i.e., the su essors have not been determined.
The se ond { the Passed list { ontains all states that have been explored. The
algorithm takes a state from the Waiting list, ompares it with the Passed list,
and in ase it has not been explored, the state itself is added to the Passed list
while the su essors are added to the Waiting list.
    The properties, that the model he king engine an he k, des ribe a subset
of timed omputation tree logi (TCTL). In short, the four (un-nested) tempo-
ral quanti ers E<>, A[℄, E[℄, and A<> are supported, whi h stand for possibly,
always, inevitably, and potentially always. In addition the operator  --> ' is
supported, whi h stands for the leadsto property A[℄( ! A<> '). An option
for deadlo k he king is also implemented but it is urrently only available in
the stand-alone veri er verifyta.
    This Uppaal2k veri ation server has been extended with various optimiza-
tion options, des ribed in our publi ations and elsewhere in the literature. The
 urrent version supports the bit-state hashing under-approximation te hnique
whi h has been su essfully used in the model- he king tool SPIN for several
years. A te hnique for generating an over-approximation of a system's rea hable
state-spa e based on a onvex-hull representations of onstraints is also sup-
ported. Finally, an abstra tion te hnique based on (in-)a tive lo k redu tions
is available.


2     New Dire tions of         Uppaal
Several resear h a tivities are ondu ted within the ontext of Uppaal. In this
se tion we report on developments that extend the ore fun tionalities of the
tool.

2.1   COUppaal     : Cost-Optimal Sear h
Uppaal    was initially intended to prove the orre tness of real time systems with
respe t to their spe i ation. If a system does not meet the spe i ation Uppaal
  nds an error state and an produ e diagnosti information on how to rea h this
error state. However, we often prefer to think of these states as desired goal states
and not as error states. To give an example. Consider four persons, who have
to ross a bridge that an only arry two persons at a time. Then, one would
like to know whether they an rea h the safe side, given additional onstraints
and deadlines. This an be expressed with a timed rea hability question, and if
the goal state is rea hable, the tra e gives also a feasible s hedule. We an use
this approa h to generally solve timed s heduling problems. In pro ess industry
for example, it is often valuable to know whether it is possible to s hedule the
produ tion steps su h that all onstraints are met. In [Feh99,HLP00℄, we derive
feasible s hedules for a part of a steel plant in Ghent, Belgium, and a Lego
model of this plant.
    Even though it is often hard to nd a solution, as soon as a feasible solution
is found, the question arises, whether this solution is optimal with respe t to
time or the number of a tions. To address this, we in luded on epts that are
well known from bran h and bound algorithms to Uppaal. It is then possible to
derive optimal tra es for Uniformly Pri ed Timed Automata (UPTA) [BFH+ ℄. In
this model the ost in reases with a xed rate as time elapses, or with a ertain
amount if a transition is taken. The ost is treated as a spe ial lo k with extra
operations, but su h that we an still use the eÆ ient data stru tures urrently
used in Uppaal. First results for the steel plant and several ben hmark problems
were obtained in [BFH+ ℄, and we hope to in lude an option that allows to nd
optimal tra es to goal states in the next release of Uppaal.
    To be able to nd time-optimal tra es is very useful, but in many situations
we would like to have a more general notion of ost. We proposed the model
of Linearly Pri ed Timed Automata (LPTA) to be able to model for example
ma hines that use a di erent amount of energy per time unit. This model extends
timed automata with pri es on all transitions and lo ations. In these models,
the ost of taking an a tion transition is the pri e asso iated with the transition,
and the ost of delaying d time units in a lo ation is d  p, where p is the pri e
asso iated with the lo ation. The ost of a tra e is simply the a umulated sum
of osts of its delay and a tion transitions.
   To treat LPTA algorithmi ally, we introdu e pri ed zones, whi h assign to
a zone a linear fun tion that de nes the minimal ost of rea hing a state in
that zone. In [BFH+ 00℄ it was shown that given a set of goal states the ost-
optimal tra e is omputable. This result is quite remarkable sin e several similar
extensions of timed automata have been proven to be unde idable. A prototype
implementation allows us to perform rst experiments [LBB+ 01℄.

2.2   Parametri -Uppaal      : Solving Parameterized Rea hability
      Problems
Timed model he king if frequently applied with the intention to nd out,
whether the timing onstants of the model are orre t. A ommon problem is to
adjust timing parameters in a way, that yield a desired behavior. This an be
a hieved if we given a timed automaton with parameters in the guards and if
some or all values for the parameters are synthesized to make the model behave
 orre tly, i.e., satisfy a ertain TCTL formula. We all this parametri model
 he king. This problem is addressed in [AHV93℄, where it is shown to be un-
de idable for systems with three lo ks or more. A semi-de ision pro edures is
suggested in [AHV93℄ whi h nds the orre t values for the parameters when it
terminates.
    We extend the model of timed automata to parametri timed automata by
adding a set of parameters. Guards in parametri timed automata an be on
the form x ./ e or x y ./ e where e is a linear expression over the parameters.
Having guards of this type gives a natural way of de ning a symboli state-spa e
in luding parameters. Instead of having integers in the entries of a DBM we use
parametri DBMs (PDBMs) where the entries are linear expressions over the
parameters.
    All the operations on DBMs are based on adding or omparing entries of
DBMs. Without knowing anything about the values of the parameters we an in
general not ompare linear expressions over the parameters to ea h other or to
integers. Comparing a parameter p to the onstant 3 has two possible out omes
depending on the value of p. When su h omparisons arises we will have to
distinguish both possibilities. We will do this by adding a onstraint set to a
PDBM, onsisting of onstraints of the form e ./ e0 where e and e0 are linear
expressions and ./2 f<; ; >; g. In the example from before we will then split
into two ases, one where the onstraint p < 3 is added to the onstraint set and
one where p  3 is added to the onstraint set. We an now ompare entries of
PDMs based on their onstraint sets.
    Changing DBMs to PDBMs and letting symboli states onsist of the lo ation
ve tor, a PDBM, and a onstraint set, the standard algorithm for state-spa e
exploration an be used. When a state satisfying the property is found the on-
straints in the onstraint set of the state gives the onstraints on the parameters
needed for the state to be rea hable. If we want to nd all the possible values
for the parameters we need to sear h the omplete state-spa e to nd all the
di erent onstraint sets making a goal state rea hable.
    We have implemented a parametri version of Uppaal allowing parameters in
 lo k guards and invariants. For de iding minimum between linear expressions we
have borrowed a LP solver from the PMC tool [BSdRT01℄. Parametri versions of
the root- ontention proto ol and the bounded retransmission proto ol have been
analyzed using the implementation and minor errors in two published papers on
these proto ols have been dis overed.
    Sin e the problem is unde idable, Uppaal is not guaranteed to terminate.
As a pragmati remedy, our algorithm outputs an explored state and the orre-
sponding onstraint set, as soon as it if found to satisfy the property. This allows
the user to get partial results whi h an be very useful and in many ases are the
full results though the sear h has not terminated. It is also possible to give initial
 onstraints as input whi h in many ase will make the sear h terminate mu h
faster, or he k whether partial results obtained are a tually the full results.

2.3   Stopwat h-Uppaal       : From Timed Automata to Hybrid Systems
For purposes of eÆ ien y, the modeling language of Uppaal was initially de-
signed to be rather limited in expressive power. In parti ular, when modeling
hybrid systems omposed of dis rete ontroller programs and ontinuous plants
the timed automata model underlying Uppaal is rather restri tive.
    One useful extension of timed automata is that of linear hybrid automata
[HHWT97℄. In this model guards may be general linear onstraints and the
evolution rate of ontinuous variables may be given by arbitrary intervals. Con-
sequently, model- he king and rea hability he king is known to be unde idable
for this model and more importantly the state-spa e exploration requires manip-
ulation and representation of general polyhedra, whi h is omputationally rather
expensive.
    In [CL00℄ an extension of Uppaal with stopwat hes ( lo ks that may be
stopped o asionally) has been given allowing an approximate analysis of the
full lass of linear hybrid automata to be arried out using the eÆ ient data
stru tures and algorithms of Uppaal.
    In parti ular, this work investigates the expressive power of stopwat h au-
tomata, and shows as a main result that any nite or in nite timed language
a epted by a linear hybrid automaton is also a eptable by a stopwat h au-
tomaton. The onsequen es of this result are two-fold: rstly, it shows that the
seemingly minor upgrade from timed automata to stopwat h automata imme-
diately yields the full expressive power of linear hybrid automata. Se ondly,
rea hability analysis of linear hybrid automata may e e tively be redu ed to
rea hability analysis of stopwat h automata. This, in turn, may be arried out
using an easy (over-approximating) extension of the eÆ ient rea hability anal-
ysis for timed automata to stopwat h automata. In [CL00℄ we also report on
preliminary experiments on analyzing translations of linear hybrid automata
using a stopwat h-extension of Uppaal.
2.4   PrUppaal    : Probabilisti Timed Automata
Uppaal      an he k whether a network of timed automata satis es a safety or a
liveness (timed) property. Many times, this type of properties are not expres-
sive enough to assert adequately the orre tness of a system. Take for instan e
the well known Alternating Bit Proto ol (ABP). Using Uppaal, we an he k
whether the ABP satis es properties like \every message that is sent will even-
tually be re eived " or \every message that is sent will be re eived within  se ."
In fa t we will see that the former is satis ed but not the latter, regardless of
the value of . If our interest is to provide quality of servi e, the latest property
be omes as important as the former one. However, the fa t that the ABP does
not satisfy the se ond property does not ne essarily make it an in orre t pro-
to ol. Knowing the probability with whi h a message is lost or damaged during
transmission, we an determine the probability that a message is re eived within
 se . The orre tness of the ABP is now depend on whether we onsider that
su h a probability measure is satisfa tory.
    Veri ation of probabilisti timed sys-                           waiting
tems is one of the future dire tions pursued
by Uppaal. Probabilisti timed automata
are a natural extension of timed automata                                send!
with probabilities. The probabilisti infor- x  10
mation is atta hted to edges. Now, an edge re eive?
                                                                 99
                                                                100
                                                            x := 0
                                                                     01     1
                                                                           100
                                                                            x := 0
has the form s ! p where s is a on-
                    g;a


trol node, g is a guard, a is an a tion name,
and p is a probability fun tion on pairs of set
                                                       transmiting         msg lost
of lo ks to be reset and ontrol nodes. Fig-
                                                           (x  20)        (x  20)
ure 4 depi ts a probabilisti timed automa-
ton, that models a lossy hannel. A message
that is sent an be lost with probability 1001
                                               ,     Figure4. A lossy hannel.
otherwise it is transmitted within 10 to 20 nanose onds. You an think of this
automaton as model of the medium in the ABP.
    On the setting of probabilisti timed systems we formally des ribe properties
using PTCTL [HJ94℄. PTCTL extends TCTL with modalities to express prob-
abilities. For instan e, P0:95 (81000 re eived) expresses that with probability
at least 0:95, every message is re eived within 1000 nanose onds in any possible
exe ution.
    Solutions to model he k probabilisti timed automata have been proposed
in [Jen96℄ and [KNSS99℄. Unfortunately these approa hes are based on the on-
stru tion of a region graph [ACD93℄ and therefore they heavily su er from the
state explosion problem. Another solution proposed in [KNSS99℄ is to use a mod-
i ation of the forward rea hability te hnique implemented in Uppaal [YPD94℄.
Unfortunately, su h a modi ation annot de ide the validity of simple rea ha-
bility properties in general.
    Our proposal is to use minimization te hniques [ACH+ 92℄ in order to obtain
(probabilisti ) zone graphs that are stable and whi h behave in a similar manner
to region graphs. However, this te hnique is still signi antly more expensive
when ompared to the usual forward rea hability analysis. In order to redu e
the state spa e we plan to explore the use of CDD's [LWYP99℄ to represent
non- onvex zones as well as dynami partition te hniques [JHR99℄.

2.5   HUppaal    : Hierar hi al Stru tures for Modeling
Hierar hi al stru tures are a popular theme in spe i ation formalisms, su h
as state harts [Har87℄ and UML [BRJ98℄. The main idea is that lo ations not
ne essarily en ode atomi points of ontrol, but an serve as an abbreviation for
more omplex behavior. If a non-atomi lo ation is entered, this may trigger a
  as ade of events irrelevant to a higher level of the system. If a more detailed view
is required, the expli it des ription of the sub- omponent an be found isolated,
sin e dependen ies between the di erent levels of hierar hy are restri ted.
    The immediate bene t is a on ise des ription, whi h allows to view a om-
plex system on di erent levels of abstra tion and nevertheless ontains all in-
formation in detail. Moreover, symmetries an be expressed expli itly: If two
sub- omponents A and B of a super-state S are stru turally identi al, they may
be des ribed as instantiations of the same template (with possibly di erent pa-
rameters). Copies of states may exist for notational onvenien e, ambiguities are
resolved by a unique-name assumption.
    We believe that Uppaal an bene t greatly from these on epts, sin e they
support a leaner and more stru tured design of large systems. The model an be
  onstru ted top down, starting with a very abstra t notion that is re ned subse-
quently. The simulator an then be used to validate the model against the intu-
ition of the designer. Con eptually, it is possible to reason about the model with
di erent stages of granularity. Compositional veri ation an make use of this,
if lo al information suÆ es to establish safety- and deadlo k-properties. With
respe t to property-preserving abstra tions, the stru tural information gives a
natural re nement relation.
    A se ond|however ambitious|goal is to exploit the stru ture in shaping
more eÆ ient model- he king algorithms. Related work [AW99℄ indi ates, that
lo ality of information an be exploited straightforward in rea hability analysis.
Also, the work in [LNAB+ 98℄ indi ate that|at least for un-timed systems|one
may exploit the hierar hi al stru ture of a system during analysis. In Uppaal
this is more diÆ ult, sin e all parallel pro esses impli itly syn hronize on the
passage of time. Approa hes for lo al-time semanti s [BJLY98℄ have yet to be
shown to improve veri ation time in reasonable s enarios, i.e., where the de-
penden y between parallel sub- omponents is low, thus that not all interleavings
have to be taken into a ount.
    As a rst step towards this, we work on a areful de nition of hierar hi al
timed automata, that support en apsulation and lo al de nitions. In parti ular,
the syn hronization of joins raises semanti problems that an be resolved in
various ways.
    Case-studies are planned to test the naturalness of these de nitions in om-
plex examples. We experiment with a prototype translation of hierar hi al timed
automata into a parallel omposition of ( at) timed automata. This attened
                                        A
                                                    x>10
                                         (1,2)
                             a?
                                                                x:=0
      x:=0
                                                                                  x==40
                   P                                                    Q
                  (2,10)                                               (4, 20)
                                                                                 x:=0
      x==20
                           x:=0
                                        B                  b?
                                            (1,4)


              Figure5.     Timed Automaton with Periodi and Sporadi Tasks.


system ne essarily ontains auxiliary onstru ts to imitate the behavior of the
hierar hi al ones. We expe t the ase-studies to give an intuition, whether this
translation sla k is tolerable.
    The design of the hierar hi al timed automata is meant to be lose to UML
state hart diagrams. As for the real-time aspe t, one output of this onsidera-
tions will be a real-time pro le, that de nes an extension of UML formalisms
with lo ks and timed invariants in a standard way. This work is arried out in
the ontext of AIT-WOODDES proje t No IST-1999-10069.

2.6     ExUppaal       : Exe utable Timed Automata
In this work we develop an exe utable version of timed automata. We view
a timed automaton as an abstra t model of a running software. The model
des ribes the possible external events (alphabets a epted by the automaton)
that may o ur during the exe ution and the o urren e of the events must follow
the timing onstraints (given by the lo k onstraints). But the model gives no
information on how these events should be handled. We use an extended version
of timed automata ([EWY99℄) with real time tasks that may be periodi and/or
sporadi .
    The main idea is to asso iate ea h node of an automaton with a task (or sev-
eral tasks in the general ase). A task is assumed to be an exe utable program
with two given parameters: its worst ase exe ution time and deadline. An ex-
ample is shown in Figure 5. The system shown onsists of 4 tasks as annotation
on nodes, where P, Q are periodi with periods 20 and 40 respe tively (spe i ed
by the onstraints: x==20 and x==40), and A, B are sporadi or event driven
(by event a and b respe tively). The pairs in the nodes give the omputation
times and deadlines for tasks e.g. for P they are 2 and 10 respe tively.
    Intuitively, a dis rete transition in an extended timed automaton denotes
an event releasing a task and the guard ( lo k onstraints) on the transition
spe i es all the possible arrival times of the asso iated task. Note that in the
simple automaton shown in Figure 5, an instan e of task A ould be released
before the pre eeding instan e of task P has been omputed. This means that
the s heduling queue may ontains at least P and A. In fa t, instan es of all four
tasks may appear in the queue at the same time.
    Semanti ally, an extended automaton may perform two types of transitions
just as an ordinary timed automaton. In addition, an a tion transition will release
a new instan e of the task asso iated with the destination node. Assume that
there is a queue (the s heduling queue) holding all the task instan es ready to
run. It orresponds to the ready queue in an operating systems. Whenever a
task is released, it will be put in the s heduling queue for exe ution. A semanti
state of an extended automaton is a triple onsisting of a node (the urrent
 ontrol node), lo k assignment (the urrent setting of the lo ks) and a task
queue (the urrent status of the ready queue). Then a delay transition of the
timed automaton orresponds to the exe ution of the task with earliest deadline
and idling for the other waiting tasks, and a sequen es of dis rete transitions
 orresponds to a sequen e of arrivals of tasks. Naturally a sequen e of tasks
is s hedulable if all the tasks an be exe uted within their deadlines and an
automaton is s hedulable if all task sequen es are s hedulable.
    In [EWY99℄, it is shown that the s hedulability problem for extended au-
tomata an be solved by rea hability analysis for non-preemptive tasks. It is
equivalent to prove that all s hedulable states are s hedulable. For preemptive
tasks, unfortunately the problem is unde idable. In fa t the model will be as
expressive as timed automata with stop wat hes.
    Currently we are working on automati ode synthesis for the extended
model. Inspired by the design philosophy of syn hronous languages e.g. Esterel,
we assume that the underlying RT operating system guarantees the Syn hrony
Hypothesis, that is the OS system fun tions takes little time ompared to the
worst ase exe ution times and deadlines of tasks. The idea is to use system
fun tions (primitives) provided by the underlying operating system or run-time
system, to ode the dis rete transitions (the ontrol stru ture) of an automaton,
and to ompute the tasks on nodes by pro edure alls or light weight threads.
    If an automaton is s hedulable ( he ked by s hedulability analysis that all
tasks instan es an be omputed within their deadlines), and the syn hrony
hypothesis is guaranteed by the underlying operating system, the generated ode
in exe ution will meet the onstraints imposed on the tasks.

2.7 Hybrid Automata Animation
In several ase-studies with Uppaal we have identi ed a need to visualize the
exe ution of the automata. Currently the simulator in Uppaal's GUI allows an
intera tive \exe ution" of the modeled system. The user an manually sele t
one of the enabled transitions and go to the next state of the system. This an
be very helpful in understanding the model, but it is still on the diÆ ulty level
of the a tual automaton. To make good use of the simulator the user needs to
understand all the details of the modelling language and all details of the spe i
system.
      Figure6.   A protoype of the hybrid automata animation tool in Uppaal.


    To des ribe a typi al situation, onsider one person performing the modeling
and veri ation of a system, whereas another person wants to validate that
the model is \ orre t" in the sense that it is an a urate des ription of the
a tual system. Exploring all possible simulation tra es is often a very tedious
work. With a visualization tool, where the user an intera t with the underlying
model on a higher level via buttons, sliders, and other obje ts in a graphi al
environment this validation task be omes mu h simpler.
    Several other tools have responded to this demand, for example MATLAB/-
Simulink and Statemate, where graphi al animation of the models are possible.
By onsidering simulation and animation of hybrid automata, we adopt these
te hniques and aim at taking them one step further. The plan is to generalize
the model of timed automata in Uppaal to the more expressive model of hybrid
automata, where hanges of a state is de ned by ordinary di erential equations
(ODE). To ea h lo ation we asso iate a set of ODE's that des ribe how real-
valued variables hange over time. This more expressive model will be used only
in the animator to model and visualize the behavior a system's environment.
The system itself will still normally be modeled with timed automata.
    The animation is based on the values of the variables, the urrent lo ation,
and the signals. The values of the variables are al ulated at dis rete time points
using numeri al solution methods. To solve the ODE's we use a free pa kage
named CVODE 2 . Around this we have implemented a Hybrid Automata Inter-
preter that handles the automata transitions, syn hronizations, et ., and allows
the user to de ne the ODE's using a library of mathemati al fun tions. The
2 More information about the CVODE pa kage an be found at the web site
  http://www.netlib.org.
values that ome out of the Hybrid Automata Interpreter are used to drive the
animation.
    In the animation tool, the user de nes a view of the whole system by set-
ting ertain parameters. For instan e, in a 2-dimensional view two variables x
and y ould be used to give the position of an image illustrating the modeled
 omponent, and the urrent lo ation of the orresponding automaton ould be
visualized as olor- hanges in the image. The user ould also de ide what a tions
(e.g. mouse- li ks) should orrespond to signals sent to the visualized automata
model.
    Following the example of Uppaal's multi-platform user interfa e (see Se tion
1), the animator is implemented in Java. In this way it ts seamlessly into the
existing tool ar hite ture. Figure 6 shows the animator when used to simulate a
boun ing ball.

3   Re ent Developments in            Uppaal
In this se tion we des ribe the re ent developments in Uppaal, whi h are pri-
marily aimed at improving the eÆ ien y of the model- he ker of the tool. In
parti ular, the development of new internal data-stru tures, and approximation
and partial-order redu tion te hniques are onsidered relevant.

3.1 CDD's: Clo k Di eren e Diagrams
Di eren e Bound Matri es (DBM's) as the standard representation for time
zones in analysis of Timed Automata have a well-known short oming: they are
not losed under set-union. This omes from the fa t that a set represented by
a DBM is onvex, while the union of two onvex sets is not ne essarily onvex.
    Within the symboli omputation for the rea hability analysis of Uppaal,
set-union however is a ru ial operation whi h o urs in every symboli step.
The short oming of DBM's leads to a situation, where symboli states whi h
 ould be treated as one in theory have to be handled as a olle tion of several
di erent symboli states in pra ti e. This leads to trade-o s in memory and time
 onsumption, as more symboli states have to be stored and visited during in
the algorithm.
    DBM's represent a zone as a onjun tion of onstraints on the di eren es
between ea h pair of lo ks of the timed automata (in luding a titious lo k
representing the value 0). The major idea of CDD's (Clo k Di eren e Diagrams)
is to store a zone as a de ision tree of lo k di eren es, generalizing the ideas
of BDD's (Binary De ision Diagrams, see [Bry86℄) and IDD's (Integer De ision
Diagrams, see [ST98℄)
    The nodes of the de ision tree represent lo k di eren es. Nodes on the same
level of the tree represent the same lo k di eren e. The order of the lo k
di eren es is xed a-priori, all CDD's have to agree on the same ordering. The
leaves of the de ision tree are two nodes representing true and false, as in the
 ase of BDD's.
                                                                                              1111
                                                                                              0000
Y                                              Y                                              Y
                                                      111
                                                      00000
                                                         11
     3   1111
         0000
         0000 111
         1111 000
              000
              111
                                                      000
                                                      111
                                                      000
                                                      111
                                                      000
                                                      111
                                                   3 111
                                                     000
                                                         00
                                                         11
                                                         00
                                                         11
                                                         00
                                                         11                                   0000
                                                                                              11113
     2
         0000 111
         1111 000
                                                      000
                                                      111
                                                     000
                                                     111
                                                      000
                                                      111
                                                   2 111
                                                     000
                                                      000
                                                      111
                                                     000
                                                     111
                                                         00
                                                         11
                                                         00
                                                         11                                   0000
                                                                                              1111
                                                                                              000
                                                                                              111
                                                                                                  2
     1
         0000 111
         1111 000                                     000
                                                      111
                                                   1 111
                                                     000
                                                                                              000
                                                                                              111 1


    (a)
           1   2    3       4    5     6
                                           X
                                                   (b)
                                                         1   2    3   4     5    6
                                                                                        X
                                                                                              000
                                                                                              111 ( )
                                                                                                        1   2    3    4

                                                                                                                      X
                                                                                                                           5   6
                                                                                                                                   X


                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                                     0
                        X                                                                                            0
                                                                                                                     1
                                                                      X
                                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                     1 [0; 2℄
                                                         [1; 2℄                      [3; 4℄                          0
                                                                                                                     1
           [1; 3℄               [4; 6℄
                                                                  (2; 3)
                                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                                      Y
                                                                                                           11
                                                                                                           00             111
                                                                                                                          000
                        Y
                                                                                                           00
                                                                                                           11
                                                                                                        [0; 1℄            000
                                                                                                                          111
                                                                                                                            [2,3℄
                                                         Y            Y                Y
                                                                                                           00
                                                                                                           11             000
                                                                                                                          111
                            [1; 3℄                                                                         00
                                                                                                           11             000
                                                                                                                          111
                                                                   [1; 4℄                               X
                                                                                                            00
                                                                                                            11
                                                                                                             Y
                                                                                                                           00
                                                                                                                           11
                                                                                                                           X    Y
                                                     [1; 3℄                          [2; 4℄                 00
                                                                                                            11             00
                                                                                                                           11
                                                                                                        [0,0℄11
                                                                                                            00             00
                                                                                                                           11 [ 3; 0℄
                                True                                                                        00
                                                                                                            11             00
                                                                                                                           11
                                                                                True
                                                                                                                           True
          Figure7.           Three example CDD's. Intervals not shown lead impli itly to False.



    Ea h node an have several outgoing edges. Edges are labeled with integral
intervals: open, half- losed and losed intervals with integer values as the borders.
A node representing the lo k di eren e X Y together with an outgoing edge
with interval I represents the onstraint "X Y within I ". The leafs represent
the global onstraints true and false respe tively.
    A path in a CDD from a node down to a leaf represents the set of lo k values
with ful ll the onjun tion of onstraints found along the path. Remember that
a onstraint is found from the pair node and outgoing edge. Paths going to false
thus always represent the empty set, and thus only paths leading to the true
node need to be stored in the CDD. A CDD itself represents the set given by
the union of all sets represented by the paths going from the root to the true
node. From this learly CDD's are losed under set-union. Figure 7 gives three
examples of two-dimensional zones and their representation as CDDs. Note that
the same zone an have di erent CDD representations.
    All operations on DBM's an be lifted straightforward to CDD's. Care has
to be taken when the anoni al form of the DBM is involved in the operation, as
there is no dire t equivalent to the (unique) anoni al form of DBM's for CDD's.
    CDD's generalize IDD's, where the nodes represent lo k values instead of
 lo k di eren es. As lo k di eren es, in ontrast to lo k values, are not inde-
pendent of ea h other, operations on CDD's are mu h more elaborated than the
same operations on IDD's. CDD's an be implemented spa e-eÆ ient by using
the standard BDD's te hnique of sharing ommon substru ture. This sharing
 an also take pla e between di erent CDD's.
    Experimental results have shown that using CDD's instead of DBM's an
lead to spa e savings of up to 99%. However, in some ases a moderate in rease
in run time (up to 20%) has to be paid. This omes from the fa t that operations
involving the anoni al form are mu h more ompli ated in the ase of CDD's
 ompared to DBM's. More on CDD's an be found in [LWYP99℄ and [BLP+ 99℄.

3.2 Compa t Representation of States
Symboli states are the ore obje ts of state spa e sear h and their representation
is one of the key issues in implementing an eÆ ient veri er. In the earlier versions
of Uppaal ea h entity in a state (i.e., an element in the lo ation ve tor, the value
of an integer variable or a bound in the DBM) is mapped on a ma hine word.
The reason for this is simpli ity and speed. However, the number of possible
values for ea h entity is usually small, and using a whole ma hine word for ea h
of them is often a waste of spa e.
    To solve this problem two additional, more ompa t, state representations
have been implemented. In both of them the dis rete part of ea h state is en oded
as a number, using a multiply and add s heme. This en oding is mu h like looking
at the dis rete part as a number, where ea h digit is an entity in the dis rete
state and the base varies with the number of di erent digits.
    In the rst pa king s heme, a DBM is en oded using the same te hnique
as the dis rete part of the state. This gives a very spa e eÆ ient but omputa-
tionally expensive representation, where ea h state takes a minimum amount of
memory but where a number of bignum division operations have to be performed
to he k in lusion between two DBMs.
    In the se ond pa king s heme, some of the spa e performan e is sa ri ed to
allow a more eÆ ient in lusion he k. Here ea h bound in the DBM is en oded
as a bit string long enough to represent all the possible values of this bound plus
one test bit, i.e., if a bound an have 10 possible values then ve bits are used
to represent the bound. This allows heap in lusion he king based on ideas of
Paul and Simon [PS80℄ on omparing ve tors using subtra tion of bit strings.
    In Figure 8 we see that the spa e performan e of these representations are
both substantially better than the traditional representation, with spa e savings
of between 25% and 70%. As we expe t, the performan e of the rst pa king
s heme, with an expensive in lusion he k, is somewhat better, spa e-wise, than
the pa king s heme with the heap in lusion he k.
    Considering the time performan e for the pa ked state representations (see
Figure 9), we note that the pri e for using the en oding with expensive in lusion
 he k is a slowdown of 2 { 12 times, while using the other en oding sometimes
is even faster than the traditional representation.

3.3 Partial Order Redu tion for Timed Systems
Partial-order redu tion is a well developed te hnique, whose purpose is to redu e
the usage of time and memory in state-spa e exploration by avoiding to explore
unne essary interleavings of independent transitions. It has been su essfully
applied to nite-state systems. However, for timed systems there has been less
progress. The major obsta le to the appli ation of partial order redu tion to
                    0.8

                    0.7

                    0.6
   Relative Space

                    0.5

                    0.4

                    0.3

                    0.2

                    0.1

                     0
                                  Field Bus       B&O   DACAPO    DACAPO     Fischer 5   Fischer 6
                                                          (big)    (small)

                          First               Second




Figure8.                  Spa e performan e for the two pa king s hemes (denoted First and Se ond).



timed systems is the assumption that all lo ks advan e at the same speed,
meaning that all lo ks are impli itly syn hronized. If ea h pro ess ontains
(at least) one lo al lo k, this means that advan ement of the lo al lo k of a
pro ess is not independent of time advan ements in other pro esses. Therefore,
di erent interleavings of a set of independent transitions will produ e di erent
 ombinations of lo k values, even if there is no expli it syn hronization between
the pro esses or their lo ks.
    In [BJLY98℄, we have presented a partial-order redu tion method for timed
systems based on a lo al-time semanti s for networks of timed automata. The
main idea is to remove the impli it lo k syn hronization between pro esses
in a network by letting lo al lo ks in ea h pro ess advan e independently of
 lo ks in other pro esses, and by requiring that two pro esses resyn hronize
their lo al time s ales whenever they ommuni ate. The idea of introdu ing lo al
time is related to the treatment of lo al time in the eld of parallel simulation.
Here, a simulation step involves some lo al omputation of a pro ess together
with a orresponding update of its lo al time. A snapshot of the system state
during a simulation will be omposed of many lo al time s ales. In our work, we
are on erned with veri ation rather than simulation, and we must therefore
represent sets of su h system states symboli ally.
    A symboli version of the lo al-time semanti s is developed in terms of pred-
i ate transformers, whi h enjoys the desired property that two predi ate trans-
formers are independent if they orrespond to disjoint transitions in di erent
pro esses. Thus we an apply standard partial order redu tion te hniques to the
problem of he king rea hability for timed systems, whi h avoid exploration of
unne essary interleavings of independent transitions. The pri e is that we must
introdu e extra ma hinery to perform the resyn hronization operations on lo al
                      13
                      12
                      11
                      10
      Relative Time
                       9
                       8
                       7
                       6
                       5
                       4
                       3
                       2
                       1
                       0
                                   Field Bus       B&O   DACAPO    DACAPO     Fischer 5   Fischer 6
                                                           (big)    (small)

                           First               Second




Figure9.                   Time performan e for the two pa king s hemes (denoted First and Se ond).



 lo ks. A variant of DBM representation has been developed for symboli states
in the lo al time semanti s for eÆ ient implementation of our method.
    We have developed a prototype implementation based on the te hnique. Un-
fortunately, our experimental results are not so satisfa tory, whi h is not so sur-
prising due to the large number of lo al lo ks introdu ed. We are still struggling
for an eÆ ient implementation.

3.4                   DUppaal      : Distributed State Spa e Exploration
Real time model he king is a time and memory onsuming task, quite often
rea hing the limits of both omputers and the patien e of users. An in reasingly
 ommon solution to this situation is to use the ombined power of omputers
 onne ted in a luster. Good results have re ently been a hieved for Uppaal by
distributing both the model he king algorithm and the main data stru tures
[BHV00℄.
    Re all the basi state-spa e exploration des ribed brie y in Se tion 1.2. The
distributed version of this algorithm is similar. Ea h node (pro essing unit) in
the luster will hold fragments of both the Waiting list and the Passed list
a ording to a distribution fun tion mapping states to nodes. In the beginning,
the distributed Waiting list will only hold the initial state. What ever node
hosts this state will ompare it to its still empty Passed list fragment and
 onsequently explore it. Now, the su essors are distributed a ording to the
distribution fun tion and put into the Waiting list fragment on the respe tive
nodes. This pro ess will be repeated, but now several nodes ontain states in
their fragment of the Waiting list and qui kly all nodes be ome busy exploring
their part of the state spa e. The algorithm terminates when all Waiting list
fragments are empty and no states are in the pro ess of being transfered between
nodes.
     The distribution fun tion is in fa t a hash fun tion. It distributes states uni-
formly over its range and hen e implements what is alled random load balan ing.
Sin e states are equally likely to be mapped to any node, all nodes will re eive
approximately the same number of states and hen e the load will be equally
distributed.
     This approa h is very similar to the one taken by [SD97℄. The di eren e
is that Uppaal uses symboli states, ea h overing (in nitely) many on rete
states. In order to a hieve optimal performan e, the lookup performed on the
Passed list is an in lusion he k. An unexplored symboli state taken from the
Waiting list is ompared with all the explored symboli states on the Passed
list, and only if non of those states over (in lude) the unexplored symboli state
it is explored. For this to work in the distributed ase, the distribution fun tion
needs to guarantee that potentially overlapping symboli states are mapped to
the same node in the luster. A symboli state an be divided into a dis rete
part and a ontinuous part. By only basing the distribution on the dis rete part,
the above is ensured.
     Pe uliarly, the number of explored states is heavily dependent on the sear h
order. For instan e, let s and t be two symboli states su h that s in ludes t.
Thus, if s is en ountered before t, t will not be explored be ause s is already
on the Passed list and hen e overs t. On the other hand, if we en ounter t
  rst, both states will be explored. Experiments have shown that breadth rst
order is lose to optimal when building the omplete rea hable state-spa e. Un-
fortunately, ensuring stri t breadth rst order in a distributed setting requires
syn hronizing the nodes, whi h is undesirable. Instead, we order the states in
ea h Waiting list fragment a ording to their distan e from the initial state,
exploring those with the smallest distan e rst. This results in an approximation
of the breadth rst order. Experiments have shown that this order drasti ally
redu es the number of explored states ompared to simply using a FIFO order.
     This version of Uppaal has been used on a Sun Enterprise 10000 with 24
CPUs and on a Linux Beowulf luster with 10 nodes. Good speedups have been
observed on both platforms when verifying large systems (around 80% of optimal
at 23 CPUs on the Enterprise 10000).

3.5 Dynami Partitioning: Ta kling the State Explosion Problem
This line of work addresses the state-spa e explosion problem that has to be
over omed in the veri ation of systems des ribed by a parallel omposition of
several automata.
    Re all that basi algorithm implemented in Uppaal is an exa t rea hability
algorithm that omputes for ea h rea hable lo ation of the global system a nite
union of zones. One promising idea here is to make use of approximations in
order to redu e the omplexity of this algorithm, and nevertheless stay onser-
vative with respe t to safety properties. In many ases, this greatly improves
performan e without sa ri ing relevant information.
    The urrent release of Uppaal already ontains options for onvex-hull ap-
proximation of zones, basi ally asso iating one unique zone to ea h rea hable
 ontrol lo ation. Su h a zone represents then an upper-approximation of the
exa t rea hable lo k values in the onsidered lo ation. Another possible ap-
proximation would onsist in asso iating the same zone to several lo ations. We
will use a ombination of these two te hniques.
    Now, a major diÆ ulty is to adjust the level of approximation used. A tradeo
has to be found between pre ision and eÆ ien y. Rough approximations make
analysis heaper but may fail in showing non-trivial properties; more pre ise
analyses may be too expensive to be able to deal with big systems.
    The solution we propose [JHR99,Jea00,Jea℄ is de ned within the framework
of abstra t interpretation theory [CC77℄. It relies on the use of an abstra t
latti e ombining Boolean and numeri al properties (e.g. zones), and exploits
the partitioning of the state spa e of the system in order to adjust the pre ision
of the analysis. Now, given a safety property, it is hardly possible to guess the
good partition to he k it, i.e., the oarsest partition that is still detailed enough
to enable the proof of this property. We propose to start the analysis with a
very oarse partition, and to automati ally re ne it a ording to the needs of
veri ation, until the obtained pre ision enables a proof of the property, or until
the partition annot be re ned in a reasonable way any more.
    This te hnique has been implemented in the tool NBa , using onvex poly-
hedra to represent numeri al properties, and has been su essfully applied to
the veri ation of syn hronous programs [Jea00,Jea℄. Work is urrently done to
extend the tool with ontinuous time semanti , and to onne t it to the Uppaal
language for timed automata. We are also onsidering to repla e the onvex poly-
hedra latti e used in the tool by the heaper latti e of zones, used in Uppaal, or
possibly the new latti e of o tagons [Min00℄, that generalizes zones by allowing
 onstraints of the form m  xi + xj  M .


4   Re ent Case Studies

Uppaal2k     has been applied in a number of ase studies. In this se tion we
brie y des ribe a sele tion of the more re ent ones. A more omplete overview
is given on the Uppaal home page http://www.uppaal. om/ (see the se tion
\Do umentation").
    In [DY00℄, David and Wang report on an industrial appli ation of Uppaal
to model and debug a ommer ial eld bus ommuni ation proto ol, AF100
(Advant Field-bus 100) developed and implemented by pro ess ontrol industry
for safety- riti al appli ations. The proto ol has been running in various indus-
trial environments over the world for the past ten years. Due to the omplexity
of the proto ol and various hanges made over the years, it shows o asionally
unexpe ted behaviors. During the ase study, a number of imperfe tions in
the proto ol logi and its implementation are found and the error sour es are
debugged based on abstra t models of the proto ol; respe tive improvements
                  Figure10.   An overview of the LEGO plant.


have been suggested.

   In [HLP00℄, Hune et al. address the problem of synthesizing produ tion
s hedules and ontrol programs for the bat h produ tion plant model built in
LEGO MINDSTORMSTM RCXTM shown in Figures 10. A timed automata
model of the plant whi h faithfully re e ts the level of abstra tion needed to
synthesize ontrol programs is des ribed. This makes the model very detailed
and ompli ated for automati analysis. To solve this problem a general way
of adding guidan e to a model by augmenting it with additional guidan e
variables and transition guards is presented. Applying the te hnique makes
synthesis of ontrol problems feasible for a plant produ ing as many as 60
bat hes. In omparison, only two bat hes ould be s heduled without guides.
The synthesized ontrol programs have been exe uted in the plant. Doing this
revealed some model errors.

   The papers [Hun99,IKL+ 00℄ also onsider systems ontrolled by LEGO
RCXTM bri ks. Here the studied problem is that of he king properties of the
a tual programs, rather than abstra t models of programs. It is shown how
Uppaal models an be automati ally synthesized from RCXTM programs,
written in the programming language Not Quite C, NQC. Moreover, a proto ol
to fa ilitate the distribution of NQC programs over several RCXTM bri ks is
developed and proved to be orre t. The developed translation and proto ol
are applied to a distributed LEGO system with two RCXTM bri ks pushing
boxes between two onveyer belts moving in opposite dire tions. The system is
modeled and some veri ation results with Uppaal2k are reported.

     In [KLPW99℄, Kristo ersen et. al. present an analysis of an experimental
bat h plant using Uppaal2k. The plant is modeled as a network of timed
automata where automata are used for modeling the physi al omponents of
the plant, su h as the valves, pumps, tanks et . To model the a tual levels of
liquid in the tanks, integer variables are used in ombination with real-valued
  lo ks whi h ontrol the hange between the (dis rete) levels at instan es of
time whi h may be predi ted from a more a urate hybrid automata model.
An ru ial assumption of this dis retization is that the intera tion between the
tanks and the rest of the plant must be su h that any plant event a e ting the
tanks only o urs at these time instan es. If this assumption an be guaranteed
(whi h is one of the veri ation e orts in this framework), the veri ation
results are exa t and not only onservative with respe t to a more a urate
model, where the ontinuous hange of the levels may have been given by some
suitable di erential equation.

    The paper [LAM99℄ reports on the rst time, that a part of the Ada
run-time omplex has been formally veri ed. To eliminate most implementation
dependen ies and onstru ts with not learly spe i ed behavior in Ada, the
Ravens ar Tasking Pro le is used to implement the on urren y part. This
signi antly advan es the possibility to formally verify properties of on urrent
programs. The ase study uses Uppaal to prove fourteen properties, where one
depends dire tly on an upper bound on a real-time lo k value.

    In an ongoing ase study [AJ01℄, Uppaal is applied to model and analyze a
generalized version of a ar looking system developed by Saab Automobile. The
looking system is distributed over several nodes in the internal ommuni ation
network that exists in all modern vehi les. The system onsists of a entral node
gathering information and based on this instru ting sub nodes atta hed to the
physi al hardware to lo k or unlo k doors, trunk lid, et . The input sour es are
di erent kinds of remote ontrollers, speed sensors, automati re-lo king time-
outs et . whi h based on prede ned rules may a tivate the lo king me hanism.
The model of the system is derived from the a tual fun tional requirements
of the looking system used at Saab Automobile. During the urrently ongoing
work with verifying the fun tional requirements of the model, some in onsisten-
 ies and other problems between requirement have been found and pointed out
to the engineers.

5   Online Available Distributions
Uppaal2k  is urrently available for Linux, SunOS and MS Windows platforms.
It an be downloaded from the Uppaal home page http://www.uppaal. om/.
Sin e July 1999, the tool has been downloaded by more than 800 di erent users
in 60 ountries. On the home page, you also nd answers to frequently asked
questions, online do umentation, tutorials, and related resear h arti les.
    An open mailing list at http://groups.yahoo. om/group/uppaal serves
as a lively dis ussion forum for both Uppaal users and developers.

Referen es
[ACD93℄     Rajeev Alur, Costas Cour oubetis, and David Dill. Model Che king in
            Dense Real Time. Information and Computation, 104:2{34, 1993.
[ACH+ 92℄   Rajeev Alur, Costas Cour oubetis, Ni olas Halbwa hs, David Dill, and
            Howard Wong-Toi. Minimization of Timed Transition Systems. In Pro .
            of CONCUR '92, Theories of Con urren y: Uni ation an d Extension,
            pages 340{354, 1992.
[AHV93℄     Rajeev Alur, Thomas A. Henzinger, and Moshe Y. Vardi. Parametri
            Real-time Reasoning. In Pro eedings of the Twenty-Fifth Annual ACM
            Symposium on the Theory of Computing, pages 592{601, 1993.
[AJ01℄      Tobias Amnell and Pontus Jansson. Report from aste -rt auto proje t |
             entral lo king system ase study. In preparation, 2001.
[AW99℄      Rajeev Alur and Bow-Yaw Wang. \Next" Heuristi for On-the- y Model
            Che king. In Pro . of CONCUR '99: Con urren y Theory, number 1664 in
            Le ture Notes in Computer S ien e, pages 98{113. Springer{Verlag, 1999.
[BDM+ 98℄   Marius Bozga, Conrado Daws, Oded Maler, Alfredo Olivero, Stavros Tri-
            pakis, and Sergio Yovine. Kronos: A model-Che king Tool for Real-Time
            Systems. In Pro . of the 10th Int. Conf. on Computer Aided Veri a-
            tion, number 1427 in Le ture Notes in Computer S ien e, pages 546{550.
            Springer{Verlag, 1998.
[BFH+ ℄     Gerd Behrmann, Ansgar Fehnker, Thomas Hune, Kim G. Larsen, Paul
            Pettersson, and Judi Romijn. EÆ ient Guiding Towards Cost-Optimality
            in uppaal. A epted for publi ation in TACAS'2001.
[BFH+ 00℄   Gerd Behrmann, Ansgar Fehnker, Thomas Hune, Kim G. Larsen, Paul
            Pettersson, Judi Romijn, and Frits Vaandrager. Minimum-Cost Rea ha-
            bility for Pri ed Timed Automata. Submitted for publi ation. Available
            at http://www.do s.uu.se/do s/rtmv/papers/bfhlprv-sub00-1.ps.gz,
            2000.
[BHV00℄     Gerd Behrmann, Thomas Hune, and Frits Vaandrager. Distributing Timed
            Model Che king { How the Sear h Order Matters. In Pro . of the 12th Int.
            Conf. on Computer Aided Veri ation, number 1855 in Le ture Notes in
            Computer S ien e, pages 216{231. Springer{Verlag, 2000.
[BJLY98℄    Johan Bengtsson, Bengt Jonsson, Johan Lilius, and Wang Yi. Partial Order
            Redu tions for Timed Systems. In Pro . of CONCUR '98: Con urren y
            Theory, number 1466 in Le ture Notes in Computer S ien e. Springer{
            Verlag, 1998.
[BLP+ 99℄   Gerd Behrmann, Kim G. Larsen, Justin Pearson, Carsten Weise, and Wang
            Yi. EÆ ient Timed Rea hability Analysis Using Clo k Di eren e Dia-
            grams. In Pro . of the 11th Int. Conf. on Computer Aided Veri ation,
            number 1633 in Le ture Notes in Computer S ien e. Springer{Verlag, 1999.
[BRJ98℄     Grady Boo h, James Rumbaugh, and Ivar Ja obson. The Uni ed Modeling
            Language User Guide. Addison-Wesley, 1998.
[Bry86℄   Randal E. Bryant. Graph-Based Algorithms for Boolean-Fun tion Manip-
          ulation. IEEE Trans. on Computers, C-35(8):677{691, August 1986.
[BSdRT01℄ Giosue Bandini, R. F. Lutje Spelberg, R. C. M. de Rooij, and W. J.
          Toetenel. Appli ation of Parametri Model Che king - The Root Con-
          tention Proto ol. In Pro . of the 34th Annual Hawaii International Con-
          feren e on System S ien es (HICSS-34), 2001.
[CC77℄    Patri k Cousot and Radhia Cousot. Abstra t Interpretation: a Uni ed
          Latti e Model for Stati Analysis of Programs by Constru tion or Approx-
          imation of Fixpoints. Pro . of the 4th ACM Symposium on Prin iples of
          Programming Languages, January 1977.
[CL00℄    Fran Cassez and Kim G. Larsen. The Impressive Power of Stopwat hes.
          In Pro . of CONCUR '2000: Con urren y Theory, number 1877 in Le ture
          Notes in Computer S ien e, pages 138{152. Springer{Verlag, 2000.
[DY00℄    Alexandre David and Wang Yi. Modelling and Analysis of a Commer ial
          Field Bus Proto ol. In Pro . of 12th Euromi ro Conferen e on Real-Time
          Systems, pages 165{172. IEEE Computer So iety Press, June 2000.
[EWY99℄ Christer Eri sson, Anders Wall, and Wang Yi. Timed Automata as Task
          Models for Eventdriven Systems. In Pro eedings of RTSCA 99. IEEE Com-
          puter So iety Press, 1999.
[Feh99℄   Ansgar Fehnker. S heduling a Steel Plant with Timed Automata. In Pro .
          of the 6th International Conferen e on Real-Time Computing Systems and
          Appli ations (RTCSA99), pages 280{286. IEEE Computer So iety Press,
          1999.
[Har87℄   David Harel. State harts: A Visual Formalism for Complex Systems. S i-
          en e of Computer Programming, 8:231{274, 1987.
[HHWT97℄ Thomas A. Henzinger, Pei-Hsin Ho, and Howard Wong-Toi. HyTe h: A
          Model Che ker for Hybrid Systems. In Orna Grumberg, editor, Pro . of
          the 9th Int. Conf. on Computer Aided Veri ation, number 1254 in Le ture
          Notes in Computer S ien e, pages 460{463. Springer{Verlag, 1997.
[HJ94℄    Hans A. Hansson and Bengt Jonsson. A Logi for Reasoning about Time
          and Reliability. Formal Aspe ts of Computing, 6:512{535, 1994.
[HLP00℄ Thomas Hune, Kim G. Larsen, and Paul Pettersson. Guided Synthesis of
          Control Programs Using uppaal. In Ten H. Lai, editor, Pro . of the IEEE
          ICDCS International Workshop on Distributed Systems Veri ation and
          Validation, pages E15{E22. IEEE Computer So iety Press, April 2000.
[Hun99℄   Thomas Hune. Modelling a Real-time Language. In Pro eedings of FMICS,
          1999.
[IKL+ 00℄ Torsten K. Iversen, K  are J. Kristo ersen, Kim G. Larsen, Morten Laursen,
          Rune G. Madsen, Ste en K. Mortensen, Paul Pettersson, and Chris B.
          Thomasen. Model-Che king Real-Time Control Programs | Verifying
          LEGO Mindstorms Systems Using uppaal. In Pro . of 12th Euromi ro
          Conferen e on Real-Time Systems, pages 147{155. IEEE Computer So iety
          Press, June 2000.
[Jea℄     Bertrand Jeannet. Dynami Partitioning in Linear Relation Analysis. Ap-
          pli ation to the Veri ation of Rea tive Systems. to appear in Formal
          Methods and System Design, Kluwer A ademi Press.
[Jea00℄   Bertrand Jeannet. Partitionnement dynamique dans l'analyse de relations
          lineaires et appli ation a la veri ation de programmes syn hrones. PhD
          thesis, Institut National Polyte hnique de Grenoble, September 2000.
[Jen96℄    Henrik E. Jensen. Model Che king Probabilisti Real Time Systems. In
          B. Bjerner, M. Larsson, and B. Nordstrom, editors, Pro eedings of the 7th
          Nordi Workshop on Programming Theory, Goteborg Sweden, Report 86,
          pages 247{261. Chalmers University of Te hnolog, 1996.
[JHR99℄    Bertrand Jeannet, Ni olas Halbwa hs, and Pas al Raymond. Dynami
          Partitioning in Analyses of Numeri al Properties. In Stati Analysis Sym-
          posium, SAS'99, Venezia (Italy), September 1999.
[KLPW99℄ K  are Kristo ersen, Kim G. Larsen, Paul Pettersson, and Carsten Weise.
          Vhs Case Study 1 - experimental Bat h Plant using uppaal. BRICS,
          University of Aalborg, Denmark, http://www. s.au .dk/resear h/FS/-
          VHS/ s1uppaal.ps.gz, May 1999.
[KNSS99℄ Marta Z. Kwiatkowska, Gethin Norman, Roberto Segala, and Jeremy
          Sproston. Automati Veri ation of Real-Time Systems with Probabil-
          ity Distributions. In J.-P. Katoen, editor, Pro eedings of the 5th AMAST
          Workshop on Real-Time and Probabilisti System, Bamberg, Germany,
          number 1601 in Le ture Notes in Computer S ien e, pages 75{95. Springer{
          Verlag, 1999. An extended version will appear in Theoreti al Computer
          S ien e.
[Lam87℄   Leslie Lamport. A Fast Mutual Ex lusion Algorithm. ACM Trans. on
          Computer Systems, 5(1):1{11, February 1987. Also appeared as SRC Re-
          sear h Report 7.
[LAM99℄ Kristina Lundqvist, Lars Asplund, and Stephen Mi hell. A Formal Model
          of the Ada Ravens ar Tasking Pro le; Prote ted Obje ts. In Springer-
          Verlag, editor, Pro . of the Ada Europe Conferen e, pages 12{25, 1999.
[LBB+ 01℄ Kim G. Larsen, Gerd Behrmann, Ed Brinksma, Ansgar Fehnker, Thomas
          Hune, Paul Pettersson, and Judi Romijn. As Cheap as Possible: EÆ ient
          Cost-Optimal Rea hability for Pri ed Timed Automata. Submitted for
          publi ation, 2001.
[LLPY97℄ Fredrik Larsson, Kim G. Larsen, Paul Pettersson, and Wang Yi. EÆ-
            ient Veri ation of Real-Time Systems: Compa t Data Stru tures and
          State-Spa e Redu tion. In Pro . of the 18th IEEE Real-Time Systems
          Symposium, pages 14{24. IEEE Computer So iety Press, De ember 1997.
[LNAB+ 98℄ Jrn Lind-Nielsen, Henrik Reif Andersen, Gerd Behrmann, Henrik Hul-
          gaard, K are J. Kristo ersen, and Kim G. Larsen. Veri ation of Large
          State/Event Systems Using Compositionality and Dependen y Analysis.
          In Bernard Ste en, editor, Pro . of the 4th Workshop on Tools and Al-
          gorithms for the Constru tion and Analysis of Systems, number 1384 in
          Le ture Notes in Computer S ien e, pages 201{216. Springer{Verlag, 1998.
[LP97℄     Henrik Lonn and Paul Pettersson. Formal Veri ation of a TDMA Proto ol
          Startup Me hanism. In Pro . of the Pa i Rim Int. Symp. on Fault-
          Tolerant Systems, pages 235{242, De ember 1997.
[LPY97℄ Kim G. Larsen, Paul Pettersson, and Wang Yi. Uppaal in a Nutshell.
           Int. Journal on Software Tools for Te hnology Transfer, 1(1{2):134{152,
           O tober 1997.
[LWYP99℄ Kim G. Larsen, Carsten Weise, Wang Yi, and Justin Pearson. Clo k Dif-
           feren e Diagrams. Nordi Journal of Computing, 6(3):271{298, 1999.
[Min00℄    Antoine Mine. The Numeri al Domain of O tagons and Appli ation to
           the Automati Analysis of Programs. Master's thesis, E       ole Normale
           Superieure de Paris, 2000.
[Pet99℄   Paul Pettersson. Modelling and Analysis of Real-Time Systems Using
          Timed Automata: Theory and Pra ti e. PhD thesis, Department of Com-
          puter Systems, Uppsala University, February 1999.
[PS80℄    Wolfgang J. Paul and Janos Simon. De ision Trees and Random
          A ess Ma hines. In Logi and Algorithmi , volume 30 of Monogra-
          phie de L'Enseignement Mathematique, pages 331{340. L'Enseignement
          Mathematique, Universite de Geneve, 1980.
[SD97℄    Ulri h Stern and David L. Dill. Parallelizing the Mur' Veri er. In Orna
          Grumberg, editor, Pro . of the 9th Int. Conf. on Computer Aided Veri a-
          tion, volume 1254 of Le ture Notes in Computer S ien e, pages 256{267.
          Springer{Verlag, June 1997. Haifa, Isreal, June 22-25.
[ST98℄    Karsten Strehl and Lothar Thiele. Symboli Model Che king of Pro-
           ess Networks Using Interval Diagram Te hniques. In Pro eedings of
          the IEEE/ACM International Conferen e on Computer-Aided Design
          (ICCAD-98), pages 686{692, 1998.
[Yov97℄   Sergio Yovine. Kronos: A veri ation Tool for Real-Time Systems.
          Springer International Journal of Software Tools for Te hnology Transfer,
          1(1/2), O tober 1997.
[YPD94℄   Wang Yi, Paul Pettersson, and Mats Daniels. Automati Veri ation
          of Real-Time Communi ating Systems By Constraint-Solving. In Dieter
          Hogrefe and Stefan Leue, editors, Pro . of the 7th Int. Conf. on Formal
          Des ription Te hniques, pages 223{238. North{Holland, 1994.
