--- Page 1 ---
 
Exact Schedulability Analysis for Limited-Preemptive Parallel
Applications Using Timed Automata in UPPAAL
Citation for published version (APA): 
Hansen, J., Srinivasan, S., Nelissen, G., & Larsen, K. G. (2025). Exact Schedulability Analysis for Limited-
Preemptive Parallel Applications Using Timed Automata in UPPAAL. In 2025 Design, Automation and Test in 
Europe Conference, DATE 2025 Article 10992936 Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers. 
https://doi.org/10.23919/DATE64628.2025.10992936
Document license: 
TAVERNE
DOI:
10.23919/DATE64628.2025.10992936
Document status and date: 
Published: 21/05/2025
Document Version: 
Publisher’s PDF, also known as Version of Record (includes final page, issue and volume numbers)
Please check the document version of this publication: 
• A submitted manuscript is the version of the article upon submission and before peer-review. There can be
important differences between the submitted version and the official published version of record. People
interested in the research are advised to contact the author for the final version of the publication, or visit the
DOI to the publisher's website.
• The final author version and the galley proof are versions of the publication after peer review.
• The final published version features the final layout of the paper including the volume, issue and page
numbers.
Link to publication
General rights 
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright owners
and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
            • Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the public portal for the purpose of private study or research.
            • You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit-making activity or commercial gain
            • You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the public portal.
If the publication is distributed under the terms of Article 25fa of the Dutch Copyright Act, indicated by the “Taverne” license above, please
follow below link for the End User Agreement:
www.tue.nl/taverne
Take down policy 
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us at:
openaccess@tue.nl
providing details and we will investigate your claim.
Download date: 01. Apr. 2026

--- Page 2 ---
2025 Design, Automation & Test in Europe Conference (DATE 202 5) 
 978-3-9826741 -0-0/DATE2 5/© 202 5 EDAA   Exact Schedulability Analysis for
Limited-Preemptive Parallel Applications Using
Timed Automata in UPPAAL
Jonas Hansen
DEIS
Aalborg Universitet
Aalborg, DenmarkSrinidhi Srinivasan
IRIS
Eindhoven University of Technology
Eindhoven, The NetherlandsGeoffrey Nelissen
IRIS
Eindhoven University of Technology
Eindhoven, The NetherlandsKim G. Larsen
DEIS
Aalborg Universitet
Aalborg, Denmark
Abstract —We study the problem of verifying schedulability and
ascertaining response time bounds of limited-preemptive parallel
applications with uncertainty, scheduled on multi-core platforms.
While sufficient techniques exist for analysing schedulability
and response time of parallel applications under fixed-priority
scheduling, their accuracy remains uncertain due to the lack of
a scalable and exact analysis that can serve as a ground-truth to
measure the pessimism of existing sufficient analyses.
In this paper, we address this gap using formal methods. We use
Timed Automata and the powerful UPPAAL verification engine
to develop a generic approach to model parallel applications and
provide a scalable and exact schedulability and response time
analysis. This work establishes a benchmark for evaluating the
accuracy of both existing and future sufficient analysis techniques.
Furthermore, our solution is easily extendable to more complex
task models thanks to its flexible model architecture.
I. I NTRODUCTION
Parallel programming enables more efficient use of com-
puting resources on multicore platforms, thus allowing for
a reduction of the overall response time of applications. It
is therefore also being increasingly employed in real-time
systems whose tasks have to respect strict deadlines [1]. How-
ever, parallelising real-time applications makes the verification
of their timing requirements more challenging. Designing a
schedulability or response time analysis that is both accurate
and scalable for real-time parallel applications scheduled on
multi-core platforms is an open research line [2]–[10].
In this work, we focus on the analysis of systems made of a
set of periodic limited-preemptive parallel DAG tasks executing
with a work-conserving global fixed-priority (FP) scheduling
algorithm under constrained deadlines. With work-conserving
global FP scheduling, each task is assigned a fixed priority
and a deadline. Whenever a core is free, the highest priority
task with pending work is executed on that core. Parallel DAG
tasks are divided into a set of execution segments that can be
executed in parallel on different cores. Precedence constraints
between the execution of those segments are represented by a
directed acyclic graph (DAG). Tasks are limited preemptive
in the sense that segments execute non-preemptively, i.e.,
their execution cannot be interrupted even by higher-priority
tasks, but tasks can be preempted between the execution of
two different segments, i.e., at so-called preemption points.
Limited-preemptive is considered to be a good alternative to0 r5,10s1
r2,3s2
r2,3s
3
r25,30s4
r1,2s
5
r1,2s
0
r3,4s1
r3,4sTask 1
Task 2
Task ID Period Deadline Priority
Task 1 350 350 Low
Task 2 60 60 High
Fig. 1: Example of two LPPA tasks defined by their DAG structure and task
parameters.
both non-preemptive and fully preemptive scheduling [11] as
carefully chosen preemption points allow to reduce the cost of
preemptions in comparison to fully-preemptive scheduling, and,
thanks to allowing preemption between segments, it effectively
limits the blocking time caused by non-preemptive scheduling.
Fig. 1 shows an example of a limited-preemptive parallel
application (LPPA) made of two tasks. Each task is modelled
with a DAG. Each vertex of the DAG denotes a task segment
and each directed edge represents a precedence constraint
between two segments. Each segment is defined by a best- and
worst-case execution time bound, that is, it may execute non-
preemptively for any time duration within the interval defined
by those two values. Each edge in the DAG give rise to a
preemption point.
The schedulability and response-time analysis (RTA) of
limited preemptive sequential tasks, i.e., tasks modelled by a
DAG with a single path, has been extensively studied over
the years. For instance, [11]–[13] propose RTAs for different
variations of sporadic limited-preemptive tasks on single-core
platforms. Still focusing on a single core, [14] presents an exact
analysis for periodic sequential limited-preemptive tasks using
Timed Automata (TA) [15] and UPPAAL [16]. [17] proposes
an UPPAAL-based analysis for periodic sequential limited-
Authorized licensed use limited to: Eindhoven University of Technology. Downloaded on June 30,2025 at 10:58:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- Page 3 ---
preemptive self-suspending tasks on multicore platforms. For
parallel limited-preemptive tasks, only a few analyses have
been proposed. [4] presents a sufficient RTA for sporadic
partitioned LPPA and [3] proposes a reachability-based analysis
for periodic LPPAs that are globally scheduled on multicore.
To the best of our knowledge, no exact analysis currently
exists for LPPA. This gap in the state-of-the-art is largely due to
the difficulty of capturing the impact of precedence constraints
on response time, and to account for scheduling anomalies that
come with limited-preemptiveness. The absence of an exact
analysis means that the accuracy of existing sufficient analyses
remains uncertain as there is no ground truth to compare
against.
To address this gap, we develop a generic modelling ap-
proach using TA and utilise the UPPAAL verification engine
to verify schedulability and to ascertain response time bounds
for LPPA instances. Our approach is based on four key ob-
servations, developed specifically to improve the scalability
of UPPAAL models of LPPAs by minimizing the number of
clocks and locations in the TAs, and by using efficient data
structures.
II. K EYOBSERVATIONS
Generally, automata based frameworks syntactically describe
finite state machines defined over a number of discrete locations
with directed transitions connecting them. TAs extend the
semantics of automata with continuous dynamics using clocks.
Clocks are continuous variables capable of guarding discrete
transitions from firing using constraints on their current values.
The value of a clock increases at a constant rate and can be reset
when firing transitions. Additionally, UPPAAL allows us to
define and manipulate integer typed data structures through C-
like function calls whenever transitions are fired. The semantics
of TAs are commonly defined by Timed Labelled Transition
Systems in which model state is defined by the value of
all clocks and by the currently occupied discrete locations.
The value of data structures are also part of the global state
in UPPAAL models. Furthermore, UPPAAL allows multiple
parallel models that can communicate both through broadcast-
ing and hand shake synchronisation. To initiate a handshake
synchronisation, a model fires an output over a channel. This
output must synchronise with another model using an input
over the same channel. Different from handshakes, broadcasting
does not require to have a receiver ready to receive input.
Most often, improving scalability for UPPAAL models
comes down to reducing the amount of clocks used, reducing
the number of discrete locations defined in the model and
utilising memory-efficient data structures whenever possible.
In this work, we make four key observations, which we use to
improve the scalability of our modelling approach.
Obs. 1. Our first observation is related to the deterministic
nature of periodic tasks with constrained deadlines. Releases of
jobs are typically done using one clock per task that keeps track
of the time until the next job release for that task. That same
clock is also usually used to check the relative distance until
the job deadline is reached. However, we observe that since
the distance between consecutive job releases and deadlines isfixed for all tasks, a single clock can be used to keep track
of all the job releases and deadlines of all tasks. This can be
done by encoding the delta between consecutive events (i.e.,
job releases and deadlines) in the UPPAAL model.
Obs. 2. Our second and arguably most significant observation
is that, in addition to the single clock that keeps track of job
releases and deadlines, the number of clocks needed to model
scheduling on a multicore platform is upper bounded by the
number of processors in the platform. The typical approach is
to define clocks for each task that keep track of when, and for
how long their segments execute on processors. The problem
with this approach is that the number of clocks is then bounded
by the maximum number of segments that can be concurrently
pending, which may be significantly larger than the number of
processors in the platform. UPPAAL must then decide which
subset of clocks defines the evolution of a system state when
exploring the state space. In our model instead, clocks are not
defined at the level of tasks. They are defined at the level of
processors. We define one clock per processor. Then, each clock
keeps track of the duration for which the last segment dispatch
on the core executed for. This significantly reduces the number
of clocks that must be maintained by UPPAAL.
Obs. 3. The set of segments that have all or a subset of
their precedence constraints fulfilled is part of what defines
the system state as it decides which segments are ready to be
dispatched on the processors. A naive implementation would
keep track of the status of all segments of all tasks as part
of the model state. This is both memory and computationally
inefficient. Indeed, whenever a new segment of a task would
have to be dispatched on a processor, the model would have
to check all segments to know if they are eligible. This would
drastically increase the complexity of analysing task models.
Instead, we observe that the number of segments of a task that
can be simultaneously ready (i.e., those that have not started
to execute yet and have all their predecessors completed) is
bounded by the maximum parallelism of the task. Similarly,
the number of segments that have only a subset of their prede-
cessors completed is also bounded by the structure of the DAG
of each task. These two bounds can easily be computed with a
single pass through the DAG of each task. The knowledge of
those two bounds allows us to use minimal sized lists that keep
track of segments with all or part of the precedence constraints
completed as part of the model’s state.
Obs. 4. Using predominantly asynchronous components by de-
veloping our models around broadcast communication utilising
channel priorities minimises the number of discrete locations
present in the models. As we will see in III, this allows us to
model urgency more concisely and precisely, while also lower-
ing exploration overhead in general for the verification engine.
This is important because the verification engine of UPPAAL
often cannot flatten static sequences of discrete transitions. By
utilising less discrete locations we can potentially improve its
state-space exploration.
III. UPPAAL M ODEL
In this section, we introduce our modelling approach for
LPPA. For the sake of brevity, we only present our model
Authorized licensed use limited to: Eindhoven University of Technology. Downloaded on June 30,2025 at 10:58:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- Page 4 ---
for limited-preemptive parallel applications globally scheduled
on multicore platforms. However, a variation of that model
optimised for sequential tasks was also developed but is not
covered in this paper. Both are available in [18].
This section first describes the UPPAAL model and then
explains how to use that model to verify schedulability and
calculate tasks’ response time bounds. We expect the reader to
be familiar with basic UPPAAL syntax.
Our model is divided into two distinct components modelling
thescheduler and tasks , respectively. We first discuss the
input parameters of the model, Then, for both components,
we outline their functional responsibilities and detail how this
manifests into its intended behaviour in relation to LPPA under
FP scheduling. Doing so, we also explain how the observations
discussed in II are exploited in the model.
A. Model Inputs
We begin by explaining central data types, parameters and
key data structures used by the model.
The central entities in our model are tasks. A task is defined
by its period, release offset, deadline, priority and a set of
segments. Each segment is defined by its best- and worst-
case execution time c_min andc_max , respectively. Those
properties are encoded using the task_t data type defined
as:struct {time_t period; time_t deadline;
time_t offset; int priority; struct {time_t
c_min; time_t c_max; }segments[K]; }
where time_t corresponds to the set of natural numbers
(encoded on 32-bit integers in UPPAAL) and KPNis the
maximum number of segments for any task.
Definition 1 (Input Parameters): The model takes the
following tuple as input parameters that define the num-
ber of tasks, processors and constraints on task execu-
tion:pN, M, K, PER, I, O, B, R, tasks, succs, preds, inits q,
where Nis the number of tasks, Mis the number of processors,
Kis the maximum number of segments in a single task,
PER :int[N] is a list of task periods, Iis the maximum
amount of predecessors for any segment, Ois the maximum
number of successors for any segment. To capitalize on Obs.
3 from Sec. II, the model also takes the input parameters B
andRwhere Bis the maximum number of segments of a task
with part of their precedence constraints fulfilled, and Ris the
maximum number of ready segments of a task. Finally, tasks :
task_t[N] is a list of Ntasks, succs :seg_t[N][K][O]
andpreds :seg_t[N][K][I] are matrices encoding succes-
sors and predecessors, respectively, of each segment in the DAG
of each task, and inits :seg_t[N][K] is a sparse matrix
denoting which segments are initial segments (i.e., segments
without predecessors) in the DAGs of each task, with seg_t
encoding segments.
B. Model State
In this section, we define the clocks and data structures used
by the model to keep track of its internal state.
From Obs. 1 and 2 in Sec. II, we know that we need no
more than M`1clocks to model timing constraints. We define
tp:clock as the global clock that keeps track of the time
Fig. 2: Task model. The functions offset() andperiod() return the
time until the next task release relative to the last reset of the clock tp. Note,
m_t:int[0,M-1] andr_t:int[0,R-1] .
until the next event in the system (i.e., job release or deadline).
A list of Mclocks x:clock[M] is then used to keep track
of execution times on each independent processor.
Additionally, the model controls its internal state by ma-
nipulating the data structures ready :seg_t[N][R] ,
running :bound_t[M] ,blocked :seg_t[N][B] , and
inc_preds :seg_t[N][K][I] , where running contains
the segments that are currently running, ready contains the
segments that are ready to start executing, blocked con-
tains the segments with some but not all their predecessors
completed, and inc_preds keeps track of all precedence
constraints that are not fulfilled yet, with bound_t encoding
closed intervals.
To improve efficiency in finding the highest-priority seg-
ment that is ready to be executed, we also define queue :
id_t[N] as a queue containing the id of every task with a
segment in ready in descending priority order (with id_t :
int[0,N-1] being the task index type).
C. Task Model
The task component consists of Ninstances of the task
model shown in Fig. 2, each of which is instantiated with a
unique identifier id.
A task can be in three discrete modes, Offsetting ,
Active orWaiting . A task is offsetting until its first
segment is released for the first time. The exact timing of the
transition is controlled by the invariant tpďoffset() and
guard tp == offset() involving the global clock tp. A
task becomes active from the moment it is first enqueued
into the priority queue queue until its last segment completes
its execution. Note that only active tasks may miss their
deadlines. A task that completes the execution of all of its
segments starts waiting until its next period, at which point
it enters the priority queue and becomes active again. A task
cannot be waiting for longer than its period and neither can
it stop waiting before the period has run its full duration.
Transitions between modes is controlled by the broadcast
channel move used by all tasks and two handshake channels
Authorized licensed use limited to: Eindhoven University of Technology. Downloaded on June 30,2025 at 10:58:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- Page 5 ---
run andcomplete activated by the scheduler presented in
the next section.
Themove broadcast channel is how we keep our models
mostly asynchronous, not requiring explicit synchronisations
between tasks, which allows us to reduce the number of
locations and accelerate state space exploration as noted in
Obs. 4 in Sec. II. The move andcompleted channels are
given higher priorities than the run channel. This effectively
ensures that, whenever a task may enter or leave the Active
state, that transition is urgently taken before the scheduler
may pick a new segment to run on one of the processors.
This ensures that the set of ready segments and the priority
queue are properly updated by the functions enqueue(id)
andready_add_inits(id) , before the scheduler checks
which segment should be run next.
The scheduler model presented in Sec. III-D is respon-
sible for selecting which ready tasks must start executing
segments. It communicates those decisions using the run
channel. Whenever the scheduler outputs a run[id]! , it
indicates that a segment of task idmust start to execute. Then,
the task that receives the inputs on run[id]? picks non-
deterministically one of the ready segments in ready[id]
(using the function can_run(id,k) that checks if there is
a ready segment at position kinready[id] withkbeing
any value in the range r0, Rq). It then assigns one of the M
clocks associated with a processor on which nothing is running
(using the function is_next(j) that checks if the jthclock
is free). Once a ready segment and a clock are selected, the
function begin_segment(id,k,j) adds the segment to
running[j] , and removes it from ready[id] . Finally,
dequeue() removes the task idfrom the priority queue
queue if no other segments of this task are in ready[id] .
D. Scheduler
The scheduler component model is shown in Fig. 3, con-
sisting of three discrete modes. Two of those modes, including
the initial one, are committed (indicated by the Cannotation
in the location). Committed modes prevent time from passing
when the scheduler is in one of them. Committed modes
also enforce that the next transition fired in the model must
originate from a committed mode. Since the initial location is
committed, the first transition to fire in the model is always the
Fig. 3: The scheduler model. the update active_c[j] = -1 releases x[j]
and makes it available to be allocated to the highest priority task. Note,
tmp_seg andtmp_i are temporary variables.one that initialises all lists in the model using the function
init_lists() . Once all lists have been initialised, the
scheduler becomes Idle .
The scheduler remains Idle when no job is ready, i.e., if
ready is empty, or all processors are currently executing seg-
ments, i.e., all clocks in xare observing a segment execution.
The invariant in Idle ensures that no segment is allowed to
run longer than its maximum execution time. If a processor is
not executing any segment and the corresponding clock x[i]
is not allocated, the model prevents a deadlock from happening
by ensuring that running[i].max returns a value that will
certainly never be reached by the clock x[i] .
Whenever a job is ready and a processor is free, the scheduler
selects the ID of the highest priority task in the priority queue
queue using the front() function and urgently outputs
arun action for that task, thereby ensuring that the work-
conserving policy is satisfied. run is an urgent channel,
meaning that whenever enabled, time cannot pass, while also
cascading urgency to any other enabled channels of higher
priority, forcing those higher-priority enabled channels to fire
first.
Whenever a segment has reached its upper execution bound,
i.e., when there is a clock x[j] that observes the execution of a
segment such that x[j]==running[j].max , the scheduler
transitions away from Idle . It then sets the clock x[j] as
being inactive (by setting active_c[j] = -1 ) and removes
the segment associated with clock x[j] from the list of
running segments (using running_remove(j) ). Similarly,
the scheduler can non-deterministically choose to cease the
execution of a segment if its minimum execution bound is
reached, i.e., x[j]ěrunning[j].min . In either case, the
scheduler will stop being idle and move to a committed
mode from where it immediately transitions back to Idle after
recording that the segment execution has completed by updat-
ing the content of the ready ,blocked andinc_precs
data structures using the functions finish_segment() and
move_all_idle() . Whenever this occurs, either of two
things can happen; If the segment that just completed is
not the last segment of the task, the task is enqueued back
into the priority queue. If the segment was the last uncom-
pleted segment of the task then the scheduler model fires a
complete[id]! output for which task idsynchronises with
and begins waiting .
Critically, the scheduler will always make sure that ready
is up-to-date before the highest priority task is told to run a
task. Because run is the lowest priority channel, whenever
job_ready() andprocessor_avail() are satisfied, the
run transition does not become enabled until all enabled move!
outputs have fired, ensuring that all potentially ready segments
are indeed considered ready by the scheduler. In other words,
the scheduler will always force segments that are currently at
their upper execution bound to cease before selecting the next
segment to execute.
E. Schedulability and Response-Time Analysis
We now discuss how our model can be used to check
schedulability and derive response time bounds for every task.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Eindhoven University of Technology. Downloaded on June 30,2025 at 10:58:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- Page 6 ---
To verify that a model instance is schedulable, we ask UP-
PAAL to check whether the system may reach a state where a
task is in the active mode and the clock tpis strictly greater
than the relative deadline of said task. This is done using the
following query in UPPAAL: E<> exists (i : id_t)
Task(i).Active && tp > Task(i).deadline()
If the property is satisfied, then the system is unschedulable.
Taking the contra-positive, the system is schedulable if and
only if the property is not satisfied. Note that finding a
single counter-example is enough to prove that a system is
unschedulable. This may however require full exploration of the
full state space. UPPAAL may be configured to efficiently find
counter-examples (when one exists) using depth-first search
instead of breadth-first search. On the other hand, breadth-first
search should be preferred when trying to prove that a system
is schedulable since it then explores the full state space faster.
To derive response time bounds, we define an additional
clock response : clock , declared locally in each task.
The clock response is reset whenever a task transitions
from the offsetting orwaiting mode to enter the
active mode. To obtain the worst-case response time for
a task i, we ask UPPAAL to find the largest value attain-
able by clock response when task iis in the active
mode. This is done using the following query in UPPAAL:
sup{Task(i).Active }: Task(i).response
This is correct because tasks will urgently start to wait when-
ever a job finishes. To obtain best-case response time for task
i, we ask UPPAAL to find the smallest value of response
when task iiswaiting :inf{Task(i).Waiting }:
Task(i).response
Again, this is correct because task iwill urgently start
waiting whenever its current job is done. Note, clock
response does not impact schedulability analysis because
it does not occur in invariants or guards and therefore is not
part of the model state.
IV. E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS
Since, to the best of our knowledge, we present the first exact
schedulability analysis based on TA for LPPA, our primary ob-
jective is to demonstrate that it can be used as a schedulability
test for simple problem instances, but more interestingly we
highlight its effectiveness as a benchmarking tool to evaluate
the accuracy of other sufficient analysis techniques even for
more complex problem instances. To convey this, we aim to
answer the following questions: How well does our analysis
scale with the number of tasks, segments, cores and increasing
parallelism within a task? How efficient is our method in
terms of runtime when used to ascertain that systems deemed
unschedulable by other sufficient analysis techniques are indeed
unschedulable? All experiments are run on an Intel Core Ultra
7 processor clocked at 4.80 Ghz with 64.0 GiB of RAM.
Scalability We tested the scalability of our analysis by
analysing limited-preemptive sequential tasks scheduled on a
single processor. Limited-preemptive tasks were generated by
breaking non-preemptive tasks into a sequence of smaller seg-
ments with precedence constraints between them. The segments
of each task were generated by iteratively breaking down eachsegment into two smaller segments with a probability of 0.8
until no segment is broken anymore or the task contains 20
segments. Whenever a segment is broken into two smaller ones,
its best- and worst-case execution time is divided randomly be-
tween the resulting segments. In this experiment, we generated
50random task sets with a total utilisation of 30%, aiming to
increase the likelihood of generating schedulable task sets. We
varied the number of tasks Nwithint4,8,12u, and set the
number of processors Mto either 1or2.
In Figs. 4a and 4b, we provide the runtime analysis for
various configurations of tasks and cores, to show the impact
that the number of segments, tasks and cores has on the runtime
of the analysis. For these experiments, we assigned a very
strict timeout of 250 seconds. Even within this short time
frame, the single core analysis successfully processed almost all
problem instances without timing out. As expected, increasing
the number of tasks increases the analysis runtime. Increasing
the number of segments in each task, however, has limited
impact on the analysis runtime. Predictably, when analysing
systems with 2 cores, we observed a significant increase in
the analysis runtime. We also found that task sets deemed
unschedulable had lower runtimes compared to schedulable
ones, which aligns with the expected outcome since the analysis
may stop as soon as a counter-example is found and it does not
need to explore the whole state space. Proving schedulability
on the other hand requires a full exploration of the state space.
Differently from the single-core case, the analysis runtime does
not only increase with the number of tasks but also increases
with the number of segments in tasks, simply because blocking
occurs more frequently.
Efficiency in generating counterexamples To determine how
efficient our solution is in being used as a benchmarking tool
for sufficient analyses, we considered the Schedule Abstraction
Graph (SAG) analysis tool available at [19]. We chose SAG be-
cause it is, as far we know, the best sufficient schedulability test
for periodic LPPA globally scheduled on multicore platforms
[2], [3]. For each task set for which the SAG returned that
the task set was potentially unschedulable, we ran our tool to
try and find a counter-example to schedulability. If a counter-
example could be found with our new analysis, it confirms that
the SAG was correct in not deeming the task set schedulable.
For this experiment we generated parallel tasks using the
method described in [4] and [20], using a node forking proba-
bility of 0.3, a maximum of 2nested forks, and the maximum
number of parallel segments originating from a fork, denoted
asPPAR, set to either 2or3depending on the experiment. We
generated 20 random sets of limited-preemptive parallel tasks
for each variation of the experiment, all with a total utilisation
of30%. The number of tasks Nranged within t4,6,8u, and
the number of processors Mranged within t1,2,3,4u.
These task sets were analysed by the SAG to identify those
that it could not deem schedulable. Each of these task sets were
then given to our UPPAAL model. Using depth-first search
approach we then asked it to try and find counterexamples. If a
counterexample was found within the time limits 150 or 1000
seconds (depending on the experiment), re-enforcing the SAG
Authorized licensed use limited to: Eindhoven University of Technology. Downloaded on June 30,2025 at 10:58:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- Page 7 ---
(a)Runtime of the analysis for limited-preemptive sequential
tasks on a single core.
(b)Runtime of the analysis for limited-preemptive sequential
tasks on two cores
(c)CDF of task sets for which a counter-example was found
while varying the number of tasks
(d)CDF of task sets for which a counter-example was found
while varying the number of cores
Fig. 4: Experimental Results
result, we considered it efficient in terms of runtime.
The single-core version of these experiments demonstrated
that, for all task sets that were deemed potentially unschedula-
ble by the SAG, our analysis was able to find a counterexample
within 150 seconds. This shows the efficiency of our analysis
and the accuracy of the SAG on this small test run.
Figs. 4c and 4d presents a cumulative density function (CDF)
that shows the cumulative percentage of task sets for which a
counter-example was found with a runtime no more than the
corresponding timeout shown on the x-axis. When varying the
number of tasks, we observe that an increase in the number
of tasks leads to longer runtimes when looking for counter-
examples. Consequently, as the number of tasks increases, the
percentage of task sets for which we are able to find a counter-
example within a given timeout decreases. Similarly, when
varying the number of cores, we observe that as the number
of cores increases, the percentage of task sets for which a
counter-example is found within a given timeout also decreases.
Note, both CDFs are based on the total number of potentially
unschedulable task sets as reported by SAG, it is entirely
possible that some of these are in fact schedulable which would
make it impossible to find a counter example.
Case study. [14] proposes an exact schedulability analysis
for limited-preemptive periodic tasks using UPPAAL that we
would like to test against given the similarities with our work.
However, key differences and limitations to the [14] analysis is
that it is only able to analyze single-core platforms and cannothandle DAG tasks. In their paper, they test their analysis on a
case study extracted from the WATERS 2017 industrial chal-
lenge [21], consisting of seven limited-preemptive sequential
tasks consisting of a total of 710 segments. We ran the exact
model provided by the authors of [14] and compared it to ours.
The average runtime and memory usage for verifying the use-
case schedulability using the model presented in [14] is 96,7
seconds requiring 2741,918KB of memory. Our model checks
the schedulability with an average runtime of 46,1seconds with
a memory usage of 770,997KB. This shows the effectiveness
of the key observations we made in Sec. II to develop our
model.
V. C ONCLUSION
We have successfully developed an exact schedulability
analysis framework for LPPAs and shown how it scales in
terms of tasks, segments, cores and increasing parallelism.
Under relatively small time frames it is capable of finding
counter examples, even for parallel tasks running on multi
core platforms. Our results show that our solution looks very
promising as a benchmark for evaluating the accuracy of
other sufficient analysis techniques for LPPAs. Our model is
generic, allowing for future enhancements. For example, it
can be extended to handle self-suspending tasks, event-driven
delay-induced tasks, and tasks with sporadic release patterns.
Furthermore, the model is adaptable to arbitrary deadlines
beyond the current assumption of constrained deadlines.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Eindhoven University of Technology. Downloaded on June 30,2025 at 10:58:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- Page 8 ---
REFERENCES
[1] B. Akesson, M. Nasri, G. Nelissen, S. Altmeyer, and R. I. Davis, “A
comprehensive survey of industry practice in real-time systems,” Real-
Time Systems , vol. 58, no. 3, pp. 358–398, 2022.
[2] M. Verucchi, I. S. Olmedo, and M. Bertogna, “A survey on real-time
dag scheduling, revisiting the global-partitioned infinity war,” Real-Time
Systems , vol. 59, no. 3, pp. 479–530, 2023.
[3] M. Nasri, G. Nelissen, and B. B. Brandenburg, “Response-time analysis
of limited-preemptive parallel DAG tasks under global scheduling,” in
Euromicro Conference on Real-Time Systems (ECRTS) , 2019, pp. 21–1.
[4] D. Casini, A. Biondi, G. Nelissen, and G. C. Buttazzo, “Partitioned fixed-
priority scheduling of parallel tasks without preemptions,” in 2018 IEEE
Real-Time Systems Symposium (RTSS) . IEEE Computer Society, 2018,
pp. 421–433.
[5] M. A. Serrano, A. Melani, S. Kehr, M. Bertogna, and E. Qui ˜nones, “An
analysis of lazy and eager limited preemption approaches under dag-
based global fixed priority scheduling,” in 2017 IEEE 20th International
Symposium on Real-Time Distributed Computing (ISORC) . IEEE, 2017,
pp. 193–202.
[6] J. Fonseca, G. Nelissen, and V . N ´elis, “Improved response time analysis
of sporadic dag tasks for global fp scheduling,” in Proceedings of the
25th international conference on real-time networks and systems , 2017,
pp. 28–37.
[7] ——, “Schedulability analysis of dag tasks with arbitrary deadlines under
global fixed-priority scheduling,” Real-Time Systems , vol. 55, pp. 387–
432, 2019.
[8] Q. He, N. Guan, Z. Guo et al. , “Intra-task priority assignment in real-time
scheduling of dag tasks on multi-cores,” IEEE Transactions on Parallel
and Distributed Systems , vol. 30, no. 10, pp. 2283–2295, 2019.
[9] F. Guan, J. Qiao, and Y . Han, “Dag-fluid: A real-time scheduling
algorithm for dags,” IEEE Transactions on Computers , vol. 70, no. 3,
pp. 471–482, 2020.
[10] F. Aromolo, A. Biondi, G. Nelissen, and G. Buttazzo, “Event-driven
delay-induced tasks: Model, analysis, and applications,” in 2021 IEEE
27th Real-Time and Embedded Technology and Applications Symposium
(RTAS) . IEEE, 2021, pp. 53–65.
[11] G. C. Buttazzo, M. Bertogna, and G. Yao, “Limited preemptive schedul-
ing for real-time systems. a survey,” IEEE transactions on Industrial
Informatics , vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 3–15, 2012.
[12] R. J. Bril, J. J. Lukkien, and W. F. Verhaegh, “Worst-case response time
analysis of real-time tasks under fixed-priority scheduling with deferred
preemption,” Real-Time Systems , vol. 42, pp. 63–119, 2009.
[13] R. J. Bril, M. M. van den Heuvel, U. Keskin, and J. J. Lukkien,
“Generalized fixed-priority scheduling with limited preemptions,” in 2012
24th Euromicro Conference on Real-Time Systems . IEEE, 2012, pp. 209–
220.
[14] M. Foughali, P.-E. Hladik, and A. Zuepke, “Compositional verification of
embedded real-time systems,” Journal of Systems Architecture , vol. 142,
p. 102928, 2023.
[15] R. Alur and D. L. Dill, “A theory of timed automata,” Theoretical Com-
puter Science , vol. 126, no. 2, pp. 183–235, 1994. [Online]. Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0304397594900108
[16] G. Behrmann, A. David, and K. G. Larsen, A Tutorial on Uppaal .
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2004, pp. 200–236.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-30080-9 7
[17] B. Yalcinkaya, M. Nasri, and B. B. Brandenburg, “An exact schedulability
test for non-preemptive self-suspending real-time tasks,” in DATE . IEEE,
2019, pp. 1228–1233.
[18] “Uppaal models for lppa - date 2025,” 2025. [Online]. Available:
https://github.com/nidhi2396/UPPAAL models forLPPA-DATE25
[19] “Schedule-Abstraction Graph framework GitHub organization.” [Online].
Available: https://github.com/SAG-org
[20] A. Melani, M. Bertogna, V . Bonifaci, A. Marchetti-Spaccamela, and
G. C. Buttazzo, “Response-time analysis of conditional dag tasks in
multiprocessor systems,” in 2015 27th Euromicro Conference on Real-
Time Systems , 2015, pp. 211–221.
[21] A. Hamann, D. Dasari, S. Kramer, M. Pressler, F. Wurst, and D. Ziegen-
bein, “Waters industrial challenge 2017,” in International Workshop on
Analysis Tools and Methodologies for Embedded and Real-time Systems
(WATERS) , 2017.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Eindhoven University of Technology. Downloaded on June 30,2025 at 10:58:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
