--- Page 1 ---
Formal Veriﬁcation of Safety & Security
Related Timing Constraints for a
Cooperative Automotive System
Li Huang1and Eun-Young Kang2(B)
1School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, China
huangl223@mail2.sysu.edu.cn
2The Maersk Mc-Kinney Moller Institute, University of Southern Denmark,
Odense, Denmark
eyk@mmmi.sdu.dk
Abstract. Modeling and analysis of timing constraints is crucial in real-
time automotive systems. Modern vehicles are interconnected through
wireless networks which creates vulnerabilities to external maliciousattacks. Violations of cyber-security can cause safety related accidents
and serious damages. To identify the potential impacts of security related
threats on safety properties of interconnected automotive systems, thispaper presents analysis techniques that support veriﬁcation and valida-
tion (V&V) of safety & security (S/S) related timing constraints on those
systems: Probabilistic extension of S/S timing constraints are speciﬁedin Pr Ccsl (probabilistic extension of clock constraint speciﬁcation lan-
guage) and the semantics of the extended constraints are translated into
veriﬁable Uppaal models with stochastic semantics for formal veriﬁca-
tion. A set of mapping rules are proposed to facilitate the translation. An
automatic translation tool, namely ProTL, is implemented based on themapping rules. Formal veriﬁcation are performed on the S/S timing con-
straints using Uppaal-SMC under diﬀerent attack scenarios. Our app-
roach is demonstrated on a cooperative automotive system case study.
Keywords: Automotive system
·Safety and security ·PrCcsl·
Uppaal-SMC
1 Introduction
Model based development (MBD) is rigorously applied in automotive systems in
which the software controllers interact with physical environments. The contin-uous time behaviors of those systems often rely on complex dynamics as well as
on stochastic behaviors. Formal veriﬁcation and validation (V&V) technologies
are indispensable and highly recommended for development of safe and reliableautomotive systems [ 11,12]. Conventional V&V, i.e., testing and model checking
have limitations in terms of assessing the reliability of hybrid systems due to both
stochastic and non-linear dynamical features. To ensure the reliability of safety
c/circlecopyrtThe Author(s) 2019
R. H¨ ahnle and W. van der Aalst (Eds.): FASE 2019, LNCS 11424, pp. 210–227, 2019.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-16722-6 _12

--- Page 2 ---
Formal Veriﬁcation of Safety & Security Related Timing Constraints 211
critical hybrid dynamic systems, statistical model checking (SMC) techniques
have been proposed [ 7,8,19]. These techniques for fully stochastic models vali-
date probabilistic performance properties of given deterministic (or stochastic)
controllers in given stochastic environments.
Modern vehicles are being equipped with communication devices and inter-
connected with each other through wireless networks. Vehicular Ad Hoc Net-
works ( V anet )[28] are the technologies of wireless networks that establish com-
munication among vehicles and roadside units (RSU). Nevertheless vehicularcommunication contributes to the safety and eﬃciency of traﬃc, it introduces
vulnerabilities to vehicles. Transmitted information can be corrupted or modiﬁed
by attackers, resulting in serious safety consequences (e.g., rear-end collision).Analysis of the potential impacts of cyber-security violations on safety proper-
ties is crucial in automotive systems. However, traditional automotive system
design often addresses the correctness of safety properties without consideration
of security breaches. There is still a lack of techniques that enable an integrated
analysis of safety & security (S/S) properties. Moreover, message transmissioninV anet that pertains to S/S requires restrictions by time deadlines [ 10]. In
this paper, we focus on S/S related timing constraints and propose analysis tech-
niques that support formal veriﬁcation on interconnected automotive systems.
East-adl [9,22] is an architectural description language for modeling of
automotive systems. The latest release of East-adl has adopted the time
model proposed in Timing Augmented Description Language ( Tadl2 )[5], which
expresses and composes basic timing constraints, i.e., repetition rates, end-to-end
delays. Tadl2 specializes the time model of MARTE , the UML proﬁle for Mod-
eling and Analysis of Real-Time and Embedded systems [ 30].MARTE provides
Ccsl, a Clock Constraint Speciﬁcation Language, that supports speciﬁcation of
both logical and dense timing constraints, as well as functional causality con-
straints [ 16,23]. A probabilistic extension of Ccsl, called Pr Ccsl [14], has been
proposed to formally specify timing constraints associated with stochastic prop-
erties in weakly-hard real-time systems [ 4], i.e., a bounded number of constraints
violations would not lead to system failures when the results of the violations
are negligible.
In this paper, we present a formal analysis of S/S related timing constraints
for interconnected automotive systems at the design level: 1. To identify vulner-
abilities of automotive systems under malicious attacks, we adopt and modify
the behavioral model of a cooperative automotive system (CAS) [ 13]i n Uppaal-
SMC by adding it with the models of an RSU-aided ( Raise ) communication
protocol in V anet and malicious attacks. The modiﬁcation results in a reﬁned
behavioral model of the system, i.e., more details in terms of vehicular commu-nication and security breaches are depicted; 2. Probabilistic extension of S/S
timing constraints are speciﬁed in Pr Ccsl and the semantics of the extended
constraints are translated into veriﬁable models with stochastic semantics forformal veriﬁcation; 3. A set of mapping rules are proposed to facilitate the
translation, based on which an automatic translation tool ProTL is implemented;

--- Page 3 ---
212 L. Huang and E.-Y. Kang
4. Formal veriﬁcation is performed on the S/S timing constraints using Uppaal-
SMC under diﬀerent attack scenarios.
The paper is organized as follows: Sect. 2presents an overview of Pr Ccsl and
Uppaal-SMC . CAS is introduced as a running example in Sect. 3. Section 4.1
presents the Uppaal-SMC model of CAS complemented with model of Raise
protocol and three types of attacks. S/S related timing constraints are speciﬁed
in Pr Ccsl and translated into veriﬁable Uppaal-SMC models in Sect. 5.T h e
applicability of our approach is demonstrated by performing veriﬁcation on CAScase study in Sect. 6. Sections 7and8present related works and conclusion.
2 Preliminary
In our framework, S/S related timing constraints are speciﬁed in Pr Ccsl.
Uppaal-SMC is employed to perform formal veriﬁcation on the timing
constraints.
2.1 Probabilistic Extension of Clock Constraint Speciﬁcation
Language (PrCCSL)
PrCcsl [14] is a probabilistic extension of Ccsl [3,23] for formal speciﬁcation
of timing constraints associated with stochastic behaviors. In Pr Ccsl,ac l o c k
represents a sequence of (possibly inﬁnite) instants. An event is a clock and
the occurrences of an event correspond to a set of ticks of the clock. Pr Ccsl
provides two types of clock constraints, i.e., expressions and relations ,t os p e c i f y
the progression/occurrences of clocks. An expression derives new clocks from the
already deﬁned clocks [ 3]. Let c1,c2∈C,ITE(if-then-else) expression , denoted
asβ?c1:c2, deﬁnes a new clock that behaves either as c1o ra s c2 according
to the value of the boolean variable/formula β.DelayFor (denoted ref(d)/squiggleright
base) results in a new clock by delaying the reference clock reffordticks (or d
time units) of a baseclock. FilterBy (c/definesbase/triangledownsldu(v)) builds a new clock cby
ﬁltering the instants of a baseclock according to a binary word w=u(v) , where
uis the preﬁx and vis the period .“(v)” denotes the inﬁnite repetition of v. This
expression results in a clock cthat∀k∈N+,i ft h e kthbit in wis 1, then at
thekthtick of base,cticks.
Arelation limits the occurrences among diﬀerent events, which are deﬁned
based on runand history .A runcorresponds to an execution of the system
model where the clocks tick/progress. The history of a clock crepresents the
number of times the clock chas ticked prior to the current step.
Deﬁnition 1 (Run). ArunRconsists of a ﬁnite set of consecutive steps where
a set of clocks tick at each step i. The set of clocks ticking at step iis denoted as
R(i), i.e., for all i,0/lessorequalslanti/lessorequalslantn,R(i)∈R,w h e r e nis the number of steps of R.
Deﬁnition 2 (History). The history of clock cin a run Ris a function: Hc
R:
N→ N.Hc
R(i)indicates the number of times the clock chas ticked prior to step
iin run R, which is initialized as 0 at step 0. It is deﬁned as: (1) Hc
R(0) = 0 ;

--- Page 4 ---
Formal Veriﬁcation of Safety & Security Related Timing Constraints 213
(2)∀i∈N+,c/∈R(i)=⇒Hc
R(i+1 )= Hc
R(i);( 3 )∀i∈N+,c∈R(i)=⇒
Hc
R(i+1 )= Hc
R(i)+1 .
A probabilistic relation in Pr Ccsl is satisﬁed if and only if the probability of
the relation constraint being satisﬁed is greater than or equal to the probability
threshold p∈[0,1]. Given kruns={R1,...,R k}, the probabilistic subclock ,
coincidence ,exclusion and precedence in Pr Ccsl are deﬁned as follows:
Probabilistic Subclock: c1⊆pc2⇐⇒Pr[c1⊆c2]/greaterorequalslantp, where Pr[c1⊆c2] =
1
kk/summationtext
j=1{Rj|=c1⊆c2}, representing the ratio of runsthat satisﬁes the relation
out of k runs.A runRjsatisﬁes the subclock relation between c1a n d c2 “if
c1 ticks, c2 must tick” holds at every step iinRj, s.t., ( Rj|=c1⊆c2)⇐⇒(∀i
0/lessorequalslanti/lessorequalslantn, c1∈R(i)=⇒c2∈R(i)). “Rj|=c1⊆c2” returns 1 if Rjsatisﬁes
c1⊆c2, otherwise it returns 0.
Probabilistic Coincidence: c1≡pc2⇐⇒Pr[c1≡c2]/greaterorequalslantp, where Pr[c1≡c2] =
1
kk/summationtext
j=1{Rj|=c1≡c2}, which represents the ratio of runsthat satisﬁes the
coincidence relation out of k runs.Arun,Rjsatisﬁes the coincidence relation on
c1a n d c2 if the assertion holds: ∀i,0/lessorequalslanti/lessorequalslantn,(c1∈R(i)=⇒c2∈R(i))∧(c2∈
R(i)=⇒c1∈R(i)). In other words, the satisfaction of coincidence relation is
established when the two conditions “if c1 ticks, c2 must tick” and “if c2 ticks,
c1 must tick” hold at every step.
Probabilistic Exclusion: c1#pc2⇐⇒Pr[c1#c2]/greaterorequalslantp, where Pr[c1#c2] =
1
kk/summationtext
j=1{Rj|=c1#c2}, indicating the ratio of runsthat satisﬁes the exclusion
relation out of k runs.Arun,Rj, satisﬁes the exclusion relation on c1a n d c2i f
∀i,0/lessorequalslanti/lessorequalslantn,(c1∈R(i)=⇒c2/∈R(i))∧(c2∈R(i)=⇒c1/∈R(i)), i.e., for
every step, if c1 ticks, c2 must not tick and vice versa.
Probabilistic Precedence: c1≺pc2⇐⇒Pr[c1≺c2]/greaterorequalslantp, where Pr[c1≺c2] =
1
kk/summationtext
j=1{Rj|=c1≺c2}, which denotes the ratio of runsthat satisﬁes the precedence
relation out of k runs.ArunRjsatisﬁes the precedence relation if the condition
∀i,0/lessorequalslanti/lessorequalslantn,(Hc1
R(i)/greaterorequalslantHc2
R(i)) and ( Hc2
R(i)=Hc1
R(i)) =⇒(c2/∈R(i)) hold,
i.e., the history of c1 is greater than or equal to the history of c2, and c2 must
not tick when the history of the two clocks are equal.
2.2 UPPAAL-SMC
UPPAAL-SMC [ 31] performs the probabilistic analysis of properties by monitor-
ing simulations of the complex hybrid system in a given stochastic environment
and using results from the statistics to determine whether the system satisﬁes
the property with some degree of conﬁdence. Uppaal-SMC provides a number
of queries related to the stochastic interpretation of Timed Automata (STA)

--- Page 5 ---
214 L. Huang and E.-Y. Kang
[8] and they are as follows, where Nandbound indicate the number of sim-
ulations to be performed and the time bound on the simulations respectively:1.Probability Estimation estimates the probability of a requirement property
φbeing satisﬁed for a given STA model within the time bound: Pr[bound ]φ;
2.Hypothesis Testing checks if the probability of φis satisﬁed within a certain
probability P
0:Pr[bound ]φ≥P0;3 . Simulations :Uppaal-SMC runs multiple
simulations on the STA model and the k(state-based) properties/expressions
φ1,...,φ kare monitored and visualized along the simulations: simulate N [≤
bound ]{φ1,...,φ k}.
3 Running Example
A cooperative automotive system (CAS) [ 13] is adopted to illustrate our
approaches. CAS includes distributed and coordinated sensing, control, and actu-
ation over three vehicles (denoted as vi, where i∈{0,1,2}) which are running
in the same lane. As shown in Fig. 1, a lead vehicle ( v0) runs automatically by
recognizing traﬃc signs on the road. The following vehicle must set its desired
velocity identical to that of its immediate preceding vehicle. Vehicles shouldmaintain suﬃcient braking distance to avoid rear-end collision while remaining
close enough to guarantee communication quality. Vehicle movement relies on
availability of environmental information, e.g., traﬃc signs, obstacles, etc. Theposition of v
iis represented by Cartesian coordinate ( xi,y i), where xiandyiare
distances measured from the vehicle to the two ﬁxed perpendicular lines, i.e.,
x-axis and y-axis, respectively.
Fig. 1. Overview of Cooperative Automotive System
The cooperative driving of CAS requires prompt and secure information
transmission among vehicles. We adopt a roadside unit aided ( Raise )[33] com-
munication protocol in V anet to achieve the data transmission. Each vehicle
periodically broadcasts its own position and velocity to its immediate following
vehicle through wireless connection. The authentication of the identities of each
vehicle and veriﬁcation of messages sent by the vehicles is performed by RSU.For further details of Raise , refer to Sect. 4.1. The following S/S properties on
CAS are considered:
R1. The follower vehicle should not overtake its leading vehicle when the vehiclesrun at a positive direction of x-axis.
R2. When the lead vehicle detects a stop sign, all the three vehicles must stop
within a given time, e.g., 2000 ms.

--- Page 6 ---
Formal Veriﬁcation of Safety & Security Related Timing Constraints 215
R3. If the distance between a vehicle and its preceding vehicle is less than mini-
mum safety distance, the vehicle should decelerate within a certain time (200 ms).R4. If the distance between a vehicle and its preceding vehicle is greater than
the maximum safety distance (e.g., 100 m), the vehicle should accelerate within
a certain time, e.g., 300 ms.R5. When the lead vehicle starts to turn left (or turn right), the two follower
vehicles should ﬁnish turning and run in the same lane within a given time.
R6. Authenticity: If a vehicle receives a message, its preceding vehicle must havesent a corresponding message before, i.e., the protocol should be resistant to
message spooﬁng attack.
R7. Secrecy: Symmetric keys of vehicles should be kept conﬁdential to attackers.R8. Integrity: The content of messages must not be modiﬁed during transmission,
i.e., the protocol should be resistant to message falsiﬁcation attack.
R9. Freshness: The vehicles should not accept an “obsolete” message, namely, the
diﬀerence between the current time and the timestamp of the accepted message
should be less than the predeﬁned time threshold.R10. The symmetric key agreement (i.e., mutual authentication) process between
RSU and three vehicles should be completed within a certain time, e.g., 600 ms.
R11. A vehicle should send messages to its subsequent vehicle periodically witha period 200 ms and a jitter 100 ms.
Among the above S/S requirements, R1–R5 are safety [ 20] properties, which
specify that the system should not cause undesirable results on its environmentand aim at protecting human lives, health and assets from being damaged. R6-
R11 are security properties, which refer to the inability of the environment to
aﬀect the system in an undesirable way and aim to guarantee the conﬁdential-ity and integrity of transmitted information. The interdependencies among those
S/S properties are conditional dependencies [ 17], i.e., violations of security prop-
erties can lead to the violations on safety properties. The events associated withthose S/S properties can be interpreted as logical clocks in Pr Ccsl, which pro-
vides a way to express S/S properties in the logical time manner [ 16]. Therefore,
S/S properties can be interpreted as logical timing constraints, i.e., the temporal
and causality clock relations in Pr Ccsl.
The methodology for analysis of S/S related timing constraints in this paper
can be generalized in Fig. 2. First, on the basis of the existing behavioral model
of CAS described in [ 13], we enhance the CAS model by augmenting (paral-
lelly composing) it with models of Raise protocol and malicious attacks, result-
ing in a reﬁned CAS model regarding vehicular communication characteristics
and security-related adversary interference. Second, we specify S/S timing con-
straints (R1–R11) in Pr Ccsl and translate the Pr Ccsl speciﬁcations into corre-
sponding STA and probabilistic queries. Finally, we combine the model of CAS
and the STA of Pr Ccsl speciﬁcations, and perform formal veriﬁcation based on
the combined model using Uppaal-SMC .

--- Page 7 ---
216 L. Huang and E.-Y. Kang
Fig. 2. Methodology for analysis of S/S timing constraints
4 Modeling and Reﬁnement of CAS in UPPAAL-SMC
The behaviors of CAS are modeled as a network of stochastic timed automata
(NSTA) in Uppaal-SMC described in [ 13]. In this section, we reﬁne the CAS
model by adding it with the models of Raise protocol and security attacks.
4.1 Modeling of RAISE Protocol in UPPAAL-SMC
We present a simpliﬁed version of Raise protocol [ 33] and its Uppaal-SMC
model. The original Raise protocol is modiﬁed to facilitate the communica-
tion mechanism of CAS, i.e., each follower vehicle receives messages from its
immediate preceding vehicle and RSU. Furthermore, timing constraints are alsoappended to restrict the time duration of each step (e.g., encryption and decryp-
tion) during communication process. There are two phases in Raise protocol,
i.e., symmetric key agreement and information transmission .
1.Symmetric key agreement (SKA) is performed to obtain symmetric key k
i
for guaranteeing security of communication and generates pseudo identities ID i
of vehicles for covering their real identities. The shared symmetric key between
RSU andviiski=gab, where g,a,bare three positive random numbers. As
s h o w ni nF i g . 3,Encry (msg,k )(Decry (msg,k )) denotes the encryption (decryp-
tion) of message msgwith key k, where kcan be either a public key or symmetric
key.Sign(msg,k ) generates signature of msgwith a private key k.W eu s e PK i
to denote the public key of viandSK ito represent the corresponding private
key. “ ||” is the concatenation operation on messages.
Initially, virandomly picks ganda(step 1), encrypts “ g||a” and sends the
encrypted result ( mi)t oRSU (step 2). Upon receiving mi,RSU decrypts the
message (step 3). It then generates bandID i, signs and sends the signed message
(rm i)t ovi(step 4 and 5). viveriﬁes the rm i’s signature (step 6) and sends back
the signature of g||a||b||ID i(step 7). Finally, RSU veriﬁes the signature si(step
8). If all the steps are completed correctly, the key agreement process succeeds.
Fig. 3. Symmetric key agreement in Raise

--- Page 8 ---
Formal Veriﬁcation of Safety & Security Related Timing Constraints 217
2.Information transmission (IT) initiates after the SKA is completed. The
traﬃc information (i.e, brake, direction, position and speed) of viis integrated
into a message msg i=brake i||direction i||xi||yi||speed i. As presented in Fig. 4,
initially, vigenerates the message authentication code (MAC) of msg iwith the
symmetric key ki(generated in SKA). Then, viconcatenates the MAC code with
Fig. 4. Information transmission in Raise
msg iand sends it to RSU andvi+1(step 1). Upon receiving vm i,vi+1checks
the freshness of the message (step 2), i.e., if the time interval between the currenttime and the time when vm
iis sent is greater than the predeﬁned threshold,
vi+1drops vm i. At the same time, RSU checks the authenticity of vm i(step
3). If mac iis correct, RSU computes the hash code hiof message msg i(step
4). Afterwards, it encrypts hiand sends the encrypted result hm itovi+1(step
5).vi+1decrypts hm iand get the hash code h(step 6). Furthermore, to ensure
the consistency of the message, vi+1itself also computes the hash code of msg i
(step 7). It then veriﬁes whether the hash code calculated by itself is the same
as the decrypted hash code and decides to accept or reject msg i(step 8).
To model Raise inUppaal-SMC , interactions among vehicles and RSU (i.e.,
sending/receiving messages) are modeled by synchronization channels [31]a n d
global variables. The cryptographic operations in Raise refer to public and pri-
vate key encryption and decryption, i.e., a message encrypted by public key can
be decrypted using the corresponding private key, and vice versa. The automaton
ofcryptographic device [6] is adopted to model the encryption and decryption.
Figure 5presents the STA capturing behaviors of vehicle viand RSU in SKA.
startEn (resp. startDe )a n d ﬁnDe (resp. ﬁnEn) are channels for indicating the
starting and ﬁnishing of encryption (resp. decryption). The encryption/decryp-tion result is denoted en
res/deres. In the STA, names of locations indicate the
corresponding steps pictured in Fig. 3.
IT phase from v0tov1is established with the help of RSU, modeled as the
STA shown in Fig. 6(the transmission from v1tov2can be modeled similarly).
The behaviors of v0(sender), v1(receiver) and RSU in the IT phase are modeled
inITv0,ITv1andITRSUSTA, respectively.
The SKA (or IT) succeeds if each step of the SKA (IT) is completed correctly
within a given time interval, modeled by invariant “t ≤d” (the value of dvaries
in diﬀerent steps). If timeout occurs (i.e., “t ≥d”), faillocation will be activated
and the procedure is restarted from the initial step.

--- Page 9 ---
218 L. Huang and E.-Y. Kang
Fig. 5. Uppaal-SMC model of SKA
Fig. 6. Uppaal-SMC model of IT
4.2 Modeling of Attacks in UPPAAL-SMC
We present the modeling of three types of attacks commonly used in the secu-
rity analysis, i.e., message falsiﬁcation, message replaying and message spooﬁng
attacks [ 2]. The models of attacks are illustrated in Fig. 7, where the lsparame-
ter ( ls∈[0,100]) serves as an indicator of level of adversarial strength while qc
(qc∈[0,100]) is an indicator of the adversarial channel quality.
Message Falsiﬁcation Attack (MFA) aims to falsify messages transmitted
fromvitovi+1, which is modeled as MFASTA in Fig. 7. As described earlier, in
Raise , RSU veriﬁes the authenticity of messages by checking the correctness of
the MAC code of messages. To deceive the RSU on the validity of the modiﬁed
message and avoid exposing itself to RSU, MFA attempts to obtain the symmet-ric key and utilizes the key to compute the MAC code of the falsiﬁed message. At
s1state, MFAeavesdrops on rm
i(generated at step 5 in Fig. 3), which contains
the information for symmetric key generation (i.e., g,a,b). It tries to decrypt rm i
when receiving it via sendrm [i]?. The probability that the decryption can suc-
ceed is ls%, modeled by probabilistic choices [ 31] (dashed edges) with probability
weight asls
100and100−ls
100. If the decryption succeeds, MFA obtains the symmet-
ric key of vibased on the decrypted result ( getKey (deres)). Finally, it modiﬁes
the content of message using the key, and tries to send the modiﬁed message to
vi+1(sendvm [i]!). The probability that the message can be sent successfully is

--- Page 10 ---
Formal Veriﬁcation of Safety & Security Related Timing Constraints 219
(100-qc)%. In our setting, MFA modiﬁes the speed iﬁeld in the message into a
random value in [100, 120], and changes the direction as direction i=4 ,w h i c h
indicates that the viis running at the positive direction on y-axis.
Fig. 7. STA of attacks
Message Replaying Attack (MRA) targets to replay obsolete messages that
contain old information. The MRASTA represents an MRA that replays messages
sent by vi. Upon capturing a message (via sendvm [i]?), MRA stores the message
(m = vm[i] ) and tries to replay it at a later time (i.e., after 10s). The probability
that the attacker can replay the message successfully is (100- qc)%.
Message Spooﬁng Attack (MSA) impersonates a vehicle ( vi) in order to
inject fraudulent information into its subsequent vehicle ( vi+1). Similar to MFA,
MSASTA ﬁrst obtains the symmetric key of viby detecting and decrypting
rm i. It then fabricates a new message whose content is “ brake i=0, speed i=
0,d i r e c t i o n i=4,x i=0,y i= 10” (denoted “ encode(i) ”) and tries to send
the message to vi+1(sendvm [i]!), with the probability of the message being sent
successfully as (100- qc)%.
5 Representation of S/S Related Timing Constraints
in UPPAAL-SMC
To enable the formal veriﬁcation of S/S related timing constraints (given in
Sect.3), we ﬁrst investigate how to specify those constraints in Pr Ccsl. Then,
translation from Pr Ccsl speciﬁcations of the constraints into veriﬁable STA is
demonstrated. Furthermore, a tool ProTL that supports the automatic trans-
formation based on the proposed translation rules is introduced.
5.1 Speciﬁcations of S/S Related Timing Constraints in PrCCSL
The speciﬁcations of R1–R11 are presented in Table 1, where acis a clock that
always ticks while ncrepresents a clock that never ticks. R1 is speciﬁed as an
exclusion relation between xdir(the event that the vehicles are running at the
positive direction of x-axis) and ovtake (the event that the position of follower v1
on x-axis is greater than that of leader v0). Similarly, R7 and R9 can be speciﬁed
asexclusion relations .
In the speciﬁcation of R2, stopD is a clock generated by delaying stopSign
(the event that the leader vehicle detects a stop sign) for 2000 ms. vstop refers

--- Page 11 ---
220 L. Huang and E.-Y. Kang
Table 1. PrCCSL speciﬁcations of R1–R11
Req PrCCSL Speciﬁcation
R1 xdir/definesdir=1?ac:nc,ovtake /definesx1≥x0?ac:nc,xdir#0.95ovtake
R2 stopSign /definessign=5?signRec :nc,stopD /definesstopSign (2000) /squigglerightms,
vstop /precedesequal0.95stopD
R3 vU nsaf eDe /definesvUnsafe (200) /squigglerightms,vDec ≺0.95vU nsaf eDe
R4 vF arDisDe /definesvF arDis (300) /squigglerightms,startAcc ≺0.95vF arDisDe
R5 v0Tu r n D e /definesv0Tu r n (3000) /squigglerightms,fi n Tu rn /precedesequal0.95v0Tu r n D e
R6 msgRec ⊆0.95msgSent
R7 leakK #0.95ac
R8 validMsg /definesrMsg =sM sg ?msgRec :nc,msgRec ≡0.95validMsg
R9 oldM sg /definestime−ts > thre ?msgAcpt :nc,msgAcpt #0.95oldM sg
R10 startSKADe /definesstartSKA (600) /squigglerightms,fi n SKA ≺0.95startSKADe
R11 fc lk/definesmsgSent /triangledownsld01(1), sentDe 1/definesmsgSent (100) /squigglerightms,
sentDe 2/definesmsgSent (300) /squigglerightms,sentDe 1/precedesequal0.95fc lk,
fc lk/precedesequal0.95sentDe 2
to the event that three vehicles are completely stopped, which should occur no
later than stopD . Hence, R2 is expressed as a causality relation between vstop
and stopD . R3–R5 can be speciﬁed in a similar manner.
R6 (authenticity) is expressed as a subclock relation between msgRec and
msgSent , where msgRec (msgSent ) represents the event that a message is
received (sent) by the follower (leader) vehicle. R8 is speciﬁed as a coincidence
relation between msgRec and validMsg , where validMsg is a clock that ticks
with msgRec when the received message rMsg is identical with the sent message
sMsg (i.e., rMsg == sMsg ). For R10, startSKA (ﬁnSKA ) represents the starting
(completion) of SKA. startSKADe is a clock constructed by delaying startSKA
for 600 ms. R10 delimits that ﬁnSKA must occur before startSKADe . R11 states
that two consecutive occurrences of msgSent must has a interval of [ period −
jitter, period + jitter ]ms (i.e., [100, 300] ms). In the speciﬁcation of R11, fclkis
a clock generated by ﬁltering out the 1sttick of msgSent .sentDe1 and sentDe2
are two clocks generated by delaying msgSent for 100 ms and 300 ms. R11 can
be interpreted as: ∀i∈N+,t h eithtick of fclkshould occur later than the ith
tick of sentDe1 but prior to the ithtick of sentDe2 .
5.2 Translation of PrCCSL into STA
We present how the S/S related timing constraints speciﬁed in Pr Ccsl can
be transformed into STA and probabilistic queries in Uppaal-SMC .W eﬁ r s t
describe how clock tick and history (introduced in Sect. 2) can be represented in
Uppaal-SMC . Using the mapping, we then demonstrate that expressions and
relations in Pr Ccsl can be translated into STA and queries.

--- Page 12 ---
Formal Veriﬁcation of Safety & Security Related Timing Constraints 221
In the earlier work [ 14], the semantics of Pr Ccsl operators are translated into
STA based on discrete time, i.e., the continuous physical time is discretized intoa set of equalized steps. As a result, two clock instants are still considered coinci-
dent even if they are one time step apart. To alleviate this restriction and enable
the representation of Pr Ccsl that pertains to continuous real-time semantics,
the mapping patterns are reﬁned: two clock instants are coinstantaneous only if
the time diﬀerence between them is insigniﬁcant, i.e., the time diﬀerence between
them is less than a positive inﬁnitesimal value e, e.g., e= 0.000001.
Fig. 8. HistoryIn Pr Ccsl, a logical clock represents an event and the
instants of the clock correspond to the occurrences of the
event. A logical clock cis represented as a synchronization
channel c!i n Uppaal-SMC . The history of cis modeled
as the STA shown in Fig. 8: whenever coccurs ( c?), the
value of its history is increased by 1 (i.e., h++).
Based on the mapping patterns of tick and history, the Pr Ccsl expressions
(including ITE,DelayFor and filterBy ), as well as relations (including subclock ,
coincidence ,exclusion and precedence ), can be represented as STA and queries
shown in Fig. 9.
The STA of expressions trigger the ticks of the new clock (denoted res!)
based on the occurrences of existed clocks. To represent relations , observer STA
that capture the semantics of standard subclock ,coincidence ,exclusion and
precedence relations are constructed. Each observer STA contains a “ fail”l o c a -
tion (see Fig. 9), which indicates the violation of the corresponding relation .
Recall the deﬁnition of Pr Ccsl in Sect. 2, the probability of a relation being
satisﬁed is interpreted as a ratio of runs that satisﬁes the relation among all
runs. It is speciﬁed as Hypothesis Testing queries in Uppaal-SMC ,H0:m
k/greaterorequalslantp
against H1:m
k<p, where mis the number of runs satisfying the given relation
out of all kruns. As a result, the probabilistic relations are interpreted as the
query (see Fig. 9):Pr[bound ]([ ]¬STA.fail )≥p, which means that the proba-
bility of the “ fail” location of the observer STA never being reached should be
greater than or equal to p. The STA of expressions and relations are composed to
the system NSTA in parallel. Then, the probabilistic analysis is performed over
the composite NSTA that enables us to verify the S/S related timing constraintsover the entire system using Uppaal-SMC .
Tool support: Manual translation of Pr Ccsl speciﬁcations into Uppaal mod-
els for veriﬁcation can be time-consuming and error-prone. To improve the accu-racy and eﬃciency of translation, we implement a tool ProTL (Probabilistic-
Ccsl TransLator) [ 26] that provides a push-button transformation from Pr Ccsl
speciﬁcations into corresponding STA & queries. Furthermore, veriﬁcation andsimulation support is provided in ProTL by employing the Uppaal-SMC as the
backend analysis engine. ProTL encompasses the following features: (1) An edi-
tor for editing Pr Ccsl speciﬁcation of requirements (stored as “.txt” ﬁles); (2)
Automated transformation of Pr Ccsl speciﬁcations into Uppaal-SMC STA;
(3) Integration of the STA and the system behavioral model (imported by users);(4) A conﬁguration palette for setting parameters (e.g., time bound of simula-

--- Page 13 ---
222 L. Huang and E.-Y. Kang
Fig. 9. STA of Pr Ccsl operators
tion, number of simulations) used for veriﬁcation and simulation; (5) Automatic
generation of probabilistic queries (introduced in Sect. 2) based on user-speciﬁed
parameters; (6) Capability of performing veriﬁcation and simulation on Pr Ccsl
speciﬁcations against the integrated model and generated queries.
The GUI of ProTL is implemented by applying the Python package TKIN-
TER [ 27]. The implementation of Translator is achieved by the ANother Tool
for Language Recognition (ANTLR) [ 24], a parser generator that can constructs
lexical parsers for a language by analyzing user-deﬁned syntax of the language.
We speciﬁed the syntax of Pr Ccsl in Backus-Naur Form (BNF) and apply
ANTLR to generate a parser that can analyze and recognize encodings in the
format of Pr Ccsl.T h e parser reads the Pr Ccsl speciﬁcations and generates
abstract syntax trees (AST), i.e., an intermediate form that has tree structures.

--- Page 14 ---
Formal Veriﬁcation of Safety & Security Related Timing Constraints 223
By traversing AST, the information (i.e., operators and parameters) of Pr Ccsl
can be extracted and utilized for generation of corresponding STA.
6 Experiment
To identify vulnerabilities of system to external malicious attackers, we combinethe reﬁned CAS system model (including the models of Raise protocol) with
models of three diﬀerent attackers. Formal veriﬁcation on S/S related timing
constraints (R1–R11) for the combined model is performed by Uppaal-SMC .
The combined CAS model contains the stochastic behaviors in terms of theunpredictable environments (e.g., the traﬃc signs are randomly recognized by the
leader vehicle of CAS and the probability of each sign type occurring is equally
set as 16.7%), as well as the indeterministic behaviors modeled by weightedprobability choices in the STA of attacks (see Fig. 7). In our setting, lsandqc
are conﬁgured as 10 and 90, respectively. To estimate the probability of an attack
being launched on CAS successfully, Probability Estimation query is applied to
check the probability that the “ attack ” location in each attack STA is reachable
from the system NSTA. The time bound of the veriﬁcation is set as 10000.The probability of message falsiﬁcation, message replaying and message spooﬁng
attack being successfully completed by the corresponding attacker is within the
range of [0.109, 0.209], [0.563, 0.663] and [0.143, 0.243], respectively.
In our experiments, S/S related timing constraints are speciﬁed in Pr Ccsl
and transformed into STA using ProTL. Each constraint is speciﬁed as a Pr Ccsl
relation (as described in Sect. 5.1) whose probability threshold is 95%. The veriﬁ-
cation results are demonstrated in Table 2, in which “√” denotes the correspond-
ing requirement is satisﬁed while “ ×” indicates the violation of the requirement:
Under the message replaying attack, all the S/S timing constraints are estab-lished as valid with 95% level of conﬁdence. In the message falsiﬁcation attack,
the secrecy and integrity properties (R7 and R8), as well as three safety proper-
ties (R3–R5), are violated. The MSA damages the authenticity (R6) and secrecy(R7) of communication, and leads to the violations of four safety properties, i.e.,
R1 and R3–R5.
Table 2. Veriﬁcation results of timing constraints under diﬀerent attacks
Attacks R1R2R3R4R5R6R7R8R9R10R11Average Time Mem (Mb)
Message Falsiﬁcation√√×××√××√√√40.20 57.94
Message Replaying√√√√√√√√√√√68.33 61.49
Message Spooﬁng ×√×××××√√√√58.11 40.23
The experiment results indicate the severity of impacts on safety and security
caused by the demonstrated attacks on CAS: No requirement is violated under
MRA scenario while the MSA causes the violations of most safety properties.

--- Page 15 ---
224 L. Huang and E.-Y. Kang
When CAS is attached with the STA of MSA or MFA, the secrecy of symmetric
key is violated. With the obtained symmetric key, MSA can masquerade messageas legitimate vehicles and MFA is able to tamper the content of messages without
being detected, leading to the violations of authenticity (R6) and integrity (R7)
respectively. To explore how the malicious attackers can inﬂuence the safety ofsystem, we conduct simulation by using Simulations queries. The simulation
results in Fig. 10illustrate how an MSA drives the system to undesirable states.
(a) R1 (b) R4
Fig. 10. Simulation results of R1 and R4: (a) At Time =2345, the attack occurs (indi-
cated by the rising edge of the red line). MSA sends the fabricated position information
ofV0toV1(the value of recxbecomes 0), which tricks V1to think that the distance
between V0and V1exceeds the maximum limit. V1keeps increasing its speed ( speed1)
and thus leading to the collision (indicated by x0== x1)a t Time =3815, which vio-
lates R1. (b) When an attack takes place at Time =2496 (indicated by the rising edge
of the blue line), V1receives the message from the attacker and is deluded into believing
that the speed of V0is 0. Therefore, V1keeps decreasing its speed even if the distance
between V0and V1becomes greater than 100 m, which violates R4. (Color ﬁgure online)
7 Related Work
Formal veriﬁcation of (non)-functional properties of automotive systems con-
taining stochastic behaviors were investigated in several works [ 13–15]. In these
works, systems are by default resilient to security threats and the safety prop-
erties are analyzed under no malicious attack scenarios, which is inadequate for
design of automotive systems interconnected via wireless communications. Com-bined analysis of safety and security (S/S) properties for interconnected cyber
physical systems have been addressed in earlier works [ 1,21,29], which are how-
ever, limited to theoretical frameworks and high-level descriptions of S/S prop-erties without the support for formal veriﬁcation. Pedroza et al. [ 25]p r o p o s e d
a SysML based environment called AVATAR for the formal veriﬁcation of S/S
properties, which enables assessment of the impacts of cyber-security threats on

--- Page 16 ---
Formal Veriﬁcation of Safety & Security Related Timing Constraints 225
functional safety. Wardell et al. [ 32] proposed an approach for identifying secu-
rity vulnerabilities of industrial control systems by modeling malicious attacks asPROMELA models amenable to formal veriﬁcation. However, those approaches
lack precise probabilistic annotations specifying stochastic properties regarding
to S/S aspects. Kumar et al. [ 18] introduced the attack-fault trees formalism for
descriptions of attack scenarios and conducted formal analysis by using Uppaal-
SMC to obtain quantitative estimation on impacts of system failures or security
threats. On the other hand, our work is based on the probabilistic extension ofS/S related timing constraints with the focus on probabilistic veriﬁcation of the
extended constraints.
8 Conclusion
This paper presents a model-based approach for probabilistic formal analysis of
safety and security (S/S) related timing constraints for interconnected automo-tive system in East-adl at the early design phase. The behavioral model of
automotive system in Uppaal-SMC is reﬁned by adding the models of vehic-
ular communication protocol and malicious attacks, which facilitates to exploitthe impacts of adversary environment on S/S of the system. Timing constraints
are speciﬁed in Pr Ccsl and translated into stochastic timed automata (STA)
amenable to formal veriﬁcation using Uppaal-SMC . A set of translation rules
from Pr Ccsl to STA, as well as the corresponding tool support for automating
the translation are provided. We demonstrate our approach by performing formalveriﬁcation on a cooperative automotive system (CAS) case study. Although, we
have shown the one-to-one mapping patterns from a subset of Pr Ccsl operators
to STA for conducting formal veriﬁcation on timing constraints using Uppaal-
SMC, as ongoing work, systematic and formal translation techniques covering a
full set of Pr Ccsl constraints are further studied. Furthermore, new features
of ProTL with respect to analysis of Uppaal-SMC models involving wider
range of variable/query types (e.g., urgent channels ,bounded integers ) are further
developed.
Acknowledgment. This work is supported by the EASY project funded by NSFC,
a collaborative research between Sun Yat-Sen University and University of Southern
Denmark.
References
1. Abdo, H., Kaouk, M., Flaus, J.M., Masse, F.: A safety/security risk analysis app-
roach of industrial control systems: a cyber bowtie-combining new version of attacktree with bowtie analysis. Comput. Secur. 72, 175–195 (2018)
2. Amoozadeh, M., et al.: Security vulnerabilities of connected vehicle streams and
their impact on cooperative driving. IEEE Commun. Mag. 53(6), 126–132 (2015)
3. Andr´ e, C.: Syntax and semantics of the clock constraint speciﬁcation language
(CCSL). Ph.D. thesis, Inria (2009)

--- Page 17 ---
226 L. Huang and E.-Y. Kang
4. Bernat, G., Burns, A., Llamosi, A.: Weakly hard real-time systems. Trans. Comput.
50(4), 308–321 (2001)
5. Blom, H., et al.: TIMMO-2-USE timing model, tools, algorithms, languages,
methodology, use cases. Technical report, TIMMO-2-USE (2012)
6. Corin, R., Etalle, S., Hartel, P.H., Mader, A.: Timed model checking of security pro-
tocols. In: ACM Workshop on Formal Methods in Security Engineering (FMSE),
pp. 23–32. ACM (2004)
7. David, A., et al.: Statistical model checking for stochastic hybrid systems. In:
Hybrid Systems and Biology (HSB), pp. 122–136. EPTCS (2012)
8. David, A., Larsen, K.G., Legay, A., Mikuˇ cionis, M., Poulsen, D.B.: UPPAAL-SMC
tutorial. Int. J. Softw. Tools Technol. Transf. 17(4), 397–415 (2015)
9. EAST-ADL: EAST-ADL speciﬁcation v2.1.9. Technical report, MAENAD (2011).
https://www.maenad.eu/public/EAST-ADL-Speciﬁcation M2.1.9.1.pdf
10. Engoulou, R.G., Bella¨ ıche, M., Pierre, S., Quintero, A.: VANET security surveys.
Comput. Commun. 44, 1–13 (2014)
11. IEC 61508: Functional safety of electrical electronic programmable electronic safety
related systems (2010)
12. ISO 26262–6: Road vehicles functional safety part 6. Product development at the
software level (2011)
13. Kang, E.Y., Huang, L., Mu, D.: Formal veriﬁcation of energy and timed require-
ments for a cooperative automotive system. In: ACM/SIGAPP Symposium On
Applied Computing (SAC), pp. 1492–1499. ACM (2018)
14. Kang, E.-Y., Mu, D., Huang, L.: Probabilistic veriﬁcation of timing constraints in
automotive systems using UPPAAL-SMC. In: Furia, C.A., Winter, K. (eds.) IFM2018. LNCS, vol. 11023, pp. 236–254. Springer, Cham (2018). https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-3-319-98938-9
14
15. Kang, E.Y., Mu, D., Huang, L., Lan, Q.: Veriﬁcation and validation of a cyber-
physical system in the automotive domain. In: IEEE International Conference on
Software Quality, Reliability and Security Companion (QRS), pp. 326–333. IEEE(2017)
16. Khan, A.M., Mallet, F., Rashid, M.: Combining SysML and MARTE/CCSL to
model complex electronic systems. In: Information Systems Engineering (ICISE),
pp. 12–17. IEEE (2016)
17. Kriaa, S., Pietre-Cambacedes, L., Bouissou, M., Halgand, Y.: A survey of
approaches combining safety and security for industrial control systems. Reliab.
Eng. Syst. Saf. 139, 156–178 (2015)
18. Kumar, R., Stoelinga, M.: Quantitative security and safety analysis with attack-
fault trees. In: High Assurance Systems Engineering (HASE), pp. 25–32. IEEE(2017)
19. Legay, A., Viswanathan, M.: Statistical model checking: challenges and perspec-
tives. Int. J. Softw. Tools Technol. Transf. 17(4), 369–376 (2015)
20. Line, M.B., Nordland, O., Røstad, L., Tøndel, I.A.: Safety vs. Security. In: Inter-
national Conference on Probabilistic Safety Assessment and Management (PSAM)
(2006)
21. Macher, G., H¨ oller, A., Sporer, H., Armengaud, E., Kreiner, C.: A combined safety-
hazards and security-threat analysis method for automotive systems. In: Koorn-
neef, F., van Gulijk, C. (eds.) SAFECOMP 2015. LNCS, vol. 9338, pp. 237–250.Springer, Cham (2015). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-24249-1
21
22. MAENAD (2011). http://www.maenad.eu/
23. Mallet, F., De Simone, R.: Correctness issues on MARTE/CCSL constraints. Sci.
Comput. Program. 106, 78–92 (2015)

--- Page 18 ---
Formal Veriﬁcation of Safety & Security Related Timing Constraints 227
24. Parr, T.: The deﬁnitive ANTLR 4 reference. Pragmatic Bookshelf (2013)
25. Pedroza, G., Apvrille, L., Knorreck, D.: Avatar: a SysML environment for the
formal veriﬁcation of safety and security properties. In: New Technologies of Dis-tributed Systems (NOTERE), pp. 1–10. IEEE (2011)
26. ProTL. https://sites.google.com/view/protl
27. Tkinter: Python interface to Tcl/Tk. https://docs.python.org/3/library/tkinter.
html
28. Raya, M., Hubaux, J.P.: Securing vehicular Ad Hoc networks. J. Comput. Secur.
15(1), 39–68 (2007)
29. Sabaliauskaite, G., Mathur, A.P.: Aligning cyber-physical system safety and secu-
rity. In: Cardin, M.A., Krob, D., Lui, P., Tan, Y., Wood, K. (eds.) Complex SystemsDesign & Management Asia, pp. 41–53. Springer, Cham (2015). https://doi.org/
10.1007/978-3-319-12544-2
4
30. Speciﬁcation, O.: UML proﬁle for MARTE: modeling and analysis of real-time
embedded systems. Technical report, Object Management Group (2011)
31. UPPAAL-SMC. http://people.cs.aau.dk/ ∼adavid/smc/
32. Wardell, D.C., Mills, R.F., Peterson, G.L., Oxley, M.E.: A method for revealing and
addressing security vulnerabilities in cyber-physical systems by modeling malicious
agent interactions with formal veriﬁcation. Proc. Comput. Sci. 95, 24–31 (2016)
33. Zhang, C., Lin, X., Lu, R., Ho, P.H., Shen, X.: An eﬃcient message authentication
scheme for vehicular communications. IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. 57(6), 3357–3368
(2008)
Open Access This chapter is licensed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ),
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium
or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and thesource, provide a link to the Creative Commons license and indicate if changes were
made.
The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in the chapter’s
Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If
material is not included in the chapter’s Creative Commons license and your intendeduse is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
