--- Page 1 ---
Safe and Time-Optimal Control
for Railway Games
Shyam Lal Karra, Kim Guldstrand Larsen, Florian Lorber, and Ji r  Srba
Department of Computer Science, Aalborg University,
Selma Lagerl ofs Vej 300, 9220 Aalborg East, Denmark
Abstract. Railway scheduling is a complex and safety critical problem
that has recently attracted attention in the formal verication commu-
nity. We provide a formal model of railway scheduling as a stochastic
timed game and using the tool Uppaal Stratego , we synthesise the
most permissive control strategy for operating the lights and points at
the railway scenario such that we guarantee system's safety (avoidance of
train collisions). Among all such safe strategies, we then select (with the
help of reinforcement learning) a concrete strategy that minimizes the
time needed to move all trains to their target locations. This optimizes
the speed and capacity of a railway system and advances the current
state-of-the-art where the optimality criteria were not considered yet.
We successfully demonstrate our approach on the models of two Dan-
ish railway stations, and discuss the applicability and scalability of our
approach.
1 Introduction
Railway networks are complex safety critical systems where one has to guaran-
tee safety despite the unpredictable behaviour of external factors inuencing the
system operation. This unpredictable behaviour arises from the fact that the du-
rations taken by trains to change positions in the railway network are inuenced
by human operators as well as other factors like weather conditions etc. In ad-
dition to that, trains can move concurrently on multiple independent tracks and
it becomes hard to manually control the lights and points (switches) in order to
avoid trains collisions or derailment. This becomes particularly important, once
we try to increase the throughput in the railway network and minimize the train
travel times, as this requires more concurrency where dangerous situations can
be easily overlooked by a human operator. There is hence a clear demand on the
employment of automatic methods that will assist with a safe and time-optimal
operation of a railway network, and this is the main focus of our paper.
We shall rst introduce our railway scheduling problem by an example. An
instance of the problem is given in Figure 1 and consists of two trains , each
travelling in a given (and xed) direction. At any moment, each train is placed
on a clearly identied part of a track called section . In our example, the train t0
is located at the section s1and travels from the left end-point of the section to its
right end-point, assuming that the duration of such a move has some predened

--- Page 2 ---
Fig. 1. A railway network with two trains t0andt1, four points p0,p1,p2andp3, nine
sections s0: : : s 8and three lights l0,l1andl2.
probabilistic distribution with the expected value of 2 time units. Similarly, the
traint1starts at the right end-point of section s3and moves in the right-to-
left direction with the expected travel time of 4 time units to cross section s3.
Sections are connected with points (switches), like the point p0that depending
on its mode can connect the section s3with either the section s7as depicted in
our gure, or with the section s0. Ends of sections can be guarded by lights that
signal to the trains whether they are allowed to leave a given section and move
to the connected section (depending on the mode of the points). We assume that
passing a point is instantenious and that trains follow the light signals (i.e. never
pass a light that is red).
Therailway scheduling problem (also known as dynamic routing problem) is
given by a track layout together with the initial positions of trains in the network
and the target positions (sections) for each train. The role of the controller is to
operate the lights and points such that the trains move to their target positions
in a safe way (without the possibility of a collision, under the assumption that
they respect the lights), while at the same time optimizing the time it takes
before all trains arrive to their target sections.
Returning to our example, let us assume that the target section for the train
t0iss6and that the trains t1aims to reach s0. Note that we can change the points
so that both trains simply drive straightforward and reach the target sections
without the risk of a crash. However, the controller has an alternative choice
for the train t0to navigate it through the sections s7,s3ands8instead, where
the expected arrival time is shorter than passing through the section s4. Now,
the optimal strategy depends on the fact how fast the train t1leaves the section
s3. If it does so early (depending on the respective stochastic distribution), then
it is worth for the controller to direct the train t0along the faster route that
includes the section s3, otherwise (in case t1is for some reason delayed) it is
more time-optimal to guide the train t0in the straight line.
In our work, we propose a method to construct such smart/adaptive con-
trollers that guarantee both safety and time optimal behaviour. We propose a
2

--- Page 3 ---
two-step controller synthesis procedure, which in the rst step ensures safety, and
in the second step optimises the controller to reduce the time needed for all trains
to reach their goals. To achieve this, we rst introduce a formal model of railway
games and provide its encoding to the tool Uppaal Stratego [6].Uppaal
Stratego rst computes the most permissive strategy for the given railway
game represented as a two-player game. Here the controller decides the modes
of points and light congurations, while the opponent (environment) moves the
trains around in the network, respecting the lights guarding each section. The
speed of the trains in this game is completely unconstrained, meaning that they
may stay in a section forever or move immediately to the other end of the sec-
tion without any time contraints. This guarantees that the synthetised strategy
is safe, irrelevant of the speed of the trains (including the possibility that a
train breaks and does not move at all). The tool Uppaal Stratego is able
to synthesise the most permissive strategy that includes allsafe operations of
the railway network. In the second step, we add stochastic behaviour to the
trains so that they take a random amount of time for crossing a section which
is chosen according to the rates for a given probabilistic distribution associated
with the train and the concrete section in the network. From all safe strategies,
we then (again using Uppaal Stratego ) select the fastest one by employing
reinforcement learning. This provides us with the control strategy that is (near)
time-optimal and provably safe.
Our main contributions can be summarized as follows:
{We generalize previous attempts to solve the train scheduling problem by
allowing for concurrent moves of trains and we extend the existing railway
models with stochastic information about the expected times for trains to
travel along a section.
{We provide both the untimed and timed semantics for a railway network
that allows us to argue about safety and time-optimality and we show their
encoding in the model of stochastic timed automata.
{We explain the application of the tool Uppaal Stratego for solving net-
work scheduling problems and by means of two existing railway stations
in Aalborg and Lyngy, we prove that the tool is able to compute safe and
near-optimal control strategies.
Related work. Railway safety was studied e.g. in [14,16,3,5] with a focus on model
checking of safety properties in railway networks, however, these approaches do
not consider controller synthesis.
The work in [12] considers controller synthesis problem for the railway schedul-
ing problem and the safety condition by translating it to strictly alternating two-
player game and provides a number of abstractions in order to reduce the state
space of the underlying game graph. In [10] this approach has been explored with
the use of on-the-y controller synthesis techniques, however, these approaches
do not allow for concurrent train moves in order to reduce the complexity of
the problem. The controller synthesis problem for railway network safety and
deadlock avoidance was addressed in [9] by its modelling in Petri nets. In [11]
3

--- Page 4 ---
automatic generation and verication of formal safety conditions from an inter-
locking tables of a relay interlocking system are discussed. However, none of these
approaches consider the timing aspects in combination with controller synthesis
and to the best of our knowledge, our work is the rst one that synthetizes a
schedule that is both safe and time-optimal at the same time.
Uppaal Stratego has been used in several case studies, where rst a safe
strategy is generated, and then an optimization step is performed. Examples
include adaptive cruise control [13] and the intelligent control of trac lights [8].
While the approach for the controller synthesis used in this paper is similar to
these works, it is applied to a completely new area, which requires an ecient
modeling of problem and nontrivial eort in order to boost the performance of
the tool, including the use of a new learning method recently implemented in
Uppaal Stratego .
2 Formal Denition of Railway Games
We rst introduce a game graph that is used to give the semantics to our railway
scheduling problem. A game graph is a tupleG=hV;;;v0;Bad;Goali
whereVis a nite set of vertices, VVis the set of controller transitions,
VVis the set of environmental transitions, v02Vis the initial vertex,
BadVis the set of bad vertices where controller loses and GoalVis the
set of vertices controller aims to eventually reach.
Given a game graph G, arunis a nite or innite sequence =hv0;v1;v2;:::i
of vertices such that either vivi+1orvivi+1for every relevant i. A run
is amaximal run if it is either innite or =hv0:::vkiand there is no vk+1
such thatvkvk+1orvkvk+1. The set of all maximal runs starting at the
vertexv0is denoted by MaxRuns (v0).
A controller strategy:V ,!Vis a partial function such that for every
v2Vwe havev(v) or(v) is undened in case that vhas no outgoing
controllable transitions. Given a strategy , the outcome of the game under 
from the vertex v0is dened as the set of all possible maximal runs that follow
the strategy , formally
Outcome(v0) =
fhv0;v1;:::i2MaxRuns (v0)jvivi+1or(vi) =vi+1for allig:
A run=hv0;v1;:::iis called safe if there is no isuch thatvi2Bad.
A strategy is asafe strategy if all the runs from Outcome(v0) are safe. A
strategyis awinning strategy if it is safe and for every run =hv0;v1:::i2
Outcome(v0) there is an isuch thatvi2Goal.
2.1 Railway Topology
We are now ready to formalise the railway topology. A railway topology is a
tupleR= (S;P;L;;E ) whereS=fs0;s1:::smg,P=fp0;p1:::prgand
L=fl0;l1;l2:::ltgare the sets of sections, points and lights, respectively.
4

--- Page 5 ---
Each section s2Shas two ends denoted by s.left ands.right and each point
phas three ends p.up, p.down, p.main . We shall use the notation Sends=
fs.left, s.rightjs2SgandPends=fp.up, p.down, p.main jp2Pg. The
injective function :L!Sendsassigns each light to a section. A light at a
left (right) end of a section can only control a train moving on that section in
the direction right to left (left to right). Finally, the connectivity of the sec-
tions and points is represented by undirected edges Esuch thatE[V]2where
V=Pends[Sendsand [V]2=fZVjjZj= 2g) satisfying
{ife16=e2thene1\e2=;for alle1;e22E,
{fs.left,s.rightg=2Efor each section s2S, and
{for eachp:z2Pendsthere is an s:x2Sendssuch thatfp:z;s:xg2E.
In other words, each end can connect to at most one other end, we allow point
ends to connect only to section ends and section-loops as well as isolated point
ends are not allowed.
2.2 Untimed Semantics of Railway Games
Consider a railway topology R= (S;P;L;;E ). We shall dene its associated
game graph for a given number of trains T=ft0;t1:::tk 1g. The vertices of
the game graph consist of congurations where each train is located at a section
end and has a direction in which it is moving. For each point p2P, a mode
up/down is associated with it in the conguration, indicated by p.mode . Finally,
for each light l2L, there is a colour red/green associated with it in a given
conguration. The underlying semantics is given as a game graph GR=hC;;
;c0;Bad;Goalidened in the rest of this section.
Congurations. The set of congurations is C(Sendsfleft;rightg)T
fup, downgPfred, greengLso that a conguration c2Cis a triple of three
functions of the form ( pos;mod;col) where
{pos:T!Sendsfleft;rightgstores the location and direction of each
traint2T. For each train t2T,pos(t) is an ordered pair of the form
(pos1(t);pos2(t)) where pos1(t) indicates the section end in which tis cur-
rently located and pos2(t) indicates the train direction,
{mod:P!fup;downgrecords the mode of each point, and
{col:L!fred;greengremembers the current lights setting.
We assume a given initial conguration c0with the initial placement of all
trains and a xed color lights and modes of points, as well as a set of goal
congurations Goal where all trains are in their target sections and the posi-
tions of points and light colors can be arbitrary. The set Bad contains all con-
gurations where two trains are located on the same sections, formally Bad =
f(pos;mod;col)2Cjthere ist;t02Twheret6=t0;pos1(t) =s:xandpos1(t0) =
s:yfor some x,y2fleft,rightgg:
Transitions. We shall rst dene a function nextSec : 
Sends(P!
fup;downg)
!Sendsthat, given the modes of points, determines what are
the neighbouring sections in the network (we assume that x,y2fleft,rightgand
z2fmain;up;downg):
5

--- Page 6 ---
{nextSec (s:x;mod) =s0:yiffs:x;s0:yg2E
{nextSec (s:x;mod) =s0:yif there exists a p2Psuch thatfs:x;p:zg2Eand
z=main andmod(p) =upsuch thatfp:up;s0:yg2E, or
z=main andmod(p) =down such thatfp:down;s0:yg2E, or
z=down orz=upsuch thatfp:main;s0:yg2E
{nextSec (s:x;mod) =s:xotherwise.
Letc= (pos;mod;col) be a conguration from C. We shall also dene a
set of movable trains movableTrains (pos;col)Tthat, given the position of
trains and colours of all lights, returns the set of all trains (if any) that are
at the end of their sections and their corresponding lights (if any) are green
in colour. Formally, movableTrains (pos;col) =ft2Tjpos(t) = ( s.x, x ) where
x2fleft,rightgandcol(l) =green for alll2Lsuch that(l) =s:xg.
We are now ready to dene the controllable and environmental transitions
in the graph.
Controllable Transitions : These are transitions modelling the moves made by
the controller in the game. Whenever there is a train at the end of a section,
the controller can change the modes of points and the colours of lights, with the
restriction that if a train is moving in a section where there is green light, it is
not allowed to suddenly change it to red (as instanteniously stopping a moving
train is not a realistic behaviour). The controller move is nished by placing all
movable trains to the connected sections, unless there is a train that can crash
to another train, in which case this train moves alone and the crash is detected
by the fact that the target conguration belongs to the set Bad. Formally, we
write ( pos;mod;col)(pos0;mod0;col0) if
{there exists a t2Tsuch that pos(t) = (s:x;x ) wherex2fleft,rightg,
{for everyt2Twhere pos(t) = (s:y;x ) forx;y2fleft,rightgif for every light
l2Lwhere(l) =s:xholds col(l) =green then col0(l) =green ,
{and moreover
if there ist2movableTrains (pos;col0) s.t. nextSec (pos1(t);mod0) =pos(t0)
for somet02Trftgthen pos0(t) =
nextSec 
pos1(t);mod0
;pos2(t)
and for every other t02Trftgwe have pos0(t0) =pos(t0),
otherwise pos0(t) =
nextSec 
pos1(t);mod0
;pos2(t)
for every
t2movableTrains (pos;col0) and pos0(t0) =pos(t0) for every other t0.
Environmental Transitions : Finally, we can dene the transitions controlled
by the environment modelling the uncertainty whether the trains move along the
sections and what set of trains move concurrently. We dene ( pos;mod;col)
(pos0;mod;col) if
{movableTrains (pos;col) =;,
{for everyt2Teither pos0(t) =pos(t), or pos0(t) = ( s.y,y) provided that
pos(t) = ( s.x,y) forx;y2fleft,rightg), and
{pos6=pos0.
6

--- Page 7 ---
The rst condition guarantees that if there are some movable trains at the end
of the sections, then they move to their neighbouring sections (by means of con-
trollable transitions). The second condition gives the environment the freedom
to decide any subset of trains that (concurrently) arrive at the ends of their
respective sections and the last conditions guarantees that at least one train
moves in order to guarantee progress (we want to avoid environmental self-loops
as the game will not have any winning strategy in this case). Notice that the
environment cannot inuence the modes of points nor the setting of lights.
Example 1. The railway network shown in Figure 1 is in the initial conguration
c0= (pos;mod;col) where pos(t0) = (s1:left;right),pos(t1) = (s3:right;left), and
mod(p0) =mod(p1) =up,mod(p2) =mod(p3) =down , and say that col(l0) =
col(l1) =col(l2) =red. There are no controllable transitions in c0as no trains
are at the ends of the sections, i.e., movableTrains (pos;col) =;. However, the
environment can move either the train t0froms1:lefttos1:right or the train
t1froms3:right tos3:left, or both of them at the same time. Suppose it is the
second case and the train t1arrives ats3:left. Now the controller can swap the
mode ofp0and set the light l2to green, which implies that the train t1moves
tos0:right . Now it is the environmental turn and say that the train t0arrives
tos1:right . The controller can safely set the light l1to green and without any
further control, also the train t0eventually arrives to its target section s6.
2.3 Stochastic Semantics for Railway Games
In the railway game provided in the previous section, the movement of trains
along sections has been purely discrete with no information about the timing
of these movements. In this section we rene this view by assuming that the
time it takes a train tto pass a section sis given by a distribution t;s. Here
we shall assume that the passage-time distributions are given by exponential
distributions. Choosing exponential distributions simplies the technical presen-
tation due to the memoryless property of exponential distributions, however, in
Uppaal Stratego there is a support for several other distributions as well as
for the possibility to make the distribution parameters depend on weather con-
ditions and other external factors (see [7]). However, assuming only knowledge
about the expected passage-time, exponential distribution is anyway the most
appropriate choice in terms of entropy.
A stochastic railway game for a set of trains Tis a tuple ( S;P;L;;E;R ),
where (S;P;L;;E ) is a railway game and R:TS!R0provides for
each traint2Tand each section Sthe rateR(t;s) of an exponential distribu-
tion being the passage-time distribution t;s. We recall that for an exponential
distribution with rate r, the density of passage-time disrexp rd, and the prob-
ability that the passage-time will be less than dis 1 exp rd. Also, the expected
passage-time is1
r. Finally, given two trains t1andt2with passage-time rates r1
andr2, the probability that t1completes its passage rst isr1
r1+r2.
In the full railway game, various trains (all the ones that are not stopped by
a red light at the end of a section) are independently moving along dierent sec-
tions simultaneously with the passage-times given by exponential distributions
7

--- Page 8 ---
with rates prescribed by R. One of these trains will reach its end rst1. This calls
for a stochastic renement of the uncontrolled train transitions of the railway
game. Consider the untimed train transition ( pos;mod;col)(pos0;mod;col),
where train t{ non-deterministically choosen between the moving trains { is
the unique train reaching the end of its section s, i.e. pos(t)6=pos0(t). In the
stochastic renement we will assign a density for this transition happening at
timed. Now letMTdescribe the set of trains moving excluding the winning
traint. Also fort02M, lets(t0) denote the section along which t0is moving.
Then a timed train transition is of the form:
(pos;mod;col)d
(pos0;mod;col)
wheredis a passage-time and is given by:
=R(t;s)exp R(t;s)dY
t02Mexp R(t0;s(t0))d
In the above the rst two terms of the product { R(t;s)exp R(t;s)d{ is the
density that train tpasses section sindtime-units. However, the density of
the train transition must also reect that tis the rst train to reach the end of
its section. This is expressed by the last product term. Note that exp R(t0;s(t0))d
is the probability that train t0has not completed the passage of its section s(t0)
indtime-units. Due to the assumed independence of the passage-times of trains,
the product among all these equals the probability that no other moving train
butthas reached the end of its section before d.
The above notion of density of a timed train transition extends to densities
on nite timed runs by simple multiplication of the densities of the timed train
transitions appearing in the run. Now constrained by a strategy , the railway
game becomes fully stochastic as the non-deterministic choices of the controller
are resolved by the strategy. Hence { by integration and addition { the densities
on runs determine a probability measure Pon sets of outcomes under . In
particular, for a given strategy we may determine the probability of the set of
runs leading to a crash of two trains. If no crash under the strategy can occur,
we may determine the expected time until all trains have reached their goal.
Example 2. Reconsider the railway network from Figure 1. Assume that all lights
are green (sounds dangerous, and it is!). A possible control strategy 1could try
to avoid disaster by turning point p2up once any of the two trains reached the
end of the initial section. However, there is still a possibility of crash as train t1
may complete both sections s3ands7before train t0completes section s1. The
1The event that two or more trains reach the end of their sections simultaneously has
measure zero and may be ignored.
8

--- Page 9 ---
following shows that the probability of this is2
9.
P1(Crash ) =P1(t1completess3ands7beforet0completess1)
=P1(t1completess3beforet0completess1)
P1(t1completess7beforet0completess1)
=1
4
1
4+1
21
1
1
1+1
2=1
32
3=2
9
Example 3. Again consider the railway network from Figure 1. In this scenario
we assume that all lights are initially red (sounds better from a safety point
of view). Here we consider a safety strategy 2, where whenever a train ( t1
respectively t0) reaches its end the corresponding light ( l2respectivel1) is turned
green and at the same time the corresponding point ( p0respectivep2) is moved
(down respectively up). This strategy guarantees safety, so the probability of the
two trains crashing is 0. The expected time until both trains are at their goal
location under 2is 13 as seen by:
E2[Goal ] = max
E2[t1ingoal ];E2[t0ingoal ]	
= maxf4 + 2;2 + 2 + 7 + 2g= 13
Example 4. As a nal example, consider yet again the railway network from
Figure 1. Let us rst consider that t0is the rst train to reach the end of its
section. The optimal strategy ofor the controller is now to move p2up, and
drive straight for the goal, with an expected time of 13. If, however, t1is the
train to reach its end rst, t0can move through the sections s7,s3,s8, with an
expected time of 8. The expected time for both trains to reach their goal under
this strategy is 12 :3, as calculated below.
Eo[Goal ] = maxfEo[t1ingoal ];Eo[t0ingoal ]g
= max
4 + 2;Po(t0completess1beforet1completess3)
(2 + 2 + 7 + 2) +
Po(t0completess1aftert1completess3)
(2 + 1 + 4 + 1 + 2)	
= max
4 + 2;7
913 +2
910	
= 12:3
3 Railway Games in Uppaal Stratego
After having introduced the theoretical foundations of our untimed railway game
and its stochastic extension, we shall discuss the encoding of our approach into
timed automata in the Uppaal -style and use the tool Uppaal Stratego [6]
to synthetise (near) time-optimal and safe control strategies.
9

--- Page 10 ---
Fig. 2. An example of a timed game automaton of the tool Uppaal Stratego
3.1 Translation to Timed Game Automata
Uppaal Stratego uses timed game automata as models, which are an exten-
sion of timed automata [2]. Timed automata extend nite state machines with a
number of real-valued clocks that enable them to measure the progress of time.
The automata used by Uppaal are extended further, by allowing for additional
model features, e.g. C-like syntax, explained below. Timed game automata addi-
tionally divide transitions into controllable and uncontrollable transitions. Fig-
ure 2 provides an example of a timed game automaton in Uppaal Stratego ,
containing all feature used in the presented models. The automaton consists of
one location ( Loc1 ), which contains an exponential rate ( 2) determining how
long we have to stay in that location before performing a transition. The tran-
sition on top is controllable, denoted by the solid line. The controller can only
execute the transition, if the turn variable is currently 0. The transition sends a
signal ( PlayerMove! ) to other automata (run in parallel and not showed in the
gure) when executed. Finally, the controller can choose a value for the variable
temp , which will be assigned to the global variable turn. If it assigns the value 1,
its the opponent's turn, which means it can execute the transition below (dotted
line). Before such a transition is executed, we again delay according to the expo-
nential rate of the location, and the opponent can choose to keep broadcasting
on the channel OpponentMove! until it decides to change the value of turn.
When encoding our railway games into Uppaal Stratego , we applied two
main optimizations in order to reduce the state space of the games. One opti-
Fig. 3. Controller of a railway game modelled as a timed automaton
10

--- Page 11 ---
Fig. 4. A train in a railway game modelled as a timed automaton
mization was inspired by [12], and it separates lights and points into relevant and
irrelevant sets. Only lights that are on sections currently occupied by a train are
considered relevant for the controller. The same applies to points, that is, only
points connected to occupied sections are relevant. When the controller moves,
it can only change the conguration of currently relevant lights/points. All other
lights/points are set to their default values (red/down). The second optimiza-
tion is a static analysis of the railway network. For each train we perform an
exploration of the connectivity in railway network and collect all the sections it
may visit in order to be still able to reach its target section. If a mode of a given
point leads to a section from which it is not feasible to move the train to its
target location, we remove this mode choice from the controller for this specic
train. This further reduces the state-space that Uppaal Stratego needs to
explore during the controller synthesis. Both optimizations do not change the
existence of winning strategies nor remove any time-optimal strategies. Another
optimization was to enforce green light for at least one train, every time the
controller sets the lights. This will ensure progress by forcing at least one train
to move at any given point.
Figures 3 and 4 show a (simplied) example of the used timed automata
models2. The models are split into one automaton for the controller, and one
automaton for each train. Only one template of the trains is shown. In addition,
theUppaal les contain C-line code, including variables for storing the layout
of the stations, and the current conguration.
In Figure 3 we show the controller: the controller is responsible for initializing
the railway station (setting all the variables for the layout), before the game
starts. After that, it can chose the mode of the relevant lights, setting them to
either green or red. Then it can set the mode of the relevant points. In this
example, we consider only two trains, hence only two lights/points need to be
set here. After setting the lights and points, if there is a possibility for a crash,
the controller sets the crash variable to true. Note that if the controller has a
winning strategy, this will never occur. If no train can crash, all trains that are
waiting for green light are notied that the conguration changed. When these
2Our experiment les can be found online at http://people.cs.aau.dk/ ~florber/
TrainGames/ExperimentFiles.rar
11

--- Page 12 ---
steps are done, the controller waits for a train to arrive at the end of a section,
at which point it will be able to change the settings again.
Figure 4 illustrates a train: initially, trains are starting at the end of a section,
waiting to pass to the next section. If the train receives the signal that the
conguration was changed ( moveWaitingTrains? ) and is has green light now, it
can move to the next section and start driving there. When a train moves to the
next section, several variables are updated. First, the train updates its current
position according to the nextSec function, then it checks whether it reached its
nal destination, and nally it updates its rate to the rate of the section it is
currently driving on. If it reaches the end of the section, it will signal this to the
controller, which is done via sending the trainArrived! signal. The duration until
a train reaches the end of a section is given by the rate of the current section,
which in the gure is illustrated next to the driving location.
In Figure 5 is an excerpt of the nextSec function implemented in case of the
railway network shown in Figure 1 which either reports a crash or returns the
next section end of the train, depending on the settings of points and lights. For
example, if the current position of the train is s1:right (stored in the variable
pos), the train is going towards the right, the light l1is green and point p2is in
down mode, the train ends up in s7:left. Now ifs7is already occupied then it
results in a crash otherwise the position of the train is updated accordingly.
section_End nextSec(int tId) f
...
pos=currentPosition[tId];
if(pos == s1.right and dir == right)
if(colour[1] == green)
if(mode[2]= down)
if(sectionOccupied[7] == false) pos=s7.left;
else crash=true;
else
if(sectionOccupied[2] == false) pos=s2.left;
else crash=true;
else
pos=s1.right;
...
return pos;
g
Fig. 5. Fragment of Uppaal C-code for changing a train position
3.2 Uppaal Stratego
Uppaal Stratego [6] combines the two branches Uppaal TIGA [4] and Up-
paal SMC [7].Uppaal TIGA provides an on-the-y algorithm for synthesis
12

--- Page 13 ---
G
Timed
Train Gameσ
Safety 
Strategy
P
Stochastic 
Timed
Train GameP|σ
Safety property  φ
synthesis
UPPAAL TIGA
abstraction
σ°
optimized
Strategy
synthesis
(learning)CostUPPAAL StrategoFig. 6. Overview of the functionality of Uppaal Stratego
of reachability and safety objectives for timed games. Uppaal SMC provides
statistical model-checking for stochastic timed games. The workow of Uppaal
Stratego which combines the two tools can be seen in Figure 6. To run Up-
paal Stratego , one has to dene queries for the model checker. We used two
types of queries to generate the strategies.
The query below synthesises the safe strategy. It asks the model checker for
a control strategy, such that the Boolean variable crash is always false.
strategy safe = control:A[] not crash
The optimization of our strategy with machine learning requires the specication
of a cost function. In our case, the cost is given by the time passing, while there
is a reward for bringing a train to its destination. We simulate for at most 151
time units (or until all trains exited), thus we set the reward to 150, such that
exiting the train is always of higher priority than ending fast. This optimization
is performed while adhering to the safe strategy. The query is given below.
strategy opt = minE (time - 150*(exited[0])) [<=151]:
<> (time>=150 || exited[0]) under safe
The second step does not provide necessarily the time-optimal strategy (as the
problem is in general undecidable), however, by the use of reinforcement learning
it approaches the optimal solution and works convincingly in practice.
4 Experiments
We shall now present the experiments and results we achieved using Uppaal
Stratego . We analyzed two Danish railway stations, Aalborg and Lyngby. The
Station # Sections # Lights # Points # Trains
Lyngby 11 14 6 2 to 5
Aalborg 26 41 14 2 to 5
Table 1. Specics about the Lybgy and Aalborg station
13

--- Page 14 ---
Station 2 Trains 3 Trains 4 Trains 5 Trains
Lyngby 0.04 0.16 3.37 55.93
Aalborg 0.24 16.57 858.91 timeout
Table 2. Time (in seconds) for computing the most permissive safe strategy
railway layout for Lyngby was based on the layout presented by Kasting et al. [12]
that we extended by the rates associated to each section. The layout used for
Aalborg is based on a track plan found online [1] where we considered the main
tracks, disregarding the cargo tracks. We assumed that each entry to a point is
guarded by a light. The rates for both stations were estimated by using Google
Maps to gure out the length of the sections, and assuming that trains drive with
80kmh outside of the station, and 40 kmh in the proximity of the platforms. To
achieve that all rates are higher than 1, the rates of Lyngby were multiplied by
66, and all rates in Aalborg by 20. Thus, one time unit in an experiment with
Lyngby/Aalborg below corresponds to 66/20 seconds, respectively.
4.1 Setup
We considered the problem with 2, 3, 4 and even 5 trains concurrently moving
at the station in order to explore the scalability of our approach. The initial and
nal locations for the trains in the Lyngby station were chosen similarly to [12].
The trains in Aalborg are placed in a way to make their travel as complex as
possible, i.e., they always have to travel from one side to the other, taking several
points and cross each others paths. The models with less than 5 trains were
produced by removing trains from the complete model with a maximum number
of trains. The specics about the stations can be found in Table 1, showing that
Aalborg is about twice the size of Lyngby. The experiments were executed on
AMD Opteron 6376 processor running at 2,3Ghz with 10GB memory limit.
4.2 Results
In Table 2 we report on the time to compute the safety strategy. The runtime
for computing the strategy depends on the size of the station and, as expected,
it grows exponentially with the number of trains (Aalborg with 5 trains timed
out). This means that for this high number of trains, the proposed approach is
at the moment infeasible without further state-space reductions. However, even
at the larger stations like Aalborg, in reality there should rarely be more than
three trains approaching the station at the same time.
In Table 3 we investigate how Uppaal Stratego performs in optimizing
the constructed safe strategy. We use a currently unpublished learning method
ofUppaal Stratego relying on Q-learning [15]. We use 50 iterations and each
of 1000 runs for learning the strategies for Lyngby, and 5000 runs for Aalborg,
as the increased state-space requires a higher learning eort. We report the time
needed to produce the safe strategy plus to its optimization in Uppaal Strat-
ego, the expected time until all trains reach their goals under the synthesised
14

--- Page 15 ---
Station Aal2 Aal3 Aal4 Aal5 Lyn2 Lyn3 Lyn4 Lyn5
Uppaal runtime 650.53 1501.46 3990.49 |66.79 143.86 244.38 382.33
Expected time 1.8 2.62 2.65 |1.06 2.6 2.27 2.72
Table 3. Strategy optimization, including the runtime of safe strategy synthesis (in
seconds), and the expected time until all trains reach their destinations
Fig. 7. 1000 random runs on Lyngby, the right plot is under the optimized strategy
strategies where e.g. Aal3 means the Aalborg station with 3 trains. The ex-
pected time was computed by simulating 2000 random runs under the strategy.
The presented values are an average computed from repeating the experiments
20 times. The stochastic nature of the trains can of course inuence the observed
timed behaviour, and lead to small time uctuations in the expected time.
Figure 7 shows the frequency histogram of the arrival times of the train num-
ber 4 during 1000 simulations on Lyngby with 5 trains, where the unoptimized
safe strategy is on the left side and the guided optimized strategy is on the right
side. Thex-axis represents the train arrival time in minutes and the y-axis the
number of times the train arrived at the given time. Clearly, the unguided strat-
egy has a majority of simulation where the train did not arrive within 8 minutes,
whereas the optimized strategy makes the train number 4 to arrive on average
in 1.6 minutes.
5 Conclusion
We presented a game-theoretic approach for controlling of a railway network
as a two player game between the controller (setting up the lights and modes
of points) and the environment (moving the trains). Our approach guarantees
safety (absence of trains simultaneously entering the same section) by computing
the most permissive safe strategy in the untimed game. This strategy is further
optimized in the model enhanced with stochastic semantics, approximating the
time trains use to travel across a section, in order to optimize the speed of trains
arriving to their target sections.
The main novelty of the proposed approach is the support for concurrently
moving trains and the synthesis of (near) time-optimal controllers that are safe.
15

--- Page 16 ---
Both these steps can be automatically realized in our tool Uppaal Stratego .
This is an important step towards reecting the behaviour of trains in reality.
Our approach was demonstrated and evaluated on two Danish railway stations,
using dierent number of trains. The experiments clearly show the feasibility of
our approach, however, for one of the stations, the highest number of trains led
to a timeout, highlighting also the limitations of our current implementation.
In the future work, we shall work on improving the performance of our tool
and on applying reduction techniques in order to decrease the size of the state-
space, similarly as it was done in [10] for the untimed and strictly alternating
game. We will also look at the scheduling problem where each train has a pre-
dened route like in [11]; this is a realistic assumption and it will likely reduce
the complexity of the control synthesis. Furthermore, we can without any eort
use cost functions of dierent types e.g. to prioritize or penalize certain trains
depending on their importance. For further evaluation of our strategies, we plan
on making it easier to extract them from our tool, so that they can be applied to
simulations in other software or control directly model trains in a demonstrator
that we plan to build. Finally, in our railway model we made a few simplifying
assumptions that we plan to relax in our future work. For example, we shall add
a travel time through a point (at the moment we assume that it is instantaneous)
and make sure that points are not operated while trains are passing over them
in order to prevent derailment.
Acknowledgments. We would like to thank to Peter G. Jensen for his sup-
port with the experiments and advice on Uppaal Stratego . We also thank the
anonymous reviewers for their detailed comments and in particular for pointing
out a problem in our original formal model that could have made the constructed
controller potentially unsafe. The research leading to these results has received
funding from the project DiCyPS funded by the Innovation Fund Denmark, the
Sino Danish Research Center IDEA4CPS and the ERC Advanced Grant LASSO.
The fourth author is partially aliated with FI MU, Brno, Czech Republic.
References
1. Danish railway station plans. https://www.sporskiftet.dk/wiki/
danske-spor-og-stationer-sporplaner-og-link/ . Accessed: 2019-01-14.
2. Rajeev Alur and David L. Dill. A theory of timed automata. Theor. Comput. Sci. ,
126(2):183{235, April 1994.
3. B. Aristyo, K. Pradityo, T. A. Tamba, Y. Y. Nazaruddin, and A. Widyotriatmo.
Model checking-based safety verication of a petri net representation of train in-
terlocking systems. In 2018 57th Annual Conference of the Society of Instrument
and Control Engineers of Japan (SICE) , pages 392{397, Sep. 2018.
4. Gerd Behrmann, Alexandre David, and Kim G. Larsen. A tutorial on uppaal , pages
200{236. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2004.
5. A. Cimatti, F. Giunchiglia, G. Mongardi, D. Romano, F. Torielli, and P. Traverso.
Formal verication of a railway interlocking system using model checking. Formal
Aspects of Computing , 10(4):361{380, Apr 1998.
6. Alexandre David, Peter Gjl Jensen, Kim Guldstrand Larsen, Marius Miku cionis,
and Jakob Haahr Taankvist. Uppaal stratego. In Christel Baier and Cesare Tinelli,
16

--- Page 17 ---
editors, Tools and Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis of Systems , pages
206{211, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2015. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
7. Alexandre David, Kim G. Larsen, Axel Legay, Marius Miku cionis, and
Danny Bgsted Poulsen. Uppaal SMC tutorial. International Journal on Soft-
ware Tools for Technology Transfer , 17(4):397{415, Aug 2015.
8. Andreas Berre Eriksen, Chao Huang, Jan Kildebogaard, Harry Lahrmann, Kim G
Larsen, Marco Muniz, and Jakob Haahr Taankvist. Uppaal stratego for intelligent
trac lights. In 12th ITS European Congress , 2017.
9. A. Giua and C. Seatzu. Modeling and supervisory control of railway networks
using petri nets. IEEE Transactions on Automation Science and Engineering ,
5(3):431{445, July 2008.
10. Michael R Hansen. On-the-y solving of railway games (work in progress). Marina
Wald en (Editor) , page 34, 2017.
11. Anne Elisabeth Haxthausen. Automated generation of formal safety conditions
from railway interlocking tables. STTT , 16(6):713{726, 2014.
12. Patrick Kasting, Michael R. Hansen, and Steen Vester. Synthesis of railway-
signaling plans using reachability games. In Proceedings of the 28th Symposium on
the Implementation and Application of Functional Programming Languages , IFL
2016, pages 9:1{9:13, New York, NY, USA, 2016. ACM.
13. Kim Guldstrand Larsen, Marius Miku cionis, and Jakob Haahr Taankvist. Safe and
Optimal Adaptive Cruise Control , pages 260{277. Springer International Publish-
ing, Cham, 2015.
14. Jakob Lyng Petersen. Automatic verication of railway interlocking systems: A
case study. In Proceedings of the Second Workshop on Formal Methods in Software
Practice , FMSP '98, pages 1{6, New York, NY, USA, 1998. ACM.
15. Christopher J. C. H. Watkins and Peter Dayan. Q-learning. Machine Learning ,
8(3):279{292, May 1992.
16. Kirsten Winter. Model checking railway interlocking systems. In Proceedings of
the Twenty-fth Australasian Conference on Computer Science - Volume 4 , ACSC
'02, pages 303{310, Darlinghurst, Australia, Australia, 2002. Australian Computer
Society, Inc.
17

--- Page 18 ---
Appendix
Layout of Aalborg, taken from [1].
Layout of Lyngby, taken from [12].
18
