--- Page 1 ---
Modelling and Verication of Web Services
Business Activity Protocol
Anders P. Ravn, Ji r  Srba?, and Saleem Vighio??
Department of Computer Science, Aalborg University,
Selma Lagerl ofs Vej 300, DK-9220 Aalborg East, Denmark.
fapr,srba,vighio g@cs.aau.dk
Abstract. WS-Business Activity specication denes two coordination
protocols in order to ensure a consistent agreement on the outcome of
long-running distributed applications. We use the model checker Uppaal
to analyse the Business Agreement with Coordination Completion pro-
tocol type. Our analyses show that the protocol, as described in the stan-
dard specication, violates correct operation by reaching invalid states
for all underlying communication media except for the perfect FIFO.
Based on this result, we propose changes to the protocol. A further in-
vestigation of the modied protocol suggests that messages should be
received in the same order as they are sent so that a correct protocol
behaviour is preserved. Another important property of communication
protocols is that all parties always reach their nal states. Based on
the verication with dierent communication models, we prove that our
enhanced protocol satises this property for asynchronous, unreliable,
order-preserving communication whereas the original protocol does not.
1 Introduction
Numerous protocols from the web services protocol stack [9] are currently in
active development in order to support communication schemes that guarantee
consistent and reliable executions of distributed transactions. As applications
depend on the correctness of these protocols, guarantees about their functionality
should be given prior to the protocols being put into industrial use. However,
design and implementation of these protocols is an error-prone process, partly
because of the lack of details provided in their standards [7, 17]. Therefore, formal
approaches provide a valuable supplement during the discussion and clarication
phases of protocol standards. The advantage of formal methods is that automatic
tools like Uppaal [3] and TLC [7] can be applied to analyse protocol behaviours
and verify general correctness criteria.
In this paper we consider the WS-Coordination framework [12] which, among
others, includes the WS-Atomic Transaction (WS-AT) [10] and WS-Business
?The author is partially supported by the Ministry of Education of Czech Republic,
grant no. MSM 0021622419.
??The author is supported by Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering, Science, and
Technology, Nawabshah, Pakistan, and partially by the Nordunet3 project COSoDIS.

--- Page 2 ---
2 Anders P. Ravn, Ji r  Srba, and Saleem Vighio
Activity (WS-BA) [11] standards. The WS-AT specication provides protocols
used for simple short-lived activities, whereas WS-BA provides protocols used for
long-lived business activities. The WS-AT protocol has recently been in focus in
the formal methods community and its correctness has been veried using both
the TLC model checker [7] where the protocol was formalized in the TLA+[8]
language as well as using the Uppaal tool and networks of communicating timed
automata [15]. In [15], we discussed the key aspects of the two approaches,
including the characteristics of the specication languages, the performances of
the tools, and the robustness of the specications with respect to extensions.
In the present work we analyse the WS-BA standard which (to the best of our
knowledge) has not yet been automatically veried in the literature. It consists
of two coordination protocols: Business Agreement with Participant Completion
(BAwPC) and Business Agreement with Coordinator Completion (BAwCC).
We focus on BAwCC in our analysis. It is more complex in its behaviour and
has a larger number of states, transitions and messages than BAwPC. We de-
velop several Uppaal [3] models related to the WS-BA protocols based on the
state-tables provided in the standard specication (see [11] or the appendix for
the complete tables). We use with advantage the C-like constructs available in
Uppaal and the model of the BAwCC protocol contains more than 600 lines of
C code. Our tool supported analysis unexpectedly reveals several problems. The
safety property, that the protocol never enters an invalid state, is checked for
a range of communication mechanisms. The main result is that the property is
violated by all considered communication mechanisms but perfect FIFO (queue).
Based on a detailed analysis of the error traces produced by Uppaal , we
suggest xes to the protocol. Moreover, in contrast to [7, 15], we do not limit our
analyses to only one type of asynchronous communication policy where messages
can be reordered, lost and duplicated, but study dierent communication mech-
anisms (see e.g. [1]). This fact appears crucial as even the xed protocol behaves
correctly only for some types of communication media, whereas for others it still
violates the correctness criteria.
Another important property of web services applications is that they should
terminate in consistent end states, irrelevant of the actual behaviour of the other
participating parties [6]. This kind of property is usually called liveness and
for most nontrivial protocols it cannot be established without some fairness
assumptions, such that if a particular transition is innitely often enabled then
it is also executed. In our setting we use a more engineering-like approach by
introducing tire-outs (delays before an alternative action is chosen, essentially
the \execution delay" of ATP [13]) on the resubmission of messages, as this is
a likely way this situation is handled in practice. Uppaal enables us to specify
the timing information in a simple and elegant way and our verication results
show that under suitable timing constraints used for tire-outs, we can guarantee
the termination property for the xed protocol, at least for the communication
policies where the protocol is correct.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we give an overview
of the web services business activity protocol and discuss dierent types of com-

--- Page 3 ---
Modelling and Verication of Web Services Business Activity Protocol 3
munication policies. Section 3 introduces the Uppaal modeling approach used
in the case study. Properties of the original and the xed protocols are dis-
cussed in Sections 4 and 5. Section 6 describes the termination property and its
verication. Finally, Section 7 gives a summary and suggestions for the future
research. The appendix contains a full overview of the state-transition tables of
the original and modied BAwCC protocol.
2 WS-Business Activity Protocol
WS-Business Activity (WS-BA) [11] and WS-Atomic Transaction (WS-AT) [10]
both built on top of WS-Coordination specication [12] form the Web Ser-
vices Transaction Framework (WSTF). WS-Coordination describes an extensible
framework for coordinating transactional web services. It enables an application
service to create a context needed to propagate an activity to other services and
to register for coordination protocols. These coordination protocols are described
in WS-AT and WS-BA specications. WS-AT provides protocols based on the
ACID (atomicity, consistency, isolation, durability) principle [5] for simple short-
lived activities, whereas WS-BA provides protocols used for long-lived business
activities with relaxation of ACID properties.
WS-BA [11] describes two coordination types: AtomicOutcome and Mixed-
Outcome. In AtomicOutcome the coordinator directs all participants to the same
outcome, i.e. either to close or to cancel/compensate. In MixedOutcome some
participants may be directed to close and others to cancel/compensate. Each of
these coordination types can be used in two coordination protocols: WS-Business
Agreement with Participant Completion (BAwPC) and WS-Business Agreement
with Coordination Completion (BAwCC) that we shall focus on. A participant
registers for one these two protocols, which are managed by the coordinator of
the activity.
2.1 Business Agreement with Coordination Completion
A state-transition diagram for BAwCC is shown in Figure 1. Note that the gure
depicts a combined view and the concrete coordinator and participant states are
abstracted away. The complete transition tables are listed in the appendix.
A participant registered for this protocol is informed by its coordinator that
it has received all requests to perform its work and no more work will be re-
quired. In this version of the protocol the coordinator decides when an activity
is terminated, so completion notication comes from the coordinator: It sends
aComplete message to the participant to inform it that it will not receive any
new requests within the current business activity and it is time to complete the
processing. The Complete message is followed by the Completed message by the
participant, provided it can successfully nish its work. This protocol also in-
troduces a new Completing state between Active andCompleted states. Once the
coordinator reaches the Completed state, it can reply with either a Close or a
Compensate message. A Close message informs the participant that the activity

--- Page 4 ---
4 Anders P. Ravn, Ji r  Srba, and Saleem Vighio
Active Completing Completed Closing Ended
Compensating
Failing
CancelingExitingNotCompleting
Complete Completed Close ClosedExit
ExitCannotComplete
CannotCompleteExitedNotCompleted
Exit
Compensate
FailCompensated
Failed
Fail
CanceledFailFail
CancelCancel
Coordinator generated Participant generated
Fig. 1. Business Agreement with Coordinator Completion
has completed successfully. A participant then sends a Closed notication and
forgets about the activity. Upon receipt of a Closed notication the coordinator
knows that the participant has successfully completed its work and forgets about
the participant's state.
ACompensate message, on the other hand, instructs the participant to undo
the completed work and to restore the recorded data to its initial state. A partic-
ipant in response can either send a Compensated or a Failnotication. The Com-
pensated message informs the coordinator that the participant has successfully
compensated its work for the business activity, the participant then forgets about
the activity and the coordinator forgets about the participant. Upon receipt of
aFailmessage, the coordinator knows that the participant has encountered a
problem and has failed during processing of the activity. The coordinator then
replies with a Failed message and forgets about the state of the participant. The
participant in turn also forgets about the activity. A participant can also send
CannotComplete orExitmessages while being in Active , orCompleting states. A
CannotComplete notication informs the coordinator that the participant can
not successfully complete its work and any pending work will be discarded and
completed work will be canceled. The coordinator replies with a NotCompleted
message and forgets about the state of the participant. The participant also

--- Page 5 ---
Modelling and Verication of Web Services Business Activity Protocol 5
forgets about the activity in turn. In case of an Exitmessage the coordinator
knows that the participant will no longer engage in the business activity and
the pending work will be discarded and any work performed will be canceled.
The coordinator will reply with the Exited message and will forget about the
participant. The participant will also forget about the activity. In Active and
Completing states the coordinator can end a transaction by sending a Cancel
message. A participant can either reply with a Canceled or a Failnotication. A
Canceled message informs the coordinator that the work has been successfully
canceled and then the participant forgets about the activity.
2.2 Communication Policies
FIFOBAGSTUTT-FIFO
LOSSY-FIFOSET
Fig. 2. Communication mediaThe WS-BA specication is not explicit about
the concrete type of communication medium
for exchanging messages apart from implicitly
expecting that the communication is asyn-
chronous. In [7] the authors (two of them were
designers of the specication) studied WS-AT
and agreed that one should consider asyn-
chronous communication where messages can
be lost, duplicated and reordered. Indeed, the
WS-AT protocol was proved correct in this
setting. It seems natural to adopt the same
communication assumptions also for WS-BA,
however, as we show later on, the BAwCC
protocol is not correct under such a liberal
communication policy. We therefore consider
a hierarchy of ve dierent communication
policies for asynchronous message passing in our study.
{Unreliable Unordered Asynchronous Communication. In this type of asyn-
chronous communication the messages may arrive in dierent order than
they were sent and the communication medium is assumed to be unreliable
as messages can be lost and duplicated. It corresponds well with the ele-
mentary UDP protocol of TCP/IP. As argued in [7], this kind of policy is
conveniently implemented as a pool of messages mathematically represented
by a set. Adding more messages of the same sort to a set has no additional
eect and as our correctness property is a safety property, lossiness is im-
plicitly included by the fact that protocol participants are not in any way
forced to read messages contained in the pool (see [7, 15] for further discus-
sion on this issue). In the rest of the paper we call this kind of communication
implementation SET.
{Reliable Unordered Asynchronous Communication. This kind of communi-
cation still does not preserve the order of messages but it is a completely
reliable medium where a message can only be received as many times as it
was sent. Therefore we have to keep track of the number of messages of the

--- Page 6 ---
6 Anders P. Ravn, Ji r  Srba, and Saleem Vighio
same type currently in transit. We can model this communication medium
as a multiset (also called a bag) of messages. We refer to this particular
implementation of the communication medium as BAG.
{Reliable Ordered Asynchronous Communication. This type of communica-
tion channel represents the perfect communication medium where messages
are delivered according to the FIFO (rst in, rst out) policy and they can be
neither duplicated nor lost. The problem with this medium is that for most
nontrivial protocols there is no bound on the size of the communication
buer storing the queue of messages in transit (thanks to the asynchronous
nature of the communication) and automatic verication of protocols using
this communication policy is often impossible due to the innite state-space
of possible protocol congurations. We refer to this communication as FIFO .
It is essentially implemented by the FTP protocol of TCP/IP.
{Lossy Ordered Asynchronous Communication. Here we assume an order pre-
serving communication policy like in FIFO but messages can now be also lost
before their delivery. The problem with unbounded size of this communica-
tion channel remains for most of interesting protocols. We call this policy
LOSSY-FIFO .
{Stuttering Ordered Asynchronous Communication. In order to overcome the
innite state-space problem mentioned in the FIFO and LOSSY-FIFO com-
munication policies, we introduce an abstraction that ignores stuttering, i.e.
repetition of the same message inside of an ordered sequence of messages.
We can also consider it as a lossy and duplicating medium which, how-
ever, preserves the order among dierent types of messages. In practice this
means that if a message is sent and the communication buer contains the
same message as the most recently sent one, then the message will be ig-
nored. Symmetrically, if a message is read from the buer, it can be read as
many times as required providing it is of the same type. This means that
the communication buer can remain nite even if the protocol includes re-
transmission of messages, as e.g. both protocols from WS-BA specication
do. We call this communication type STUTT-FIFO .
Figure 2 shows the relationship among the dierent communication media.
The arrows indicate the inclusions (in the sense of possible behaviours) of the
presented media. Hence any protocol execution with the FIFO communication
policy is possible also in any other communication type above it. This means
that if we can introduce the validity of any safety property for e.g. the SET
medium, this result will hold also for any other medium below it and nding an
error trace in the protocol with e.g. the FIFO medium implies the presence of
such a trace also in any other medium above it.
While the communication policies SET,BAG,FIFO andLOSSY-FIFO are well
studied, the STUTT-FIFO communication we introduce in this paper is nonstan-
dard and not implemented in any of industrial applications that we are aware
of. Although, as remarked above, FTP will work this way if the application level
avoids retransmission of data. The main reason why we consider this kind of
communication is that it allows us to validate the protocols in question while

--- Page 7 ---
Modelling and Verication of Web Services Business Activity Protocol 7
preserving the niteness of the state-space. Hence we can establish safety guaran-
tees also for the FIFO andLOSSY-FIFO communication policies, which would be
otherwise impossible as the size of such channels is not bounded in our setting.
3 Formal Modelling of BAwCC in UPPAAL
The WS-BA standard [11] provides a high-level description of the WSwCC pro-
tocol. It is essentially a collection of protocol behaviours described in English
accompanied by diagrams like the graph shown in Figure 1 and state-transition
tables for the parties involved in the protocol. See Figure 3 a) for a fragment of
such a table and the appendix for a complete collection of the tables.
Figure 3 a) describes how the transaction coordinator, being in its internal
state Closing , handles the message Complete arriving from the participant. It
will simply resend to the participant the message Close and remain in the state
Closing . The table also describes that while being in the state Closing , the co-
ordinator does not expect to receive the message CannotCompensate from the
participant, and should this happen, it will enter an invalid state.
TheUppaal implementation of this behaviour is given in Figure 3 b). The
syntax should be readable even without any prior knowledge of the tool, but
we refer the interested reader to [3] for a thorough introduction to Uppaal .
The code in the gure rst lists the names of constants that represent messages
sent from the transaction coordinator to the participant and vice versa. Then it
denes two functions Send MsgandReceive Msgthat take care of sending and
receiving of messages via the bit-vectors msgTC and msgP . The code is shown
only for the simplest SET implementation. For BAG,FIFO ,LOSSY-FIFO and
STUTT-FIFO the code is more complex but implemented in a standard way.
The only complication is that the data structures representing these four types
of communication are in general unbounded, so to ensure automatic verication
we introduce a constant upper bound on the buer size and we register a buer
overow in a boolean variable called overflow .
The transitions described in the state tables are then implemented in the
expected way as shown by the two examples in Figure 3 b). The nal timed
automata model then consists of a process for the coordinator with two locations
(normal execution and invalid state) and a similar process for the participant
running in parallel with the coordinator process. All data management (states,
buer content, etc.) is performed via C-like data structures, as this is an ecient
and manageable way to handle this relatively large model. In total the C part
of the implementation contains more than 600 nonempty lines of code. The
complete Uppaal model can be downloaded at [14].
4 Analysis of BAwCC
As already noted, WS-BA relaxes the ACID principles and allows for a mixed
outcome of a transaction. Therefore, we cannot expect that all parties of the
protocol agree on the outcome, as it was the case for WS-AT protocols [7, 15].

--- Page 8 ---
8 Anders P. Ravn, Ji r  Srba, and Saleem Vighio
a) WS-BA (BAwCC):
Coordinator View for Inbound Events (received messages).
Inbound EventsStates
. . . Closing . . .Exiting . . .
......... . . .......
Complete . . . resend Close . . . . . . . . .
goto Closing
......... . . .......
CannotComplete . . .goto Invalid-State . . . . . . . . .
c) Uppaal encoding with SETCommunication (simplied):
Send Msg() and Receive Msg() functions for the coordinator.
typedef int[0,6] MsgsTC; typedef int[0,6] MsgsP;
const MsgsTC CANCEL TC = 0; const MsgsP EXIT P = 0;
const MsgsTC COMPLETE TC = 1; const MsgsP COMPLETED P = 1;
const MsgsTC CLOSE TC = 2; const MsgsP FAIL P = 2;
const MsgsTC COMPENSATE TC =3; const MsgsP CANNOT COMPLETE P = 3;
const MsgsTC FAILED TC = 4; const MsgsP CANCELED P = 4;
const MsgsTC EXITED TC = 5; const MsgsP CLOSED P = 5;
const MsgsTC NOT COMPLETED TC = 6; const MsgsP COMPENSATED P = 6;
bool msgTC[MsgsTC]; bool msgP[MsgsP];
void Send Msg(MsgsTC s)f bool Receive Msg(MsgP r)f
msgTC[s] = true; g return msgP[r]; g
Behaviour of transaction coordinator upon the receipt of the message Complete is
modelled by a loop transition with the following guard and update (action).
bool guard()f
return Receive Msg(COMPLETE P) && stTC == TC CLOSING;g
void action()fSend Msg(CLOSE TC); stTC = TC CLOSING;g
Behaviour of transaction coordinator upon the receipt of the message CannotCom-
plete is modelled by a transition to a new error-state called INVALID with the fol-
lowing guard and with no update.
bool guard()f
return Receive Msg(CANNOT COMPLETE P) && stTC == TC CLOSING;g
Fig. 3. Implementation of selected WS-BA rules in Uppaal
Instead, we focus on the analysis of the actual state-transition tables w.r.t. reach-
ability of invalid states. Invalid states appear in the tables both for inbound and
outbound messages. The meaning of these states is not clearly stated in WS-

--- Page 9 ---
Modelling and Verication of Web Services Business Activity Protocol 9
Coordinator
ActiveCancel
Canceling-ActiveMedium
CancelParticipant
Active
CancelingCanceled
EndedCompensated
EndedCompensated
INVALID
Fig. 4. Error trace in BAwCC leading to an invalid state
BA specication but we contacted the designers via their discussion forum and
received (citing [16]):
\For outbound events, an Invalid State cell means that this is not
a valid state for the event to be produced. ... For inbound events, an
Invalid State cell means that the current state is not a valid state for the
inbound message. For example, for Participants in BusinessAgreement-
WithCoordinationCompletion (table B.3) the Canceling state is not a
valid state for receiving a Close message. There are no circumstances
where a Participant in this state should ever receive a Close message,
indicating an implementation error in the Coordinator which sent the
message. This is a protocol violation ..."
This means that in the tables for outbound events, messages that lead to
invalid states are never sent (and hence omitted in the Uppaal model) and for
inbound events the possibility to enter an invalid state is a protocol violation.
This requirement is easily formulated in the Uppaal query language (a subset
of TCTL) as follows.
E<> (tc.INVALID || par.INVALID) && !overflow
This is a safety property asking whether there is a protocol execution in which
either the transaction coordinator (process called tc) or the participant (process
called par) enters the state INVALID while at the same time there was no buer
overow. We have checked this property for all ve communication policies we
consider and the property surprisingly turned out to be true for all of them except
forFIFO . The tool automatically generated an error trace, seen in Figure 4.
It is easy to see that this trace is executable both for LOSSY-FIFO and BAG
communication (and hence also for any other above them in the hierarchy in
Figure 2). The main point in this trace is that the message Canceled that is sent

--- Page 10 ---
10 Anders P. Ravn, Ji r  Srba, and Saleem Vighio
by the participant is either lost (possible in LOSSY-FIFO ) or reordered with the
message Compensated (possible in BAG).
It is also clear that this error trace cannot be executed in the perfect FIFO
communication policy. For FIFO we were able to verify that the protocol is correct
for up to six messages in transit (three from coordinator to participant and three
in the opposite direction). As perfect FIFO communication is known to have the
full Turing power [4], there is no hope to establish the correctness of the protocol
with unbounded FIFO communication in a fully automatic way.
Another interesting question we can ask about the protocol is whether the
communication medium is bounded for BAwCC or not. This can be done by
asking the following Uppaal query.
E<> overflow
Verication results show that all communication media except for SET can al-
ways reach a buer overow for any given buer size that we were able to verify
(up to 20 messages in transit). This is a good indication that the communica-
tion buer is indeed unbounded and a simple (manual) inspection of the protocol
conrms this fact.
5 Enhanced BAwCC
Given the verication results in the previous section, we found the BAwCC
protocol not completely satisfactory as even a simple relaxation of the perfect
communication policy results in incorrect behaviour. Taking into account that
the protocols in WS-AT avoided invalid states even under the most general SET
communication, we shall further analyze the protocol and suggest an improve-
ment.
The error trace in Figure 4 hints at the source of problems. Once a participant
reaches the Ended state, it it instructed to forget all state information and just
send the last message by which the transition to the Ended state was activated.
The problem is that there are three dierent reasons for reaching the Ended
state, but BAwCC allows for the retransmission of all three messages at the same
time, whenever the participant is in the state Ended . As seen in Figure 4, the
participant after receiving the message Cancel correctly answers with the message
Canceled , but then sends the message Compensated . This causes confusion on the
coordinator side. A similar problem can occur in a symmetric way.
In our proposed x to the BAwCC protocol, we introduce three additional
end states, both for the participant as well as for the coordinator, in order to
avoid the confusion. The complete state tables of the enhanced protocol are given
in the appendix. We modelled and veried the enhanced protocol in Uppaal and
the results are as follows.
Under the STUTT-FIFO communication, the medium is bounded with no
overow, so all verication results are conclusive. We also established that there
is no execution of the modied protocol that leads to an invalid state. As this is

--- Page 11 ---
Modelling and Verication of Web Services Business Activity Protocol 11
Coordinator
ActiveComplete
Completing
Cancel
Canceling-CompletingMedium
CancelParticipant
Active
Canceling
Canceled
Ended-CanceledComplete
Fail
Ended-Canceled
Fail
Failing-Canceling
Canceled
INVALID
Fig. 5. Error trace in enhanced BAwCC leading to an invalid state
a safety property, the positive result holds automatically also for LOSSY-FIFO
andFIFO .
However, when considering the media BAG andSET representing a commu-
nication where messages can be reordered, the tool still returns error traces like
the one depicted in Figure 5. This problem is more inherent to the protocol
design and the reason for the confusion is the fact that the messages Canceled
andFailsent be the participant are delivered in the opposite order.
To conclude, our enhanced protocol, unlike the original one, is immune to
lossiness and duplication of messages (stuttering) as long as their order is pre-
served. Making the protocol robust w.r.t. reordering of messages would, in our
opinion, require a substantial and nontrivial redesign of the BAwCC protocol.
6 Termination under Fairness
In this section we shall turn our attention to another important property of
distributed protocols, namely the termination property. Termination means that
as long as the communication parties follow the protocol, any concrete execution
will always bring them to their end states. In Uppaal this property for our
protocol can be formulated as follows.

--- Page 12 ---
12 Anders P. Ravn, Ji r  Srba, and Saleem Vighio
A<> stTC == TC ENDED && stP == P ENDED
The semantics is that in any maximal computation of the protocol, we will
eventually reach a situation where the states of the transaction coordinator as
well as the participant are TCENDED and PENDED , respectively. Termination is
hence a liveness property.
It is clear that the original BAwCC fails to satisfy termination as we can
reach invalid states from which there is no further continuation. This is true for
all types of communication, except for FIFO , where on the other hand we cannot
prove termination due to the unboundedness of the medium. We shall there-
for focus on our enhanced BAwCC protocol and the communication medium
STUTT-FIFO where the protocol is correct and the medium bounded. A positive
result will imply termination also for LOSSY-FIFO andFIFO .
A quick query about termination in Uppaal shows that it fails the property
and the tool returns error traces that reveal the reason: there is no bound on
the number of retransmissions of messages and this can create innite process
executions where the same message is retransmitted over and over. This is to
be expected for any nontrivial protocol and in theory the issue is handled by
imposing an additional assumption on fairness of the protocol execution. This
can for example mean that we require that whenever during an innite execution
some action is innitely often enabled then it has to be also executed. Such
assumptions will guarantee that there is a progress in the protocol execution
and are well studied in the theory (see e.g. [2]).
The complication is that fairness concerns innite executions and is therefore
dicult to implement in concrete applications. Software engineers would typi-
cally use only a limited number of retransmissions within a xed time interval
and give up resending messages after a certain time has passed.
So far, we have used Uppaal only for verication of discrete systems, but
the tool allows us to specify also timed automata models and supports their
automatic verication. By introducing the timing aspects into the protocol be-
haviour, we will be able to argue about fairness properties like termination.
We model the retransmission feature using tire-outs. A tire-out imposes a
progress in the model and as already outlined in the introduction it is essentially
the \execution delay" of ATP [13]. In our model we introduce two clocks xand
ylocal both for the coordinator and the participant. We also assume two global
constants MIN-DELAY and TIRE-OUT , representing the minimal possible delay
between two retransmissions and a tire-out time after which the protocol will not
attempt to retransmit the message any more. Figure 6 shows the implementation
of this feature in the protocol model. We already explained that the rules of the
protocol are modelled using loops in Uppaal automata and the discrete data
are handled using guards and updates (not shown in the illustration). In the
gure we can separate all transitions into two categories: progress transitions
and retransmission transitions. Retransmission transitions retransmit a message
and remain in the same state, while progress transitions change the state of
the participant or the coordinator. The clock xrepresents the time delay since
the last progress transition occurred (it is reset to 0 by any progress transition)

--- Page 13 ---
Modelling and Verication of Web Services Business Activity Protocol 13
xTIRE-OUTx:=0
PyMIN-DELAY andxTIRE-OUT
y:=0R
Fig. 6. Tire-outs modelling; P is a progress transition, R is a retransmission transition
and clock yrepresents the time elapsed since the last retransmission. These two
clocks restrict the behaviour of the retransmission transitions so that they are
enabled only if at least the minimal delay has passed since last retransmission
and the clock xhas not exceeded the tire-out limit. The presence of the invariant
xTIRE-OUT then ensures a progress.
Using the tire-out modeling as described above we were able to automatically
verify that the enhanced BAwCC protocol with the STUTT-FIFO communication
policy satises the termination property for suitable constants MIN-DELAY and
TIRE-OUT where, for example, the minimal delay is set to one time unit and
the tire-out deadline to 30 time units. By changing the two constants we can
experiment with dierent timing options while making (automatically) sure that
the termination property is preserved.
7 Conclusion and Future Work
We provided a formal Uppaal model of the Business Agreement with Coordina-
tor Completion (BAwCC) protocol from the WS-BA specication. The model is
based on the state-transition tables provided in the specication. We also intro-
duced several ways to model the communication medium, starting with perfect
FIFO channels and ending up with lossy, duplicating and orderless medium. We
have veried that the protocol may enter invalid states for all communication
policies apart from the FIFO. For FIFO we veried that no invalid states are
reachable for up to six messages in transit (three in each direction), however, this
is not a guarantee that the protocol is correct for any size of the FIFO buer.
Based on the analysis of the protocol in Uppaal , we suggested an enhanced
protocol which distinguishes among three dierent ways of entering the ended
states. This protocol is correct also for all imperfect media based on FIFO but
may still reach invalid states if more liberal communication is assumed. By in-
troducing timing constraints (tire-outs) to the protocol behaviour, we were also
able to verify the termination property for imperfect FIFO communication. Fig-
ure 7 gives the summary of the results for all ve communication policies and the
original and enhanced protocols. Correctness stands for the absence of invalid
states in protocol executions, boundedness describes whether the communica-

--- Page 14 ---
14 Anders P. Ravn, Ji r  Srba, and Saleem Vighio
BAwCA Protocol
Buer Type Properties Original Enhanced
SETCorrectness No No
Boundedness Yes Yes
Termination No No
BAGCorrectness No No
Boundedness No No
Termination No No
STUTT-FIFOCorrectness No Yes
Boundedness No Yes
Termination No Yes
LOSSY-FIFOCorrectness No Yes
Boundedness No No
Termination No Yes
FIFOCorrectness Yes? Yes
Boundedness No No
Termination Yes? Yes
Fig. 7. Overview of verication results for BAwCC and enhanced BAwCC
tion channels have bounded size and termination guarantees that during any
protocol behaviour, all parties eventually reach their nal (ended) states.
To conclude, the BAwCC protocol seems correct for the perfect FIFO com-
munication as provided e.g. by the FTP of TCP/IP. We assume that the protocol
was also mainly tested in this setting and hence the tests did not discover any
problematic behaviour. On the other hand, the protocol contains a number of
message retransmissions, which would not be necessary for the perfect medium.
This signals that the designers planned to extend the applicability of the proto-
col also to frameworks with unreliable communication but as we demonstrated,
some xes have to be applied to the protocol in order to guarantee the correct op-
eration also in this case. In any case, WS-BA specication is not explicit about
the assumptions on the communication medium, but this should be perhaps
considered for the future design of protocols.
Finally, the manual creation of UPPAAL models for WS-BA protocols was
a long and time demanding process and in our future work we will try to auto-
mate the process of creating timed automata templates directly from the state-
transition tables. For widely used, standardized protocols, this is probably not
going to nd defects. Yet, in concrete implementations some optimizations and
specializations may be included, and here a tool support may assist in validating
the eect of presumably small innocent changes.

--- Page 15 ---
Modelling and Verication of Web Services Business Activity Protocol 15
Acknowledgement. The authors are grateful to the anonymous reviewers for their
comments on the perspective of this work.
References
1. Y. Afek, H. Attiya, A. Fekete, M. Fischer, N. Lynch, Y. Mansour, Dai-Wei.
Wang, and L. Zuck. Reliable communication over unreliable channels. J. ACM ,
41(6):1267{1297, 1994.
2. K.R. Apt, N. Francez, and S. Katz. Appraising fairness in languages for distributed
programming. Distributed Computing , 2:226{241, 1988.
3. G. Behrmann, A. David, and K.G. Larsen. A tutorial on UPPAAL. In Pro-
ceedings of the 4th International School on Formal Methods for the Design of
Computer, Communication, and Software Systems (SFM-RT'04) , number 3185 in
LNCS, pages 200{236. Springer-Verlag, 2004.
4. D. Brand and P. Zaropulo. On communicating nite-state machines. Journal of
the ACM , 30(2):323{342, 1983.
5. J. Gray and A. Reuter. Transaction Processing: Concepts and Techniques . Morgan
Kaufmann, 1993.
6. Paul Greeneld, Dean Kuo, Surya Nepal, and Alan Fekete. Consistency for web
services applications. In VLDB '05: Proceedings of the 31st international conference
on Very large data bases , pages 1199{1203. VLDB Endowment, 2005.
7. J.E. Johnson, D. E. Langworthy, L. Lamport, and F. H. Vogt. Formal specication
of a web services protocol. Journal of Logic and Algebraic Programming , 70(1):34{
52, 2007.
8. L. Lamport. Specifying Systems . Addison-Wesley, 2003.
9. B. Mathew, M. Juric, and P. Sarang. Business Process Execution Language for
Web Services 2nd Edition . Packt Publishing, 2006.
10. E. Newcomer and I. Robinson (chairs). Web services atomic transaction (WS-
atomic transaction) version 1.2, 2009. http://docs.oasis-open.org/ws-tx/wstx-
wsat-1.2-spec.html.
11. E. Newcomer and I. Robinson (chairs). Web services business activity (WS-
businessactivity) version 1.2, 2009. http://docs.oasis-open.org/ws-tx/wstx-wsba-
1.2-spec-os/wstx-wsba-1.2-spec-os.html.
12. E. Newcomer and I. Robinson (chairs). Web services coordination (WS-
coordination) version 1.2, 2009. http://docs.oasis-open.org/ws-tx/wstx-wscoor-
1.2-spec-os/wstx-wscoor-1.2-spec-os.html.
13. X. Nicollin and J. Sifakis. The algebra of timed processes, ATP: Theory and
application. Information and Computation , 114(1):131{178, 1994.
14. A.P. Ravn, J. Srba, and S. Vighio. UPPAAL model of the WS-BA protocol.
Available in the UPPAAL example section at http://www.uppaal.org.
15. A.P. Ravn, J. Srba, and S. Vighio. A formal analysis of the web services atomic
transaction protocol with uppaal. In Proceedings of the 4th International Sympo-
sium On Leveraging Applications of Formal Methods, Verication and Validation
(ISOLA'10) , volume 6416 of LNCS , pages 579{593. Springer-Verlag, 2010.
16. I. Robinson. Answer in WS-BA discussion forum, July 14th, 2010.
http://markmail.org/message/wriewgkboaaxw66z.
17. F. H. Vogt, S. Zambrovski, B. Gruschko, P. Furniss, and A. Green. Implementing
web service protocols in SOA: WS-coordination and WS-businessactivity. In Pro-
ceedings of the Seventh IEEE International Conference on E-Commerce Technology
Workshops(CECW'05) , pages 21{28. IEEE Computer Society, 2005.

--- Page 16 ---
16 Anders P. Ravn, Ji r  Srba, and Saleem VighioBusinessAgreementWithCoordinationCompletion protocol
(Participant View)
Inbound States
Events Active Canceling Completing Completed Closing Compensating Failing Failing NotCompleting Exiting Ended
(Active, (Compesating)
Canceling,
Completing)
Cancel Canceling Ignore Canceling Resend Ignore Ignore Resend Ignore Resend Resend Send
Completed Fail CannotComplete Exit Canceled
Canceling Closing Compensating Failing-
Completed Failing-* Compensating NotCompleting Exiting Ended
Complete Completing Ignore Ignore Resend Ignore Ignore Resend Ignore Resend Resend Send
Completed Fail CannotComplete Exit Fail
Canceling Completing Closing Compensating Failing-
Completed Failing-* Compensating NotCompleting Exiting Ended
Close Invalid Invalid Invalid Closing Ignore Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Send
State State State State State State State State Closed
Closing
Active Canceling Completing Compensating Failing-* Failing- NotCompleting Exiting Ended
Compensating
Compensate Invalid Invalid Invalid Compensating Invalid Ignore Invalid Resend Invalid Invalid Send
State State State State State Fail State State Compensated
Compensating
Active Canceling Completing Closing Failing-* Failing- NotCompleting Exiting Ended
Compensating
Failed Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Forget Forget Invalid Invalid Ignore
State State State State State State State State
Ended Ended Ended
Active Canceling Completing Completed Closing Compensating NotCompleting Exiting
Exited Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Forget Ignore
State State State State State State State State State
Ended Ended
Active Canceling Completing Completed Closing Compensating Failing-* Failing- NotCompleting
Compensating
NotCompleted Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Forget Invalid Ignore
State State State State State State State State State
Ended Ended
Active Canceling Completing Completed Closing Compensating Failing-* Failing- Exiting
Compensating

--- Page 17 ---
Modelling and Verication of Web Services Business Activity Protocol 17
BusinessAgreementWithCoordinationCompletion protocol
(Participant View)
Outbound States
Events Active Canceling Completing Completed Closing Compensating Failing NotCompleting Exiting Ended
(Active, Canceling,
Completing, Comp-
ensating)
Exit Exiting Invalid Exiting Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Exiting Invalid
State State State State State State State
Canceling Completed Closing Compensating Failing-* NotCompleting Ended
Completed Invalid Invalid Completed Completed Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid
State State State State State State State State
Active Canceling Closing Compensating Failing-* NotCompleting Exiting Ended
Fail Failing- Failing- Failing- Invalid Invalid Failing- Failing-* Invalid Invalid Invalid
Active Canceling Completing State State Compensating State State State
Completed Closing NotCompleting Exiting Ended
CannotComplete NotCompleting Invalid NotCompleting Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid NotCompleting Invalid Invalid
State State State State State State State
Canceling Completed Closing Compensating Failing-* Exiting Ended
Canceled Invalid Forget Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid
State State State State State State State State
Ended Ended
Active Completing Completed Closing Compensating Failing-* NotComleting Exiting
Closed Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Forget Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid
State State State State State State State State
Ended Ended
Active Canceling Completing Completed Compensating Failing-* NotComleting Exiting
Compensated Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Forget Invalid Invalid Invalid
State State State State State State State State
Ended Ended
Active Canceling Completing Completed Closing Failing-* NotCompleting Exiting

--- Page 18 ---
18 Anders P. Ravn, Ji r  Srba, and Saleem VighioBusinessAgreementWithCoordinationCompletion protocol
(Coordinator View)
Inbound States
Events Active Canceling Canceling Completing Completed Closing Compensating Failing Failing NotCompleting Exiting Ended
(Active) (Completing) (Active, (Compesating)
Canceling,
Completing)
Exit Exiting Exiting Exiting Exiting Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Ignore Resend
State State State State State State Exited
Exiting
Completed Closing Compensating Failing-* Failing- NotCompleting Ended
Compensating
Completed Invalid Invalid Completed Completed Ignore Resend Resend Invalid Ignore Invalid Invalid Ignore
State State Close Compensate State State State
Completed Failing-
Active Canceling- Closing Compensating Failing-* Compensating NotCompleting Exiting Ended
Active
Fail Failing- Failing- Failing- Failing- Invalid Invalid Failing- Ignore Ignore Invalid Invalid Resend
Active Canceling Canceling Completing State State Compensating State State Failed
Failing-* Failing-
Completed Closing Compensating NotCompleting Exiting Ended
CannotCo- NotCompleting NotCompleting NotCompleting NotCompleting Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Ignore Invalid Resend
mplete State State State State State State NotCompleted
NotCompleting
Completed Closing Compensating Failing-* Failing- Exiting Ended
Compensating
Canceled Invalid Forget Forget Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Ignore
State State State State State State State State State
Ended Ended Ended
Active Completing Completed Closing Compensating Failing-* Failing- NotCompleting Exiting
Compensating
Closed Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Forget Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Ignore
State State State State State State State State State State
Ended Ended
Active Canceling- Canceling- Completing Completed Compensating Failing-* Failing- NotCompleting Exiting
Active Completing Compensating
Compensa- Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Forget Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Ignore
ted State State State State State State State State State State
Ended Ended
Active Canceling- Canceling- Completing Completed Closing Failing-* Failing- NotCompleting Exiting
Active Completing Compensating

--- Page 19 ---
Modelling and Verication of Web Services Business Activity Protocol 19BusinessAgreementWithCoordinationCompletion protocol
(Coordinator View)
Outbound States
Events Active Canceling Completing Completed Closing Compensating Failing NotCompleting Exiting Ended
(Active,) (Active, Canceling,
(Completing) Completing, Comp-
ensating)
Cancel Canceling- Canceling-* Canceling- Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid
Active Completing State State State State State State State
Completed Closing Compensating Failing-* NotCompleting Exiting Ended
Complete Completing Invalid Completing Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid
State State State State State State State State
Canceling-* Completed Closing Compensating Failing-* NotCompleting Exiting Ended
Close Invalid Invalid Invalid Closing Closing Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid
State State State State State State State State
Active Canceling-* Completing Compensating Failing-* NotCompleting Exiting Ended
Compensate Invalid Invalid Invalid Compensating Invalid Compensating Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid
State State State State State State State State
Active Canceling-* Completing Closing Failing-* NotCompleting Exiting Ended
Failed Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Forget Invalid Invalid
State State State State State State State State
Ended Ended
Active Canceling-* Completing Completed Closing Compensating NotComleting Exiting
Exited Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Forget
State State State State State State State State
Ended Ended
Active Canceling-* Completing Completed Closing Compensating Failing-* NotComleting
NotCompleted Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Forget Invalid
State State State State State State State State
Ended Ended
Active Canceling-* Completing Completed Closing Compensating Failing-* Exiting

--- Page 20 ---
20 Anders P. Ravn, Ji r  Srba, and Saleem VighioEnhanced BusinessAgreementWithCoordinationCompletion protocol
(Participant View)
Inbound States
Events Active Canceling Completing Completed Closing Compensating Failing Failing NotCompleting Exiting Ended- Ended- Ended- Ended
(Active, (Compesating) Canceled Closed Compensated
Canceling,
Completing)
Cancel Canceling Ignore Canceling Resend Ignore Ignore Resend Ignore Resend Resend Send Ignore Ignore Ignore
Completed Fail CannotComplete Exit Canceled
Canceling Closing Compensating Failing- Ended- Ended- Ended
Completed Failing-* Compensating NotCompleting Exiting Ended- Closed Compensated
Canceled
Complete Completing Ignore Ignore Resend Ignore Ignore Resend Ignore Resend Resend Send Send Send Ignore
Completed Fail CannotComplete Exit Fail Fail Fail
Canceling Completing Closing Compensating Failing- Ended
Completed Failing-* Compensating NotCompleting Exiting Ended- Ended- Ended-
Canceled Closed Compensated
Close Invalid Invalid Invalid Closing Ignore Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Ignore Send Ignore Ignore
State State State State State State State State Closed
Closing Ended- Ended- Ended
Active Canceling Completing Compensating Failing-* Failing- NotCompleting Exiting Canceled Ended- Compensated
Compensating Closed
Compensate Invalid Invalid Invalid Compensating Invalid Ignore Invalid Resend Invalid Invalid Ignore Ignore Send Ignore
State State State State State Fail State State Compensated
Compensating Ended- Ended- Ended
Active Canceling Completing Closing Failing-* Failing- NotCompleting Exiting Canceled Closed Ended-
Compensating Compensated
Failed Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Forget Forget Invalid Invalid Ignore Ignore Ignore Ignore
State State State State State State State State
Ended Ended Ended- Ended- Ended- Ended
Active Canceling Completing Completed Closing Compensating NotCompleting Exiting Canceled Closed Compensated
Exited Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Forget Ignore Ignore Ignore Ignore
State State State State State State State State Invalid
Ended Ended- Ended- Ended- Ended
Active Canceling Completing Completed Closing Compensating Failing-* Failing- NotCompleting Canceled Closed Compensated
Compensating
NotCompleted Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Forget Invalid Ignore Ignore Ignore Ignore
State State State State State State State State State
Ended Ended- Ended- Ended- Ended
Active Canceling Completing Completed Closing Compensating Failing-* Failing- Exiting Canceled Closed Compensated
Compensating

--- Page 21 ---
Modelling and Verication of Web Services Business Activity Protocol 21Enhanced BusinessAgreementWithCoordinationCompletion protocol
(Participant View)
Outbound States
Events Active Canceling Completing Completed Closing Compensating Failing NotCompleting Exiting Ended- Ended- Ended- Ended
(Active, Canceling, Canceled Closed Compensated
Completing, Comp-
ensating)
Exit Exiting Invalid Exiting Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Exiting Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid
State State State State State State State State State State
Canceling Completed Closing Compensating Failing-* NotCompleting Ended- Ended- Ended- Ended
Canceled Closed Compensated
Completed Invalid Invalid Completed Completed Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid
State State State State State State State State State State State
Active Canceling Closing Compensating Failing-* NotCompleting Exiting Ended- Ended- Ended- Ended
Canceled Closed Compensated
Fail Failing- Failing- Failing Invalid Invalid Failing- Failing-* Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid
Active Canceling Completing State State Compensating State State State State State State
Completed Closing NotCompleting Exiting Ended- Ended- Ended- Ended
Canceled Closed Compensated
CannotCo- NotComp- Invalid NotCompleting Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid NotCompleting Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid
mplete leting State State State State State State State State State State
Canceling Completed Closing Compensating Failing-* Exiting Ended- Ended- Ended- Ended
Canceled Closed Compensated
Canceled Invalid Forget Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid
State State State State State State State State State State State
Ended- Ended-
Active Canceled Completing Completed Closing Compensating Failing-* NotComleting Exiting Canceled Ended- Ended- Ended
Closed Compensated
Closed Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Forget Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid
State State State State State State State State State State State
Ended- Ended-
Active Canceling Completing Completed Closed Compensating Failing-* NotComleting Exiting Ended- Closed Ended- Ended
Canceled Compensated
Compens- Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Forget Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid
ated State State State State State State State State State State State
Ended- Ended-
Active Canceling Completing Completed Closing Compensated Failing-* NotCompleting Exiting Ended- Ended- Compensated Ended
Canceled Closed

--- Page 22 ---
22 Anders P. Ravn, Ji r  Srba, and Saleem VighioEnhanced BusinessAgreementWithCoordinationCompletion protocol
(Coordinator View)
Inbound States
Events Active Canceling Canceling Completing Completed Closing Compensating Failing Failing NotComp- Exiting Ended- Ended- EndedNot- Ended
(Active) (Completing) (Active, (Compesa- leting Failed Exited Completed
Canceling, ting)
Completing)
Exit Exiting Exiting Exiting Exiting Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Ignore Ignore Resend Ignore Ignore
State State State State State State Exited
Exiting Ended- Ended- Ended
Completed Closing Compensating Failing-* Failing- NotComp- Failed Ended- NotCompleted
Compensating leting Exited
Completed Invalid Invalid Completed Completed Ignore Resend Resend Invalid Ignore Invalid Invalid Ignore Ignore Ignore Ignore
State State Close Compensate State State State
Completed Failing- Ended- Ended- Ended- Ended
Active Canceling- Closing Compensating Failing-* Compensating NotComp- Exiting Failed Exited NotCompleted
Active leting
Fail Failing- Failing- Failing- Failing- Invalid Invalid Failing- Ignore Ignore Invalid Invalid Resend Ignore Ignore Ignore
Active Canceling Canceling Completing State State Compensating State State Failed
Failing-* Failing- Ended- Ended- Ended
Completed Closing Compensating NotComp- Exiting Ended- Exited NotCompleted
leting Failed
CannotCom- NotCom- NotCom- NotComp- NotComp- Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Ignore Invalid Ignore Ignore Resend Ignore
plete pleting pleting pleting pleting State State State State State State NotCompleted
NotComp- Ended- Ended- Ended
Completed Closing Compensating Failing-* Failing- pleting Exiting Failed Exited Ended-
Compensating NotCompleted
Canceled Invalid Forget Forget Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Ignore Ignore Ignore Ignore
State State State State State State State State State
Ended Ended Ended- Ended- Ended- Ended
Active Completing Completed Closing Compensating Failing-* Failing- NotComp- Exiting Failed Exited NotCompleted
Compensating pleting
Closed Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Forget Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Ignore Ignore Ignore Ignore
State State State State State State State State State State
Ended Ended- Ended- Ended- Ended
Active Canceling- Canceling- Completing Completed Compensating Failing-* Failing- NotComp- Exiting Failed Exited NotCompleted
Active Completing Compensating pleting
Compensated Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Forget Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Ignore Ignore Ignore Ignore
State State State State State State State State State State
Ended Ended- Ended- Ended- Ended
Active Canceling- Canceling- Completing Completed Closing Failing-* Failing- NotComp- Exiting Failed Exited NotCompleted
Active Completing Compensating pleting

--- Page 23 ---
Modelling and Verication of Web Services Business Activity Protocol 23Enhanced BusinessAgreementWithCoordinationCompletion protocol
(Coordinator View)
Outbound States
Events Active Canceling Completing Completed Closing Compensating Failing NotCompleting Exiting Ended- Ended- EndedNot- Ended
(Active,) (Active, Canceling, Failed Exited Completed
(Completing) Completing, Comp-
ensating)
Cancel Canceling- Canceling-* Canceling- Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid
Active Completing State State State State State State State State State State
Completed Closing Compensating Failing-* NotCompleting Exiting Ended- Ended- Ended- Ended
Failed Exited NotCompleted
Complete Completing Invalid Completing Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid
State State State State State State State State State State State
Canceling-* Completed Closing Compensating Failing-* NotCompleting Exiting Ended- Ended- Ended- Ended
Failed Exited NotCompleted
Close Invalid Invalid Invalid Closing Closing Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid
State State State State State State State State State State State
Active Canceling-* Completing Compensating Failing-* NotCompleting Exiting Ended- Ended- Ended- Ended
Failed Exited NotCompleted
Compens- Invalid Invalid Invalid Compensating Invalid Compensating Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid
ate State State State State State State State State State State State
Active Canceling-* Completing Closing Failing-* NotCompleting Exiting Ended- Ended- Ended- Ended
Failed Exited NotCompleted
Failed Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Forget Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid
State State State State State State State State State State State
Ended- Ended-
Active Canceling-* Completing Completed Closing Compensating Failed NotComleting Exiting Failed Ended- Ended- Ended
Exited NotCompleted
Exited Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Forget Invalid Invalid Invalid
State State State State State State State State State State State
Ended- Ended-
Active Canceling-* Completing Completed Closing Compensating Failing-* NotComleting Exited Ended- Exited Ended- Ended
Failed NotCompleted
NotComp- Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid Forget Invalid Invalid Invalid Invalid
leted State State State State State State State State State State State
Ended- Ended-
Active Canceling-* Completing Completed Closing Compensating Failing-* NotCompleted Exiting Ended- Ended- NotCompleted Ended
Failed Exited
