--- Page 1 ---
Modeling and Veriﬁcation of CKB Consensus
Protocol in UPPAAL
Yi-Chun Feng, Yuteng Lu, Meng Sun
School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University, Beijing, China
fyichunfeng,luyuteng,sunm g@pku.edu.cn
Abstract —The Nervos CKB (Common Knowledge Base) is
a public permissionless blockchain designed for a peer-to-peer
crypto-economy network. The CKB Consensus Protocol is a key
part of the Nervos CKB blockchain that improves the Consen-
sus’s performance limit of Bitcoin. In this paper, we develop a
formal model of the CKB Consensus Protocol and verify some
important properties of the protocol using the UPPAAL model
checker. Based on the formal model, the reliability of CKB
Consensus Protocol can be guaranteed.
Index Terms —CKB, Consensus Protocol, Model Checking,
UPPAAL.
I. I NTRODUCTION
Blockchain can be viewed as a decentralized ledger that
allows direct peer-to-peer information transfer, and has nu-
merous beneﬁts such as persistency, decentralization and
anonymity. It has been popularized since the introduction of
Bitcoin by Satoshi Nakamoto [8]. Developing a trustworthy
blockchain is a very challenging task due to the complexity of
the distributed execution environment and the existence of vul-
nerabilities. In fact, a lot of attacks on blockchains succeeded
in the past years, such as the famous DAO (Decentralized
Autonomous Organization) attack which results in the lost of
more than 50M USD [2]. Thus, many researchers conduct
investigations on blockchains’ security problems.
CKB blockchain [1] has a decentralized secure layer that
provides common knowledge for the peer-to-peer network.
CKB Consensus Protocol [11], a key part of the CKB
blockchain, is designed to overcome two Bitcoin Consensus’s
drawbacks: the low transaction processing throughput and
thevulnerability to selﬁsh mining attacks . CKB Consensus
Protocol limits the time of connecting the sender in search
of a lost transaction. This restriction can improve transaction
processing efﬁciency without compromising the security of
the blockchain. In addition, CKB Consensus Protocol adopts
the “two-step conﬁrmation”, which is used to prevent selﬁsh
mining attacks.
In recent years, CKB has become very popular, and has
been successfully applied in different areas. This makes the
security properties of CKB more and more important. In this
paper, we make some attempts to provide a formal framework
for modeling CKB Consensus Protocol using timed automata
and verifying its security properties in the UPPAAL model
checker [4].
Formal veriﬁcation has high assurance and coverage, so we
choose it to analyze CKB Consensus Protocol’s soundnessand reliability properties. In [6], UPPAAL has been used in
veriﬁcation of the Bitcoin Protocol, and the probability of
success of double-spending attacks based on the formal model
is studied. A framework for modeling the Bitcoin contracts
in Promela and use SPIN to verify whether the logic of a
contract is correct is provided in [3]. The interface automata
model of computation is used in [7] as a semantic domain
to formalize smart contracts for detecting violations of the
contract agreements. The synchronization protocol is another
sub-problem for the veriﬁcation of the CKB blockchain. It has
been discussed in [5], [10]. Based on the related works, we
could see practical meaning of combining formal veriﬁcation
techniques and blockchain.
The main contributions of this paper are as follows:
We propose a formal model of the CKB Consensus
Protocol in which the two-step conﬁrmation, as well as
the miner, the full node, and the block propagation, are
modeled using timed automata.
We deﬁne a family of the CKB Consensus Protocol’s
properties and formally verify them in the UPPAAL
model checker.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: The Nervos
CKB and the CKB consensus protocol are brieﬂy described in
Section II. The formal model of the CKB consensus protocol
is provided in Section III. Section IV proposes the veriﬁcation
of properties in UPPAAL. Section V concludes the paper and
discusses possible future work.
II. A P RIMER ON CKB
Nervos Network [1] is proposed to improve scalability and
provide a better user experience. It uses the idea of off-chain
to create a two-layer environment. The ﬁrst layer in Nervos
Network is the CKB layer. It is responsible for providing
decentralized and secure infrastructure. The second layer is
the environment for generating states and protecting privacy.
The encryption of the ﬁrst layer will protect the activities in the
second layer. Under the security provided by the CKB layer,
the second layer’s operation can be expanded to a large extent.
The operation of the Nervos Network consists of three parts:
state generation executed, state veriﬁcation, and storing states
in the cell. After the second layer generates a new state, the
state will be placed into the transaction. Later, the transactions
will be broadcasted to the whole network.
The block structures in CKB include the proposal zone and
the commitment zone [9], [11]. Miners put new transactions
DOI reference number: 10.18293/SEKE2021-072.

--- Page 2 ---
into the proposal zone after these transactions are generated.
When the transactions are put into the proposal zone, the
proposal step of the two-step conﬁrmation starts. After the
proposal step, the miner will put the transaction into the
commitment zone and the commitment step begins. After
the two-step conﬁrmation is completed, this transaction is
considered to be “valid”. CKB protocol speciﬁes that all blocks
including orphan blocks that pass PoW will be broadcasted.
The block propagation mechanism in the consensus protocol
checks whether the transaction in the block is lost while
avoiding extra round trips.
III. T HEMODEL OF THE CKB C ONSENSUS PROTOCOL
Our formal model of the CKB Consensus Protocol is mainly
composed of four automata: Two-Step automaton ,Miner au-
tomaton ,Full Node automaton , and Block-Propagation au-
tomaton . The veriﬁcation is modeled based on a single trans-
action subject in which not only the transaction process but
also the interaction among different nodes are presented.
In this model, all variables are used to mark whether the
corresponding operations are successful. The default values
of all variables are 0initially. After the operations are com-
pleted, values will be assigned according to the results. The
assignment is always 1if the operation is successful. When the
operation is abnormal, the variable assignment will be greater
than1. The assigned variables are treated as parameters in the
constraint conditions of state transitions.
A. Two-step Automaton
The two-step conﬁrmation consists of the “proposal” and
“commitment” step. Every transaction that passes two-step
conﬁrmation will be regarded as legal. In Fig. 1, T0is the
initial state, representing the generation of a new transaction.
The mining operation is simulated by channel collectP! which
is synchronous with channel collectP? in Miner automaton.
Variable cpis used to mark whether the transaction has been
written into the proposal zone. Variable cis the global time,
which represents the time interval of each mining epoch.
If a new transaction is processed by a miner, the variable
cpwill be assigned in Miner automaton. T1represents “start
of proposal conﬁrmation”. The proposal conﬁrmation includes
four operations: conﬁrming the transaction exists in the pro-
posal zone, checking the txid of the transaction, conﬁrming
the full node has received the transaction, and verifying the
content of the transaction. The variable checkT is used to mark
whether this transaction passes the txidcheck.
Channel checkTxid! is synchronized to checkTxid? in Full
Node automaton. Variable xis the height of block on
blockchain. Whenever a new block is added into blockchain,
the value of xwill increase by 1. Variable hprecords the height
of block where this transaction is located at.
In the entire two-step conﬁrmation process, if any veriﬁ-
cation fails, the state will transfer to T9, indicating that the
transaction cannot be broadcasted. State T2means “veriﬁ-
cation of transaction”. Variables checkR andcheckV indicate
whether the full node successfully receives and veriﬁes the
Fig. 1. The Two-step Automaton.
transaction respectively. Full Node automaton will assign
values to checkR andcheckV after veriﬁcation. State T3means
that the transaction is ready for “mining of the second step”.
Variable ccis used to mark whether the transaction is written
into the commitment zone. If the transaction has been veriﬁed
in the ﬁrst step of conﬁrmation, it will be regarded as a
“Proposed Transaction”. At the same time, the transaction will
be marked as proposed at height hpif the transaction exists
in one block’s proposal zone with height hp.
All transactions completed the ﬁrst step of conﬁrmation can
be collected by miners and written into the commitment zone
of a new block. Channel collectC! is synchronized to collectC?
in Miner automaton. The difference in mining between the ﬁrst
and the second steps lies in the location where the transaction
is written. The transaction will exist in two blocks with a
certain height interval. The height interval must be limited
within a deﬁned range, and the interval will be checked in the
second step of conﬁrmation.
After the transaction is marked as proposed and written into
the commitment zone, it will reach the state T4, which is
“start of the commitment conﬁrmation”. This step includes two
operations: conﬁrming the proposed transaction and checking
the height interval. Variable checkC presents whether this
transaction conﬂicts with others on the chain. Channel commit-
ted? in Full Node automaton will be synchronized. When the
proposed transaction enters this conﬁrmation, it must meet the
transition constraint cc>= 1, which means that the transaction
has been written in the commitment zone. The variable hc
marks the current height of this block on the chain.
When the state transfers to T5, it must conform to its
invariant close <=hc-hp <=far. The setting of close is to
ensure the time interval is long enough for the transaction
to be propagated to the entire network. The value of faris
designed according to the number of proposed transactions that
its device can store. If the constraint condition checkC == 1 is
met, the state can transfer to T6, and the channel propagating!
will be triggered at the same time. All transactions are regarded

--- Page 3 ---
Fig. 2. The Miner Automaton.
as “Committed Transaction” when they reach state T6.
Channel propagate! is synchronized to propagate? in Block-
Propagation automaton. If the transaction exists in the commit-
ment zone of a certain block and is marked as proposed and
committed, then the transaction can be spread to the network.
State T7andT8represent “authorization of broadcast” and
“prohibition of broadcast” respectively. Variable pstands for
whether this transaction can be propagated. Value 1indicates
that the transaction is legal and propagable, and value 2indi-
cates that the propagation will be blocked. The assignment of
variable pwill be completed by Block-Propagation automaton.
B. Miner Automaton
Fig. 2 demonstrates the behavior of a miner. M1is the
standby state of the miner. After mining, the state transfers to
M2, which represents “new block generation”. If there is a
transaction missing during block propagation, the automaton
will go to channel connecting? through synchronization by
Block-Propagation automaton. Channel request? and query-
ing? describe the process of the miner being asked for the
missing transaction. The miner will send the requested transac-
tion back. Variable checkRe andcheckQ represent the miner’s
reply. Variable ccis the operation result after putting the
transaction into the commitment zone. After two unsuccessful
requests for the transaction, the miner will be regarded as a
suspicious one and be blacklisted. This operation is simulated
by the synchronization channel disconnecting? . State M6
indicates “disconnection”.
C. Full Node Automaton
After the new block is generated, the full node will check the
legitimacy and the PoW of blocks before broadcasting them.
Fig. 3 depicts the Full Node automaton in which all operations
are aimed at a single transaction. In the ﬁrst step of conﬁrma-
tion, the full node will perform the checking of transaction txid
and the veriﬁcation of contents, which are described by the
channels checkTxid? and ReceiveVerify? respectively. In the
second step of conﬁrmation, the full node is responsible for
committing the transaction. F4is the state after the two-step
conﬁrmation automaton synchronizes the committed! channel.
When any operation fails, the state transfers to F5. At this
time, the transaction is deemed invalid.
Fig. 3. The FullNode Automaton.
Fig. 4. The Block-Propagation Automaton.
D. Block Propagation Mechanism
Fig. 4 describes the simulation of block propagation mecha-
nism. Starting from the standby state P0, the entire process is
started via the synchronous channel propagating! in Two-Step
automaton. The meaning of state P1is to check whether the
transaction exists in the commitment zone. Variable pindicates
whether this transaction can be propagated. Value 1means
that the transaction can be broadcast, and 2means broadcast is
prohibited. When cc’s value is not equal to 1, it means that the
transaction does not appear in any public blocks’ commitment
zone.
State P2represents “This transaction is previously un-
known.” If the transaction is not found in the commitment zone
of any public blocks, the synchronization channel connecting!
must be activated to contact the miner. When checkRe >= 2,
it means that the transaction is still not obtained. Then, state
transfers to P3, which means “failure in request”. Block-
Propagation automaton will trigger the channel querying! to
synchronize to the miner, and the miner must reply within a
short time t. Finally, if the missing part is still not known,
the automaton transfers to state P4. State P4represents
“transaction invalidation”. When returning to the standby state,
channel disconnecting! simulates the operation of blacklisting
this miner and disconnecting him. At the same time, variable
pis assigned to 2, which tells Two-Step automaton that this
transaction should not be propagated.
IV. V ERIFICATION IN UPPAAL
In this section, we provide a family of properties that should
be satisﬁed in two-step conﬁrmation. All the properties have
been veriﬁed in the UPPAAL model checker.

--- Page 4 ---
Property 1. All new transactions will go through the process
of being placed in the proposal zone.
A <> TwoStep:T 1
T1means the transaction appears in the proposal zone. All
newly generated transactions will be put into the proposal
zone, then other nodes will receive the information about these
transactions. The validity of these transactions will not affect
the blocks’ legitimacy and the propagation’s legality.
Property 2. When a transaction is regarded as proposed, it
must pass the txidcheck. If the transaction does not ﬁnish the
txidcheck, it cannot become a “proposed transaction”.
A[ ]TwoStep:T 4imply (checkT == 1)
A[ ]not checkT == 1 imply not TwoStep:T 4
Property 3. If a transaction is proposed, the full nodes must
have received and veriﬁed this transaction. If the full nodes
have not received this transaction or veriﬁed the contents, this
transaction cannot be regarded as proposed.
A[ ]TwoStep:T 4imply (checkR == 1 and checkV == 1)
A[ ] (not checkR == 1) or(not checkV == 1)
imply not TwoStep:T 4
In the proposal step, the ﬁrst task is processing the trans-
action txid, and the second task is sending a notiﬁcation to
the full nodes. Before a transaction is regarded as proposed, it
must pass the process of checking txid(checkT == 1 ). If the
checking is unsuccessful, it will never be considered proposed.
In addition, the full nodes must have received ( checkR == 1 )
and veriﬁed ( checkV == 1 ) this transaction. T4indicates that
the transaction is proposed.
Property 4. When a transaction is placed in the commitment
zone, it must be received and veriﬁed by the full nodes. If the
full nodes have not received and veriﬁed this transaction, it
will not appear in the commitment zone.
A[ ]TwoStep:T 5imply checkR == 1 and checkV == 1
A[ ]not(checkR == 1 and checkV == 1)
imply not TwoStep:T 5
T5means the transaction is placed in the commitment zone.
To activate the second stage of two-step conﬁrmation, the
transaction must be put into the commitment zone by miners.
Before being put in the commitment zone, the transaction must
pass the veriﬁcation of the proposal step.
Property 5. When a transaction is committed, it must appear
in the commitment zone with height hc, and satisﬁes the
boundary: close < =hc hp <=far.
A[ ]TwoStep:T 6imply checkC == 1
and(close < =hc hp and hc hp <=far)
T6is a sign of transaction commitment. The value of
checkC indicates whether this transaction is in the commitment
zone.Property 6. If the transaction is missing, and the miner cannot
obtain the transaction after requesting and querying, the miner
will be disconnected and blacklisted.
A[ ]BlockPropagation:P 3and BlockPropagation:P 4
imply MiningNode:M 6
Property 7. This model is repeatable and has no deadlock.
A[ ]not deadlock
V. C ONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we formally illustrate the complete process
of the two-step conﬁrmation of the CKB consensus protocol
in UPPAAL. It may lead to a better understanding of how
the CKB consensus protocol works. All the properties with
clear deﬁnitions are veriﬁed formally in UPPAAL. These
properties could serve as a reference for the CKB application
scenarios. The notion of two-step conﬁrmation has impor-
tant implications for avoiding hiding information. This may
suggest various applications except for blockchain. Having
acknowledged the limitations of the scope, we offer the
framework of verifying the CKB consensus protocol.
In the future, we will investigate the formal model further
to determine whether the CKB consensus protocol could deal
with attacks. Also, the potential of its increasing throughput
needs further exploration. Additional research focusing on the
application scenarios would also be of great value and interest.
We are hopeful that more studies with detailed results could
be provided later.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work has been supported by the Guangdong Science
and Technology Department (Grant no. 2018B010107004) and
the National Natural Science Foundation of China under grant
no. 61772038 and 61532019.
REFERENCES
[1] Nervos Network homepage, June 2020.
[2] The DAO (organization), May 2020.
[3] X. Bai, Z. Cheng, Z. Duan, and K. Hu. Formal modeling and veriﬁcation
of smart contracts. In Proceedings of ICSCA 2018 , pages 322–326.
ACM, 2018.
[4] G. Behrmann, A. David, and K. G. Larsen. A Tutorial on Uppaal. In
Formal Methods for the Design of Real-Time Systems , volume 3185 of
LNCS , pages 200–236. Springer, 2004.
[5] H. Bu and M. Sun. Modeling and Veriﬁcation of the CKB Block
Synchronization Protocol in Coq. In Proceedings of ICFEM 2020 , pages
287–296. Springer, Dec. 2020.
[6] K. Chaudhary, A. Fehnker, J. van de Pol, and M. Stoelinga. Modeling
and veriﬁcation of the bitcoin protocol. In Proceedings of MARS 2015 ,
EPTCS, pages 46–60. Open Publishing Association, 2015.
[7] G. Madl, L. A. D. Bathen, G. H. Flores, and D. Jadav. Formal
veriﬁcation of smart contracts using interface automata. In Proceedings
of Blockchain 2019 , pages 556–563. IEEE, 2019.
[8] S. Nakamoto. Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system.
https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf, 2008.
[9] J. Xie. Nervos CKB: A Common Knowledge Base for Crypto-Economy,
Jan. 2018.
[10] Q. Zhang, Y . Lu, and M. Sun. Modeling and Veriﬁcation of the Nervos
CKB Block Synchronization Protocol in UPPAAL. In Proceedings of
BlockSys 2020 , pages 3–17. Springer, Nov. 2020.
[11] R. Zhang. CKB Consensus Protocol, June 2019.
