--- Page 1 ---
International Journal on Software Tools for Technology Transfer (2022) 24:395–414
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10009-022-00657-z
GENERAL
Special Issue: FMICS 2019/2020
Veriﬁable strategy synthesis for multiple autonomous agents: a
scalable approach
Rong Gu1·Peter G. Jensen2·Danny B. Poulsen2·Cristina Seceleanu1·Eduard Enoiu1·Kristina Lundqvist1
Accepted: 8 March 2022 / Published online: 30 March 2022
© The Author(s) 2022
Abstract
Path planning and task scheduling are two challenging problems in the design of multiple autonomous agents. Both problems
can be solved by the use of exhaustive search techniques such as model checking and algorithmic game theory. However,model checking suffers from the infamous state-space explosion problem that makes it inefﬁcient at solving the problemswhen the number of agents is large, which is often the case in realistic scenarios. In this paper, we propose a new version of our
novel approach called
MCRL that integrates model checking and reinforcement learning to alleviate this scalability limitation.
We apply this new technique to synthesize path planning and task scheduling strategies for multiple autonomous agents. Ourmethod is capable of handling a larger number of agents if compared to what is feasibly handled by the model-checking
technique alone. Additionally,
MCRL also guarantees the correctness of the synthesis results via post-veriﬁcation. The method
is implemented in UPPAAL STRA TEGO and leverages our tool MALTA for model generation, such that one can use the method
with less effort of model construction and higher efﬁciency of learning than those of the original MCRL . We demonstrate the
feasibility of our approach on an industrial case study: an autonomous quarry, and discuss the strengths and weaknesses of
the methods.
Keywords Autonomous agents ·Synthesis ·Model checking ·Reinforcement learning
1 Introduction
With the rise of artiﬁcial intelligence (AI), autonomous
agents, such as driverless cars, drones, and autonomous con-struction equipment, are increasingly integrated in all aspectsof society. Autonomy requires that the involved agents are
B Rong Gu
rong.gu@mdu.se
Peter G. Jensen
pgj@cs.aau.dk
Danny B. Poulsen
dannybpoulsen@cs.aau.dk
Cristina Seceleanu
cristina.seceleanu@mdu.se
Eduard Enoiu
eduard.paul.enoiu@mdu.se
Kristina Lundqvist
kristina.lundqvist@mdu.se
1Mälardalen University, V ästerås, Sweden
2Aalborg University, Ålborg, Denmarkable to sense the often unpredictable environment and act
on changes over time in order to pursue their goals [ 20].
For instance, in a construction site, the autonomy of the
agents (machines) bear the promise of increasing people’ssafety, while improving industrial productivity by automat-ing repetitive tasks. Two major problems need to be solved
to achieve the autonomy during operations: path planning
andtask scheduling . Computing both automatically is called
mission plan synthesis . Path planning aims to calculate a path
that visits all target positions (a.k.a. milestones) and avoids
static obstacles. Algorithms like A* [ 35], Theta* [ 15], and
Rapidly exploring Random Tree [ 29] are adopted widely for
calculating the shortest path between two points in a 2-D
map. While path plans specify the movement between everytwo milestones, the order in which tasks should be completedat milestones is often dealt with as a subsequent optimiza-
tion problem. The optimization problem of task scheduling
is often paired with additional constraints, such as ﬁnishingtasks in a certain order, and repeating some tasks until the
agents are informed to execute other tasks. The requirements
on tasks can involve temporal conditions, e.g., “always start
123

--- Page 2 ---
396 R. Gu et al.
task Abefore task Bis ﬁnished,” and timing constraints, e.g.,
“always ﬁnish all tasks within 8 hours”. All these constraintsmake the task scheduling difﬁcult to complete in practice,
in particular if constraints on computation time are given.
In fact, a simpliﬁed version of task scheduling is the classicjob-shop problem [ 19] ,w h i c hi sN Ph a r d[ 1].
In our previous work [ 22], we proposed an approach based
on Timed Automata (
TA) and Timed Computation Tree Logic
(TCTL ) to formally describe the agents’ movement and task
execution, as well as their requirements, respectively, to facil-
itate synthesis of plans by model checking. The approach
has been implemented as a tool named TAMAA (Timed-
Automata-based Mission planner for Autonomous Agents).
The tool shows the feasibility of solving the mission-planning
problem by using model checking when time of movementand task execution are ﬁxed. However,
TAMAA has two limi-
tations: (i) if moving and executing tasks take unpredictable
durations, TAMAA fails to generate complete mission plans
that address all eventualities; (ii) TAMAA alone does not scale
well with the number of agents growing, as the state space
of the model explodes when the number of agents becomes
large.
In this paper, we ﬁrst solve problem (i) by synthesizing
comprehensive strategies of timed games ( TG), which use
time intervals instead of ﬁxed times as the moving and taskexecution times.
TGare solvable by UPPAAL TIGA [5], which
is for synthesizing strategies of TG.T h e TAMAA -generated
TAcan be re-used and easily converted into TGby labeling
actions as controllable and uncontrollable ones in UPPAAL
TIGA .A st h e TGmodels consider all possible times of task
execution and moving within given intervals, and UPPAAL
TIGA utilizes liveness properties to ﬁnd the state-action pairs
of the models that always eventually reach the goal states,
the results represent the complete mission plans that address
all eventualities.
However, as the synthesis in UPPAAL TIGA is still based
on exhaustive symbolic exploration, this method inevitably
suffers from the same state-space explosion problem as ordi-
nary TAMAA . The state-space explosion problem is one of
the most stringent issues when employing exhaustive search
techniques such as model checking [ 14]; therefore, many
studies have explored ways of ﬁghting it [ 9,34]. To solve
problem (ii), we proposed a novel method called MCRL [23]
that combines model checking with reinforcement learning
[36] to synthesize mission plans for large numbers of agents.
Instead of exhaustively exploring the state space, MCRL sam-
ples the state space randomly within a time frame, and then
uses these samples to train the agent models so that their
behavior becomes increasingly efﬁcient in reaching theirgoals such as ﬁnishing all tasks. Since the method does not
need to traverse every state of the model, state-space explo-
sion is avoided.In this paper, we improve the original
MCRL by integrating
it with UPPAAL STRA TEGO1[18], which is a tool that inte-
grates the UPPAAL model checker, simulation, algorithmic
synthesis (i.e., UPPAAL TIGA ), and learning-based synthesis.
Thanks to the integration, we can merge the sampling phaseand the training phase of
MCRL so that the temporary synthe-
sis results can be used in the simulation and accelerate it to get
to the goal state. Speciﬁcally, after each round of simulation,
the sampled trace is provided to a learning module, whichruns Q-learning [38] to populate a Q-table. Q-learning is a
reinforcement learning algorithm that calculates a value for
each state-action pair in the trace. The state-action pairs andtheir values are stored in the Q-table, which is then used as a
strategy. Strategies are mission plans that constantly provide
suggestions of actions to the agents, at each of their states.The suggested actions include moving to a certain milestone,or executing a certain task. After the learning algorithm is
invoked, an intermediary strategy is generated, which does
not necessarily cover all the eventualities in the unpredictableenvironment. However, it is still input into the next round of
simulation so that the simulator explores the state space in
a heuristic way, by increasing the probabilities of choosingthe actions that have higher values than other actions of the
same state in the Q-table. In this way, the simulation can get
to the goal state increasingly likely and faster.
Although exhaustive model checking suffers from state-
space explosion, it is beneﬁcial at ensuring the correctness of
the synthesized strategies, that is, the latter satisfy all require-
ments, and the completeness, meaning that the synthesizedstrategies cover all the eventualities in the unpredictable envi-
ronment. Therefore, we leverage exhaustive model checking
after a strategy is synthesized by the Q-learning algorithm,to verify if the agent models behave according to the require-
ments speciﬁcation, under the control of the strategy. In this
work, we further extend the model checker of
UPPAAL STRA T-
EGO to support the exhaustive veriﬁcation of the learned
strategies. In this way, model checking and reinforcement
learning are combined effectively by our method ( MCRL ),
in solving the mission-plan synthesis problem of multipleautonomous agents. Moreover, the new version of
MCRL
reuses the automation of model construction provided by ourtoolset named MALTA .
To summarize, this paper is an extension of our previous
work [ 23] and the new contributions are:
•An improved version of
TAMAA that employs UPPAAL
TIGA to synthesize mission plans (i.e., strategies) that
consider all the eventualities in the respective environ-
ments.
•A new version of MCRL integrated in UPPAAL STRA TEGO ,
which provides advantages such as a merged phase of
1https://people.cs.aau.dk/~marius/stratego/
123

--- Page 3 ---
Veriﬁable strategy synthesis for multiple autonomous agents: a scalable approach 397
sampling and training that beneﬁt each other.
T h en e wv e r s i o no f MCRL is implemented in an extensible
scheme with the help of UPPAAL STRA TEGO , so that users
can replace the learning algorithm with their own pre-
compiled libraries.
•Experimental evaluation of the new methods by apply-
ing them on an industrial case study to demonstrate their
merits and weaknesses.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In
Sect. 2, we introduce the preliminaries of this paper, that
is, deﬁnitions of timed automata, (stochastic) timed games,(stochastic) strategies, and reinforcement learning. Section3describes the problem of strategy synthesis for multiple
agents, as well as its challenges. Section 4presents all the
solutions and their application ranges. This section providesa general view of the methods and describes their differ-
ences. In Sect. 5, we overview our previous method
TAMAA ,
which is the foundation of the new methods, and introduce theimproved version of
TAMAA inUPPAAL TIGA . Section 6con-
tinues with the introduction of the learning-based method for
strategy synthesis. It ﬁrst analyzes the root of the scalabilityproblem of
TAMAA , after which it describes the new MCRL .
Section 7presents the implementation of MCRL and the inte-
gration with UPPAAL STRA TEGO , as well as the automated
model generation supported by our existing toolset. Next,we describe the evaluation experiments in Sect. 8, where we
present the results of the experiments, as well as a discus-
sion of the merits and weaknesses of the simulation-basedmethods and the improved version of
TAMAA . In Sect. 9,w e
compare to related work, before concluding the paper in Sect.
10.
2 Preliminaries
2.1 Timed automata and timed games
Deﬁnition 1 ATimed Automaton TA[2] is a tuple:
A=<L,l0,X,Σ, E,I>, (1)
where Lis a ﬁnite set of locations, l0is the initial location, X
is a ﬁnite set of nonnegative real-valued clocks, Σis a ﬁnite
set of actions, E⊆L×B(X)×Σ×2X×Lis a ﬁnite set
of edges, where B(X)is the set of guards over X, that is,
conjunctive formulas of clock constraints of the form x⊿/triangleleftn
orx−y⊿/triangleleftn, where x,y∈X,n∈N,⊿/triangleleft ∈ {<,≤,=,≥,>},
and I:L→B(X)assigns an invariant to each location.
The semantics of a TAAis deﬁned as a timed transition
system over states (l,v), where lis a location and v∈RX
represents the valuation of the clocks on that location, withthe initial state s0=(l0,v0), where v0assigns all clocks in X
to zero. There are two kinds of transitions:
(i)delay transitions :(l,v)d−→(l,v⊕d), where v⊕dis the
result obtained by incrementing all clocks of the automaton
with the delay amount dsuch that v⊕d|/equal1I(l), and
(ii)discrete transitions :(l,v)a−→(l/prime,v/prime), corresponding to
traversing an edge lg,a,r−−−→l/primefor which the guard gevaluates
totrue in the source state (l,v),a∈Σis an action, ris
the clock reset set, and clock valuation v/primeof the target state
(l/prime,v/prime)is obtained from vby resetting all clocks in rsuch
thatv/prime|/equal1I(l/prime).
We denote the timed transition system of a TAAbySA.
Ar u n πof a TAAis a sequence of alternating delay and
discrete transitions of its SA:π=(l0,v0)d1−→(l0,v1)a1−→
(l1,v/prime
1)d2−→...dn−→(ln−1,vn)an−→(ln,v/prime
n), where direfers to
a delay transition and airefers to a discrete transition. We
denote the set of ﬁnite runs of Astarting from (l0,v0)as
Πf(A).
ATimed Game G(TG)[13]i sa TAwhose actions Σare
partitioned into controllable ( Σc) and uncontrollable ( Σu)
actions. The timed transition system, runs, and a set of runs
of a TGare denoted as SG,π, andΠ(G), respectively. TGis
a useful mathematical model, suitable to describe a systemconsisting of several players that compete or collaborate to
win the game, e.g., by ﬁnishing their tasks. Each player can
take arbitrary numbers of actions before other players act.The numbers depend on the design of the
TG. Informally, a
strategy is a function that during the course of the TGcon-
stantly suggests the players what to do next in order to win the
game. The suggestion is either a controllable action a∈Σc
or a delay. Delays in strategies are denoted as λ, which do not
indicate the lengths of delays, whereas the symbol diused
in the deﬁnition of runs refers to concrete delays with spe-ciﬁc lengths. The formal deﬁnition of strategies is as follows,
where last(π
f)is used to denote the last state of a ﬁnite run
πf:
Deﬁnition 2 (Strategy )L e tG=<L,l0,X,Σc∪Σu,I>
b eaT G .As t r a t e g y σoverGis a partial function: πf→
Σc∪{λ}such that for any ﬁnite run πfending in state q(i.e.,
q=last(πf)), if a∈σ(π f)∩Σc, then there must exist a
transition qa−→q/prime∈SG.
Deﬁnition 2indicates that a strategy is a function that
takes ﬁnite runs of the TGas input and output controllable
actions or delays as suggestions of actions to the agents. Ifthe strategy σismemoryless , that is, the decisions on actions
depend only on the current state, it can be represented as a
function: last(π
f)→Σc∪{λ}. In this paper, we focus
onmemoryless andnon-lazy winning strategies [ 17], which
123

--- Page 4 ---
398 R. Gu et al.
either urgently decide on a controllable action or wait until
the environment acts.2
2.2 Stochastic timed games and stochastic
strategies
In principle, more information is often known of the environ-
ment, for instance, the likelihood of actions or the probability
distribution of delays. In this section, we consider Stochastic
Timed Games , where a stochastic environment is assumed.
The environment makes choices of delay and uncontrollable
actions stochastically, according to a density function for agiven state.
We deﬁne the Stochastic Timed Game as a Timed Markov
Decision Process (TMDP) [ 17]:
Deﬁnition 3 (Stochastic Timed Games ) A Stochastic Timed
Game (
STG )i sa TMDP P=<G,/precedesequalu>, where G=<
L,l0,X,Σc∪Σu,E,I>is a TG, andμuis a family of
density-functions. Let μu
q(d,u)∈R≥0be a member of μu,
which assigns a probability density of the environment tak-ing the uncontrollable action “ u” after a delay of “ d”a tt h e
state “ q,” where {μ
u
q:∃l∃v.q=(l,v)},u∈Σuis an uncon-
trollable action, and qis a state (l,v).
Stochastic strategies [ 17]f o r STG are correspondingly
deﬁned as follows:
Deﬁnition 4 (Stochastic Strategy ) A stochastic strategy μc
for a STG is a family of density-functions. Let μc
q(d,c)∈R≥0
be a member of μc, which assigns a probability density of
the controller taking the controllable action “ c” after a delay
of “d” from state “ q,” where {μc
q:∃l∃v.q=(l,v)},c∈Σc
is a controllable action, and qis a state (l,v).
Remark 1 The STG models are for sampling the state-action
pairs in the corresponding TG. They are used in the simu-
lation and learning phases of MCRL .T h e TGmodels, which
reﬂect the agents’ behavior more realistically, are used in theveriﬁcation phase of
MCRL , and the algorithmic synthesis in
UPPAAL TIGA .
2.3 UPPAAL, UPPAAL TIGA, and UPPAAL
STRATEGO
2.3.1 UPPAAL
UPPAAL [6] is a state-of-the-art model checker for real-time
systems. It supports modeling, simulation, and model check-ing, and uses an extension of
TAas the modeling formalism.
We use an example depicted in Fig. 1to illustrate a sim-
ple UPPAAL TA (UTA ) modeling trafﬁc lights. Locations are
2This kind of strategies is shown to sufﬁce for optimal scheduling of
Duration Probabilistic Automata [ 27].
Fig. 1 An example of a UPPAAL timed automaton (UTA) of a trafﬁc
light
circles, such as the ones labeled Red andGreen , which
model the two colors of the trafﬁc lights. The initial location
is the double circle (i.e., Red ). One UTA can have only one
initial location. The UTA ’sedges are directed lines that con-
nect locations, which can be decorated by guards . A clock
variable xis deﬁned to measure the elapse of time, and used
in the invariants on locations (e.g., x<=6), which specify
how long the UTA can delay on that location, and guards on
edges (e.g., x>=3).
Anetwork ofUTA models a parallel composition of UTA
that can synchronize via channels (i.e., a!is synchronized
with a? by handshake). In Fig. 1, the edges are labeled with
channels named STOP andGO, which synchronize this UTA
with other UTA .I n UPPAAL , there are two special kinds of
locations, namely urgent and committed locations. Urgent
locations are denoted by encircled u, and require that the timedoes not elapse on those locations (e.g., Yellow );committed
locations are denoted by encircled c, and require that not only
no time elapses there but also the next edge to be traversed
must start from one of the committed locations in the networkof
UTA (e.g., Switch ).UTA also extends TAby introducing
discrete data variables that can be updated via functions on
edges. Functions are written in a subset of the C language.Clocks can be reset over edges, e.g., x=0 in Fig. 1.
The
UPPAAL queries that we verify in this paper are prop-
erties of the following form, where pis an atomic proposition
over the locations, clocks, and data variables of the UTA :( i )
Invariance :A[]pmeaning that for all runs, for all states in
each run, pis satisﬁed, (ii) Liveness :A<>pmeaning that
for all runs, pis satisﬁed by at least one state in each run,
and (iii) Reachability :E<>pmeaning that there exists a run
where pis satisﬁed by at least one state of the run.
2.3.2 UPPAAL TIGA and UPPAAL STRATEGO
UPPAAL TIGA [5] is an extension of UPPAAL , which supports
solving games based on TGwith respect to the temporal prop-
erties aforementioned. In this paper, we use UPPAAL TIGA to
solve our task scheduling problem in the ﬁrst solution basedon game-theoretic synthesis.
UPPAAL STRA TEGO [18]i sa
tool that integrates UPPAAL with two of its branches, that is,
UPPAAL SMC [16] (statistical model checking) and UPPAAL
TIGA [5]. In addition, it also supports learning-based algo-
123

--- Page 5 ---
Veriﬁable strategy synthesis for multiple autonomous agents: a scalable approach 399
rithms for solving STG , and we use this tool to develop our
second solution to strategy synthesis that is based on simu-lation and learning.
2.4 Reinforcement learning
MCRL employs reinforcement learning (RL) for strategy
synthesis. RLis a kind of machine learning method for train-
ing reactive systems by rewarding desired behaviors and/or
punishing undesired ones. Agents that constantly act in an
environment and receive feedback (i.e., rewards/penalties)from the environment are reactive systems. RLaims to cal-
culate how agents should take actions in an environment,
in order to maximize the accumulated rewards of actions.Model-free RL, such as Actor-Critic algorithms [28], relies
on samples from the environment, which can be a model
or a real environment, to estimate the rewards of the next
state-action pairs. Model-based RL, such as Dynamic Pro-
gramming [36], uses the model’s predictions or distributions
of the next state-action pairs and their rewards to calculate
optimal actions.
Q-learning is one of the model-free algorithms, which, at
the limit, converges to optimal policies for reactive agents
in a stochastic environment. Policies are associated with astate-action value function called Q function . The optimal Q
function satisﬁes the Bellman optimality equation:
q
∗(s,a)=E[R(s,a)+γmax
a/primeq∗(s/prime,a/prime)], (2)
where q∗(s,a)represents the expected reward of executing
action aat state s,Edenotes the expected value function,
R(s,a)is the reward obtained by taking the action aat state
s,γis a discounting value, s/primeis the new state coming from
state sby taking action a, and max
a/primeq∗(s/prime,a/prime)represents the
maximum reward that can be achieved by any possible next
state-action pair (s/prime,a/prime). The Bellman equation calculates the
rewards of state-action pairs by considering both the current
reward and the discounted maximum future reward. Watkins
[38] shows that under the assumption of sufﬁcient repeated
sampling, the Q-learning algorithm converges towards theoptimal Q-values and thus the solution to the Bellman equa-
tions. These values are stored in Q-tables, which serve as the
strategies that we aim to synthesize.
3 Problem description and analysis
In this section, we introduce the autonomous quarry that
serves as the industrial case study provided by VOLVO Con-
struction Equipment (CE) in Sweden. Based on this practical
case study, we formulate our research problem and two asso-ciated challenges.
Fig. 2 An example of an autonomous quarry
3.1 An industrial case study: the autonomous quarry
As depicted in Fig. 2, the quarry contains various autonomous
vehicles, e.g., trucks and wheel loaders, which are the agents
in the environment.
A typical mission of the agents is to transport stones
from stone piles to crushers. Speciﬁcally, wheel loaders ﬁrstdig stones at the stones piles and load them into trucks
that are responsible for transporting the stones to crush-
ers. The primary crushers crush the stones into fractions,after which trucks load the crushed stones and transport the
material to the secondary crushers, which is the ﬁnal des-
tination of the stones. During the transportation, the agents(that is, autonomous wheel loaders and trucks) must avoid
static obstacles (e.g., holes and rocks on the ground, larger
than given sizes) and dynamic obstacles (e.g., humans, othermobile machines). In brief, these agents must be able toplan their paths to the target positions (a.k.a. milestones) and
schedule their tasks so that the entire mission could be accom-
plished respecting some requirements, e.g., quarrying 1500m
3of stones per day.
Generalizing from this case study, our research problem
of mission planning involves task scheduling, path planningand following, and collision avoidance for multiple agents.
In our previous work [ 24,25], we have introduced a solution
for the collision-avoidance problem of dynamic obstacles,and proposed a method for verifying this function. In thispaper, we focus on synthesizing static mission plans, while
assuming that the dynamic avoidance among agents as well
as other moving obstacles functions correctly.
3.2 Problem analysis
Algorithms such as Theta* [ 15] and RRT [ 29] are capable
of computing collision-free paths between two milestones.We adopt the Theta* algorithm to solve path-planning in this
study and the experiments, as the algorithm is especially good
at generating smooth paths with any-angle turning points,in 2-D maps. Note that, our toolset (introduced in Sect. 7)
supports more path-planning algorithms. After the paths are
calculated, the execution order of tasks on milestones mustbe decided to achieve correct and efﬁcient strategies. Based
123

--- Page 6 ---
400 R. Gu et al.
on the requirements from VOLVO CE , we formulate and cat-
egorize the requirements of tasks as follows:
–Milestone Matching Tasks must be performed at the right
milestones, e.g., digging stones must be carried out at
stone piles.
–Task Sequencing The task execution order must be cor-
rect, e.g., unloading stones into the primary crusher must
be executed after digging stones is ﬁnished, but before
loading stones starts.
–Timing All tasks that contribute to the goal (e.g. trans-
porting 10 tons of stones to the secondary crusher) must
be ﬁnished within a prescribed time (e.g. within 1 hour).
Task scheduling now reduces to synthesizing a plan of task
execution such that, by following the plan, agents can work
independently or collectively to accomplish the entire mis-
sion according to the requirements. The classic schedulingproblem called the job-shop problem [ 19] is a simpliﬁed
version of the task scheduling. Being an NP-hard problem,
even a simple instance of the job-shop problem with very
restrictive constraints remains difﬁcult to solve [ 1]. Addition-
ally, our task-scheduling problem poses some unique extra
challenges, as described in the next section. For simplicity,
henceforth, we call the problem of path planning and taskscheduling for autonomous agents as mission planning .
3.3 Non-determinism and scalability of mission
planning
Different from the classic job-shop problem, there are two
types of uncertainties existing in the environment that must
be considered in the mission-planning phase, that is, the non-
deterministic execution time of tasks and non-deterministic
duration of agent movement.
–Non-deterministic task execution time The execution time
of a task is usually a time interval between the BCET (best-
case execution time) and WCET (worst-case execution
time) of the respective task.
–Non-deterministic movement time The devices at some
milestones could be exclusively occupied by agents.
Therefore, other agents that are approaching these mile-
stones must wait until those devices are released, respec-tively, and then start their tasks. This yields a non-deterministic movement time.
These features complicate our task scheduling even more
than in the classic job-shop case. Our target is not only calcu-lating mission plans, but also guaranteeing their correctness,
that is, showing that the synthesized mission plan (a.k.a.,
strategy) satisﬁes all the requirements, and that it is com-plete, namely, covers all eventualities in the environment.In our previous work [ 22], we have proposed an approach
called
TAMAA , based on the model-checking technique, to
synthesize mission plans for agents. This approach can auto-
matically generate mission plans, assuming feasible numbers
of milestones and tasks up to 100. However, the approachcannot cover all eventualities when the environment is non-deterministic. Additionally, when the number of agents
exceeds 5,
TAMAA exhausts the physical memory due to the
notorious state-space explosion problem of model checking[14].
4 Overall description of the solutions
Facing the limitation of TAMAA , we propose two solutions in
this paper, that is, (1) a game-theoretic synthesis (i.e., TIGA),and (2) a simulation-based synthesis (i.e., MCRL).
Table 1lists the solutions and their characteristics.
TAMAA
uses UTA as the modeling language and is suitable for 1-
player games, in which agents have the full control over
their environment. As depicted in Fig. 3a, the agent mod-
els in TAMAA have no uncontrollable actions, which means
the agents can totally control their movement and task exe-cution times. Therefore, the goal of
TAMAA is to ﬁnd the best
mission plans that ﬁnish all tasks the fastest.
However, strategies of 11
2-player and 2-player games
can only choose controllable actions, whereas the uncon-
trollable actions are taken by the environment either non-
deterministically in 2-player games, or stochastically in1
1
2-player games (Fig. 3b). Therefore, the goal of 2-player
games, solvable by UPPAAL TIGA and MCRL , is to ﬁnd the
comprehensive strategies that enable the agents to ﬁnish theirtasks no matter which and when uncontrollable actions aretaken. Taking into account the probabilities of performing the
uncontrollable actions, the goal of 1
1
2-player games, solvable
byUPPAAL STRA TEGO , is to ﬁnd the strategies that have the
highest probability of ﬁnishing all tasks.
In summary, different methods are suitable for different
applications, and have their own advantages and disadvan-tages. When stochastic behaviors are observed in the system,
1
1
2-player games and UPPAAL STRA TEGO can provide a
suitable solution. When agents can fully control their taskexecution times, 1-player games and
TAMAA can be the right
choice (Sect. 5). When the task execution times are ﬂexible
rather than ﬁxed and the uncontrollable actions are non-
deterministic, UPPAAL TIGA (Sect. 5) and MCRL (Sect. 6)
are capable of handling the problem.
UPPAAL TIGA is sound and complete in the sense that when
a strategy is synthesized, it is guaranteed to be correct by con-struction, and conversely, when such a strategy exists in the
state space of the model,
UPPAAL TIGA is able to ﬁnd it. How-
ever, UPPAAL TIGA suffers from the scalability problem as the
method relies on the exhaustive graphic search. MCRL uses a
123

--- Page 7 ---
Veriﬁable strategy synthesis for multiple autonomous agents: a scalable approach 401
Table 1 Summary of all solutions
TAMAA TIGA MCRL STRA TEGO
Model UTA TG TG & STG STG
Game 1 player 2 player 2 player 11
2player
Techniques Model checking [ 22] Symbolic on-the-ﬂy
algorithm [ 13]Reinforcement
learning & Model
checking [ 23]Reinforcement
learning [ 18,26]
Fig. 3 Examples of symbolic
state spaces of different modelsof games. Probabilities in bare
o n l yu s e di n1
1
2-player games
simulation-based method for synthesis and proposes a post-
veriﬁcation of the synthesized strategies, which alleviates thescalability problem while sacriﬁcing the completeness of the
method, that is, although
MCRL has the ability to deal with
more agents than UPPAAL TIGA , it does not guarantee to syn-
thesize a strategy even if such strategy exists.
We will introduce these methods in detail in Sects. 5and 6,
and then compare their performance in different applicationscenarios in Sect. 8.
5 Solution 1: game-theoretic synthesis
In this section, we introduce the ﬁrst solution, that is, our
game-theoretic synthesis , which is based on an exhaustive
search of the state spaces of agent models. We have twomethods belonging to such kind of synthesis, namely the
original
TAMAA [22] and TAMAA inUPPAAL TIGA [5]. As
aforementioned, the original TAMAA is designed to solve 1-
player games, whereas TAMAA inUPPAAL TIGA leverage the
models of TAMAA and the algorithmic method of synthesis
ofUPPAAL TIGA to synthesize complete plans that take into
account any (possibly antagonistic) environmental action.
First, we overview TAMAA , which provides an automatic
model generation and synthesis of mission plans for 1-playergames.5.1 Overall description of TAMAA
TAMAA [22] enables users to conﬁgure their agents, tasks,
and working environment in a graphical user interface (GUI),
and automatically generate UTA networks that model the
movement and task execution of agents. After users ﬁnish
the conﬁguration, UPPAAL is called to verify the UTA models
in order to generate runs that satisfy various properties. Theveriﬁcation used in
TAMAA is not for checking if the model
is correct or not, but for generating runs of the model, which
are then parsed to generate mission plans.
5.2 Mission-plan synthesis by TAMAA
To pave the foundation of the synthesis method, we ﬁrst
elaborate the UTA models generated by TAMAA by an exam-
ple illustrated in Fig. 4a. These models are also used in the
improved solution of TAMAA with some slight adjustments
(see Sect. 5.3).
In the quarry example, there are four autonomous trucks
starting at milestone A, which aim to transport stones from
milestone Bto the primary crusher at milestone CorD, and
eventually go to the secondary crusher at milestone E.A
wheel loader is working at milestone Cto dig stones and
load them into the trucks. Only the autonomous trucks arethe agents that we are interested in. First, the environment is
123

--- Page 8 ---
402 R. Gu et al.
Fig. 4 An example of calculating paths by decomposing the map and
running the Theta* algorithm
Fig. 5 TA models of an agent’s movement and task execution
decomposed into a Cartesian grid and the Theta* algorithm
[15] is executed to calculate the shortest paths among mile-
stones A–E(See Fig. 4b). Note that the trucks only need to
choose one primary crusher at position CorD, to unload
stones.
Next, UTA models are automatically generated by TAMAA ,
based on the shortest paths. For brevity, in Fig. 5a, we show
a part of the UTA model in UPPAAL describing the movement
of the autonomous trucks between milestones AandB.T h e
movement to other milestones is modeled in a similar way.Locations AandBrepresent milestones Aand B, respec-
tively. The outgoing edge from the urgent initial location to
location Aindicates that the trucks start from milestone A.
Locations FATB andFBTA are created to count the traveling
time between AandB.
A constant variable MTstores the traveling time. The agent
is only allowed to move when it is not executing any tasks.Therefore, channel move [id] is used to synchronize the
transitions in the movement
UTA with the task execution UTA
(Fig. 5b) so that the moving actions are only enabled when
the agent is idle, where the variable idrefers to the cur-rent agent in both the movement UTA and the task execution
UTA . A two-dimensional Boolean array named position
is updated in this UTA , in which each element stores whether
a certain milestone is being occupied by an agent. To model
the agents’ movement on the paths in Fig. 4b,TAMAA instan-
tiates movement UTA similar to Fig. 5a.
The task execution UTA models the actions that an agent
can choose to execute at a milestone. One such UTA is partly
depicted in Fig. 5b, where location Idle represents the sta-
tus of “no operation,” when the agent is allowed to move,
and location T2represents the task of unloading stones into
a primary crusher. The self-loop of location Idle labeled
bychannel move [id] regulates the movement UTA to start
to move only when the task execution UTA is at location
Idle . Two Boolean arrays named tsandtfare updated
in the UTA , representing whether a task has been started or
ﬁnished, respectively. Assuming trucks need to iterate their
tasks multiple times before transporting all the stones, the
guard of the incoming edge of location T2enables this edge
if the following conditions are true : (i) the task of loading
stones from the wheel loader is done (i.e., tf[id][1] is
true ), (ii) the agent must be at milestone CorD, where the
primary crushers are located (i.e., position[id][2] /bardbl
position[id][3] istrue ), (iii) no other agent is exe-
cuting this task (i.e., !isBusy(2) istrue ), and (iv) the
task has not been done in this round of transportation (i.e.,isNecessary(2) istrue ). Location T2 has an invari-
ant indicating that the execution time of the task must not
exceed its
WCET . Similarly, the guard on the outgoing edge
of location T2ensures that task is ﬁnished after the exe-
cution time is greater than or equal to BCET . The function
updateIteration() updates the integer of task itera-
tion.
After the resulting UTA model is automatically gener-
ated by TAMAA , properties that formalize the requirements
mentioned in Sect. 3.2are also generated by using the conﬁg-
uration information and well-designed TCTL templates. The
Timing requirement is used for synthesizing mission plans
that ﬁnish all tasks within a prescribed time limit. Others arefor verifying if the models guarantee that the mission plans
are functionally correct. For brevity, we only show the
TCTL
property of the Timing requirement used in UPPAAL . The rest
of the properties are reported in our previous work [ 22]. The
TCTL reachability Query ( 3) checks if agents can accomplish
their missions within TLtime units, where ite is an integer
array storing the iteration of the tasks, that is, ﬁnishing alltasks once counts for one round, xis a clock variable that is
never reset, NandMare two integers indicating the number
of agents and the requested iterations of tasks, respectively:
E<> ((forall(i:int[0,N-1]) ite[i]>=M) &&
x≤TL) (3)
123

--- Page 9 ---
Veriﬁable strategy synthesis for multiple autonomous agents: a scalable approach 403
Fig. 6 A segment of a run generated by TAMAA
The target of mission planning in a 1-player game is to ﬁnd
the run that reaches the goal state where, for example, agents
ﬁnish all the tasks. Figure 6depicts a segment of such run
belonging to a model of 2 agents, where states of the modelsare symbolically represented by the locations of the
UTA ,mi
andteistand for actions in movement and task execution
UTA of agent i, respectively, and move[i]:te i->m istands
for the synchronized actions of starting to move. As depicted,
all the actions are controllable by the agents (i.e., solid lines),
which consecutively or alternately move the respective agentand execute tasks. They can stay at the same milestone (e.g.,
B) but cannot execute the same task (e.g., two T1cannot
appear at the same state) unless the agents are not mutualexclusive of the task.
As explained in Sect. 4, runs like the one in Fig. 6are mis-
sion plans of 1-player games. To obtain such runs,
TAMAA
uses the model checker of UPPAAL to verify the UTA mod-
els of agents against reachability properties in the form of
Query ( 3). If the properties are satisﬁed, UPPAAL can gener-
ate runs that can be either the fastest, shortest, or random run,respectively. Hence,
TAMAA can generate these three kinds
of mission plans.
However, when the problem becomes a 11
2-player game
or a 2-player game, TAMAA is not able to solve it, because
the task execution times are decided by the uncontrollable
actions taken by the environment. We need another method
to deal with these problems such that the mission plans cancover all possible scenarios, even in the face of an antago-
nistic environment.
5.3 Synthesizing strategies in UPPAAL TIGA
In this subsection, we apply UPPAAL TIGA instead of UPPAAL
to synthesize strategies deﬁned by Deﬁnition 2, which serve
as the complete mission plans that the original TAMAA is not
able to synthesize.
We recast the models of TAMAA from the UTA formal-
ism into the TGformalism of UPPAAL TIGA as follows. As
depicted in Fig. 7a, the edge from location FATB (resp.,
Fig. 7 TG models of an agent’s movement and task execution in
UPPAAL TIGA
FBTA ) to location B(resp., A) is marked as uncontrollable.
This change indicates that the decision of choosing a mile-stone to visit is made by the agent, whereas the duration of
the movement to reach the milestone is determined by the
environment. Note that the invariant on FATB (i.e.,t<=MT)
and the guard on the outgoing edge of FATB (i.e.,t>=MT)
force the duration to be MT. Similarly, in Fig. 7b, the edge
from location T2to location Idle is marked as uncontrol-
lable, indicating that the duration of the task is determinedby the environment.
Besides the change of uncontrollable actions, the synchro-
nization between the task execution
UTA and movement UTA
is removed to avoid the input non-determinism of random
simulation in UPPAAL . Instead, a global Boolean array idle
is introduced in the TGmodels to store whether the agents
are idle or not. This array is used in the function namedisReady in the movement
TG, which returns true when the
corresponding element in idle istrue and the agent has not
ﬁnished its requested iteration of tasks.
Query ( 3) is also adjusted to synthesize complete strate-
gies that deal with the non-determinism of the environment,
as follows:
strategy st = control: A<>
((forall(i:int[0,N-1])ite[i] ≥M)&&
x≤TL) (4)
Query ( 4) applies the universal quantiﬁer Aon runs and the
“eventually” temporal operator <>on states, which means
that the synthesized strategy stmust always guide the agents
123

--- Page 10 ---
404 R. Gu et al.
Fig. 8 A segment of a strategy generated by UPPAAL TIGA
to ﬁnish their tasks for Mrounds within TLtime limit, no
matter how long the time of task execution is.
As depicted by Fig. 8, the runs generated by UPPAAL TIGA
contain controllable (solid lines) and uncontrollable actions
(dashed lines). The other notions of the ﬁgure are the same
as in Fig. 6. The ﬁrst four steps in Figs. 6and 8are the same,
being all controllable actions. The ﬁfth step in Fig. 8starts
to be different, because it is an uncontrollable action, which
means that the environment decides which actions to per-
form, instead of the agents. Assuming that the agents travel atthe same speed, at state (FATB, Idle, FATB, Idle) ,
the environment can choose agent 0 to arrive at milestone B
ﬁrst via the uncontrollable action in m
0; or choose agent 1 to
arrive ﬁrst via the uncontrollable action in m1. The actions
of ﬁnishing tasks are also uncontrollable, so the task execu-
tion times are uncertain from the agents’ point of view. Thestrategies synthesized by
UPPAAL TIGA are complete in the
sense that no matter which and when uncontrollable actions
are taken, the agents can always ﬁnish their tasks with respect
to various requirements by following the strategies.
Although the strategies are now complete, since UPPAAL
TIGA is also (in the worst case) exhaustively exploring the
state space to synthesize strategies, the scalability problem of
TAMAA still exists in UPPAAL TIGA . As depicted in Table 2,
the number of explored states, and the computation time
increase exponentially with the agent number growing lin-early, which implies that
UPPAAL TIGA encounters the state
space explosion.
6 Solution 2: simulation-based synthesis
In this section, we introduce our second solution for thetask-scheduling problem, which is based on simulation and
learning. First, we describe the root of the state-space explo-
sion problem that the both the original and improved versionsof
TAMAA have.6.1 State-space exploration of TAMAA
The states of the agent models are the Cartesian product of
states in each individual agent. Therefore, the state space
of multiple agents grows exponentially with the number ofagents growing linearly. The interleaving actions among theagents also increase the state space. Running
TAMAA in
UPPAAL TIGA requires searching the state space of the model.
The essence of the method is about searching and storing thestate space in order to ﬁnd the runs that reach (respectively,
avoid) certain states for reachability properties (respectively,
safety properties). Since it relies on an implementation ofan on-the-ﬂy symbolic algorithm,
UPPAAL TIGA may termi-
nate before having explored the entire state space, which
alleviates the state-space explosion problem. However, thesearching algorithm is either breadth-ﬁrst, depth-ﬁrst, or ran-dom, which is not heuristic because it constantly follows the
same order of searching without using the historical infor-
mation of the searched state space. Therefore, the synthesismethod in
UPPAAL TIGA can take a long time to ﬁnd the
desired runs when the state space is large. The simulation-
based synthesis, which is presented in the next subsection,improves the method in this aspect.
6.2 Learning strategies
Instead of using a symbolic and potentially exhaustive
method, we study here the use of simulation-based synthesis
algorithms such as Q-learning [38]. Rather than exploring
the state space exhaustively, simulation-based methods sam-
ple the state space strategically, which happens often in a
reactive manner, hence they can avoid state-space explosion.Nonetheless, simulation-based approaches sacriﬁce com-pleteness over speed of synthesis, but gain the ability to
accommodate a stochastic resolution of environment choices.
In this subsection, we go through the workﬂow of the new
version of
MCRL , which is integrated with UPPAAL STRA T-
EGO . In the rest of Sect. 6, we introduce the new features of the
new MCRL while brieﬂy introducing the functions and param-
eters in UPPAAL STRA TEGO . For technical details of UPPAAL
STRA TEGO , readers are referred to the literature [ 18,26].
As depicted in Fig. 9,MCRL explores the state space of
the TGmodel via random simulation at the initial step, dur-
ing which runs of the model are sampled. These runs serve
as input to the learning algorithm to compute the rewards
or penalties of the state-action pairs. As a result, the pairsbelonging to the runs that reach the states where tasks are
ﬁnished faster than those in other runs are assigned with
higher rewards, whereas the pairs that end up into deadlockedstates, or are wondering meaninglessly, are assigned with
lower rewards or even penalties. The accumulated values
(i.e., rewards or penalties) of the state-action pairs contributeto synthesize an intermediary strategy, which is then used
123

--- Page 11 ---
Veriﬁable strategy synthesis for multiple autonomous agents: a scalable approach 405
Table 2 Performance evaluation
of synthesis in UPPAAL TIGA
with different number of agentsrunning 3 tasks among 3milestonesNumber of agents Number of explored states Computation time
2 775 5 ms
3 222,88 220 ms4 764,001 18.1 s5 33,312,229 53.8 mins6 Out of memory Unknown
Fig. 9 Workﬂow of MCRL
in the next round of simulation until a user-deﬁned number
of runs is sampled. Speciﬁcally, the simulator exploits the
intermediary strategy in its following rounds of simulationby increasing (respectively, decreasing) the probabilities of
choosing the actions with higher values (respectively, lower
values). In this way, the simulator can reach the goal statefaster and easier than the previous rounds of simulation do.
This integration of simulation and learning is not provided
by the initial version of
MCRL [23].
When a user-deﬁned number of runs is sampled, a strategy
is considered to be produced. The simulation-based synthesis
cannot guarantee the correctness of the strategies. There-
fore, we propose a post-veriﬁcation of the strategies by usingmodel checking. Speciﬁcally, the
TGmodels are veriﬁed
together with the synthesized strategies. When the model
checker encounters multiple controllable actions during ver-iﬁcation, it enquires the strategy to choose the ones with the
highest values. Details of the veriﬁcation are presented in
Sect. 6.2.3 . Strategies that pass the veriﬁcation are guaran-
teed to be correct in the sense that they satisfy the temporal
Fig. 10 Overview of various models and strategies and their relations
in UPPAAL TIGA and UPPAAL STRA TEGO (adapted from [ 18])
constraints of requirements. If the veriﬁcation fails, a new
iteration of the synthesis and veriﬁcation can be carried out,
where the user-deﬁned number of runs is increased for a more
thorough learning. In addition, the state space of the model isrestricted by the synthesized strategy, which enables
MCRL
to deal with more complicated problems than TAMAA and
UPPAAL TIGA do.
In the following subsections, we introduce the key def-
initions, algorithms, and techniques that are used in the
new version of MCRL . Since UPPAAL STRA TEGO integrates
UPPAAL ,UPPAAL SMC , and UPPAAL TIGA , the following
algorithms and techniques are designed and implemented
collectively in UPPAAL STRA TEGO .
6.2.1 Model conversion
The initial step of MCRL is random simulation (see Fig. 9).
The non-deterministic choices of actions in the synthesis of
UPPAAL TIGA are replaced by random sampling of actions in
the simulation. Consequently, the TGmust be converted into
STG by assigning probabilities to actions.
Figure 10shows the model conversion in the process of
learning and verifying a strategy.
In step 1, the task execution TGis changed to an STG , where
the probability of ﬁnishing a task between its BCET and WCET
is uniformly distributed. Note that the uniform distribution
can be changed to a user-deﬁned distribution that can make
the agents ﬁnish their tasks easier, in the simulation. How-ever, it does not change the fact that the synthesized strategies
lack a correctness guarantee, which means that the post-
veriﬁcation is needed anyway. The reason why we chooseto use the uniform distribution is because it is the default
123

--- Page 12 ---
406 R. Gu et al.
distribution on time-bounded delays in UPPAAL STRA TEGO .3
Therefore, the syntactic structure of the TGdoes not need to
be changed. We name the ﬁrst step probabilistic quantiﬁca-
tion because it assigns quantitative probabilities to the actions
that are originally chosen non-deterministically in UPPAAL
TIGA .
Step 2 is MCRL ’s synthesis (also seen in Fig. 9), which
learns a stochastic strategy σ◦based on the STG .σ◦is then
abstracted to a strategy that does not contain any proba-bility, in step 3. The abstraction of stochastic strategies is
introduced in Sect. 6.2.3 . In the ﬁnal step, the
TGand the syn-
thesized strategy σare veriﬁed together by the model checker
ofUPPAAL STRA TEGO .4This is supported by queries in the
form of Query ( 7) that is introduced in Sect. 6.2.3 .
The model conversion does not spoil our assumption of
the environment, because the probabilities assigned to theuncontrollable actions in the
TGare only used in the learning
phase. The formal veriﬁcation of the synthesized strategy is
still by exhaustive model checking, which guarantees thatthe agents satisfy the requirements regardless of how the
environment behaves.
6.2.2 Q-learning algorithm
Although we adopt Q-learning [ 38] in this work, our frame-
work is open for extension with any other learning algo-
rithms. In order to apply Q-learning on our
STG models of
the agents, we ﬁrst deﬁne the states and actions of the Q-
table generated by the learning algorithm. To differentiate
the states of STG , we deﬁne Q-states and Q-actions as fol-
lows.
Deﬁnition 5 (Q-State ) A Q-state is deﬁned as the following
tuple:
QS=<RT,CT,CP,ST>,
where:
•RT∈Ndis a set of natural numbers denoting the itera-
tion of executing all tasks for each agent, where dis the
number of agents,
•CT∈Ndenotes the index of the current task,
•CP∈Ndenotes the index of the current milestone,
•STis a set of Boolean variables encoding the respective
execution statuses of tasks (EST) of all agents.
3The uniform distribution is used in UPPAAL SMC by default.
UPPAAL STRA TEGO includes UPPAAL SMC.
4The model checker is UPPAAL [ 6], which is included in UPPAAL
STRA TEGO.Deﬁnition 6 (Q-Action ) A Q-action is deﬁned as the follow-
ing tuple:
QA=<MT,TT>,
where:
•MT∈{1,2}denotes the type of motion, i.e., 1 :moving,
2:executing a task, and
•TT∈Ndenotes the target of the motion, which can be a
milestone or a task.
In practice, “ RT” is declared as an array of integers in
our UTA models. “ CT” and “ CP” are represented by the cur-
rent locations of the movement UTA and task execution UTA ,
respectively. “ ST” is declared as a two-dimensional array of
Boolean variables that stores the execution statuses of tasks(EST ), that is, ﬁnished (true )o r unﬁnished (false ), for all
agents in the environment. “ TT” can be the index of the tar-
get milestone, or the index of the next task.
Note that a Q-state does not contain continuous vari-
ables such as clocks, because it is impossible to sample
all the possible values of continuous variables in the sim-
ulation. Moreover, the mission-planning problem concernstheEST of agents, which are covered by Q-states already.
Introducing other variables, e.g., a global clock variable that
measures the entire time of mission execution, would beredundant. In addition, to symbolize Q-states with clock vari-ables, we need to use zones [6] instead of their concrete
values, which complicates the problem unnecessarily. The
existence of “ ST”i n Q-states requires the agents to com-
municate with each other, which introduces overhead and
unreliability in the implementation of these agents. How-
ever, to solve the mission-planning problem with uncertaintask execution times, this cost is necessary.
To apply Q-learning, we need to deﬁne a formula to cal-
culate the rewards for state-action pairs. The rewards shouldencourage the agents to accomplish their tasks as fast as pos-sible. Hence, a global clock variable named gtthat measures
the total execution time of agents is deﬁned in our
UTA model,
although it is not included in the Q-states .UPPAAL STRA T-
EGO provides a special query [ 26] that allows us to simulate
the model, sample the speciﬁc runs, and pass them to the
learning algorithm (e.g., Q-learning):
strategy opt = minE(x)[<=T]{dv}–>{cv}:<> P
(5)
In Query ( 5),minE(x) simulates the model while exe-
cuting the learning algorithm to minimize “ x,” which can
be a variable or an expression. Parameter Tis the maximum
simulation time, dvis a set of discrete variables, and cvis a
set of continuous variables. The learning algorithm observes
123

--- Page 13 ---
Veriﬁable strategy synthesis for multiple autonomous agents: a scalable approach 407
the state space of the model partially, by detecting the val-
ues of the variables in dvandcv. The formula “ <>P ”i s
a (T)CTL property satisﬁed by the runs sampled from the
simulation. These runs are used as input to the learning algo-
rithm to evaluate state-action pairs. In this mission-planningproblem, the global clock variable gtisx, the attributes of
Q-state constitute dv,cvis an empty set, and Pis as follows,
being also used in Query ( 4):
(forall(i:int[0,N-1]) ite[i] ≥M)&&gt≤TL
(6)
Algorithm 1presents the process of executing queries in
the form of Query ( 5)i n UPPAAL STRA TEGO . Parameters
stg, iterationNum, totalNum , and goodNum, formula repre-
sent the STG model, the user-deﬁned number of iterations of
learning, the user-deﬁned maximum rounds of simulation,
the maximum number of runs that satisfy the property, and
the property ( <> P in Query ( 5)), respectively.
Algorithm 1: Simpliﬁed algorithm behind the minE -
query of UPPAAL STRA TEGO
1Main( stg, iterationNum, totalNum, goodNum, formula )
2int iterations =0
3int bestFitness =∞
4Strategy best=empty
5Strategy aStrategy =empty
6foriterations <iterationNum do
7 int totalRuns =0
8 int goodRuns =0
9 fortotalRuns <totalNum do
10 Run aRun=simulate (stg,aStrategy )
11 ifaRun satisﬁes formula then
12 aStrategy =learn (aRun)
13 goodRuns ++
14 ifgoodRuns ≥goodNum then
15 break
16 totalRuns ++ ;
17 ifgoodRuns ≥goodNum then
18 ﬁtness =evaluate (aStrategy )
19 ifﬁtness <bestFitness then
20 bestFitness =ﬁtness
21 best=aStrategy
22 iterations ++
23 return best ;
At lines 4 and 5 of Algorithm 1, two empty strategies are
deﬁned, which are two arrays for storing Q-tables, in practice.
In line 10 random simulation starts, from which the runs that
satisfy “ <> P ” (a.k.a., good runs) are sent to the learning
algorithm (line 12), which can be an internal function of
UPPAAL STRA TEGO or a pre-compiled library. The check of
satisfaction of “ <> P ” is done by UPPAAL STRA TEGO .F o r
details, we refer the interested reader to the literature [ 18].The learning algorithm calculates the rewards of the state-
action pairs in these good runs based on the value of “ x,” and
stores the rewards in the variable aStrategy (line 12).
The simulation and learning terminate under two condi-
tions: (i) when the total rounds of simulation reach the limit(line 9), or (ii) when the number of good runs reaches thelimit (line 15). When the simulation terminates in case (i),
no strategy is generated as the good runs collected from the
simulation do not support generating a complete strategy;if the simulation terminates in case (ii), a strategy is gen-
erated and stored as a Q-table . Lines 17 to 21 evaluate the
learned strategy. The ﬁtness of a strategy is the expectation
of “x” when the model is under the control of the strategy
up to the horizon provided in the query. If the query is minE
(respectively, maxE ), the evaluation observes the ﬁtness of
the current strategy and judges if its value is less (respec-tively, larger) than the value of the best strategy, and updates
the best strategy accordingly.
6.2.3 Veriﬁcation of the synthesized strategies
As depicted in Fig. 9, after a strategy is synthesized, the
model checker of
UPPAAL STRA TEGO is employed to verify
the TGof the system under the control of the strategy. UPPAAL
STRA TEGO provides a special query to realize this function,
which is shown in Query (7), where Pis a Boolean expres-
sion, e.g., Query (6), opt is the strategy that is synthesized
by Query (5) and that controls the behavior of the model:
A<> P under opt (7)
Speciﬁcally, when UPPAAL STRA TEGO reaches a state where
it faces multiple controllable actions, the model checker canﬁlter out non-optimal choices (according to the strategy) from
the exploration of the system.
We extend
UPPAAL STRA TEGO such that a subset of strate-
gies generated by Query (5) can also be veriﬁed by Query
(7). This is an extension of the original work on UPPAAL
STRA TEGO [18] where only strategies generated by the game-
theoretic synthesis of UPPAAL TIGA [5] can be veriﬁed. The
subset of strategies here refers to the ones that do not have
clock variables. As deﬁned in Deﬁnitions 5and 6, the strate-
gies (i.e., Q-tables) of MCRL do not contain clocks.
This veriﬁcation is step 4 of the method (see Fig. 10). For
the users of this method, synthesizing a strategy and veri-
fying it are two consecutive operations of running Queries(5) and ( 7). However, there are two important steps of model
conversion that are executed underneath, by the tool: proba-
bilistic quantiﬁcation andabstraction (Fig. 10). Probabilistic
quantiﬁcation is explained in Sect. 6.2.1 . Now we introduce
the abstraction from stochastic strategies σ
◦ofSTG to strate-
giesσof the corresponding TG. As stated in Deﬁnitions 4
and 2,σ◦assigns probabilities to the controllable actions of
123

--- Page 14 ---
408 R. Gu et al.
the agents, whereas σexplicitly informs the agents what is
the next action to do at each state.
In practice, given a Q-table that contains the values of
state-action pairs deﬁned in Deﬁnitions 5and 6, we construct
strategies σby using the rewards as the priorities of choosing
actions at the corresponding states, that is, the actions withthe highest values are always chosen by the model checker.
When multiple actions have the same value at some states,
the model checker will exhaustively select each one of themto execute and check, in a non-deterministic manner. In this
way, we can verify if the strategies synthesized by Q-learning
are guaranteed to be complete and correct in the sense that thenew models of the agents, which are controlled by the strate-
gies, satisfy the requirements considering all the possible task
execution times. In addition, the state-space explosion of theoriginal
TAMAA is overcome, since the state space that is
explored by the model checker for verifying the new models
is much reduced by the strategies.
To guarantee that the synthesized strategies meet all the
requirements mentioned in Sect. 3.2, we design queries as
presented below. In these queries, tenandmove nare the
task execution TGand movement TGof agent n, respec-
tively. The variable tfis a two-dimensional Boolean array of
agents’ task execution statuses, e.g., ﬁnished, or unﬁnished,
xis a clock variable, and opt is the synthesized strategy.
•Milestone Matching Query ( 8) checks that agent’s nposi-
tion is always at milestone Pi, when it is executing task
Ti:
A[] (te n.Tiimply move n.Pi)under opt (8)
•Task Sequencing Query ( 9) checks if the precedent task
Ti−1is always ﬁnished, when agent nis executing task
Ti:
A[] (te n.Tiimply tf[n][i-1]==true)
under opt (9)
•Timing Query ( 10) checks if the agents can always ﬁnish
all their tasks within TLtime units, where Nis the number
of agents, Mis the requested tasks iteration number, and
TLis an integer of time limit:
A<> ((forall(i:int[0,N-1]) fin[i] ≥M)
imply x ≤TL) under opt
(10)
Fig. 11 The structure of the toolset
7 Tool support
In this section, we describe the automated support for our
method, our toolset MALTA ,5which is depicted in Fig. 11.
A GUI named Mission Management Tool (MMT) is
designed at the top level to enable users to conﬁgure the
map, agents, tasks, and milestones, etc., capturing the infor-
mation of the environment. A module named Path Planner is
designed at the second level, to support various path-planning
algorithms, e.g., A* [ 35], Theta* [ 15], and DALi [ 33]. The
Path Planner obtains the information of the map, includ-
ing the navigation area, forbidden areas, milestones, etc.,
and calculates paths among the milestones and avoid all the
forbidden areas. DALi can even select paths intelligently,when encountering temporary obstacles, crowed areas, etc.We refer the reader to literature [ 33] for details.
In the experiments of this paper, we use Theta* for path
planning, due to its capability of calculating smooth pathsthat minimize the amount of sharp turns. The Path Planner
sends the paths to the third level, where a module named
Model Generator is designed to produce the
TG/UTA models
of agents, automatically. These models are used in the fourth
level called Task Scheduler , which invokes TAMAA ,UPPAAL
TIGA ,o r UPPAAL STRA TEGO , based on the requirement and
scale of the problem of synthesizing strategies. Strategies(respectively, runs), synthesized by
UPPAAL TIGA orUPPAAL
STRA TEGO (respectively, TAMAA ), are then sent back to the
third level, where a module named Strategy & Run Parser is
designed to parse the strategy or runs into the format that is
understandable for the second level. Last, the task schedule
and the path plan are combined as a mission plan and shownin MMT GUI.
A detailed description of levels 1 to 3 of the toolset can
be found in previous work [ 22]. We focus on level 4, Task
Scheduler , in this section. In our previous work [ 23], we
5MALTA is published: https://github.com/rgu01/MALTA
123

--- Page 15 ---
Veriﬁable strategy synthesis for multiple autonomous agents: a scalable approach 409
have proposed an implementation of MCRL , which uses the
simulation query in UPPAAL SMC to randomly simulate the
models, gathers enough runs that satisfy a condition, and
prints the rewards of the state-action pairs of the runs into
text ﬁles. Next, the ﬁles are parsed and used as the sourcedata for the Q-learning algorithm to populate Q-tables. TheQ-tables are then injected back into the models. A new
UTA
named conductor is designed to read the Q-tables every time
when the agent needs to make a decision. The conductor
sends signals to the movement and task execution UTA ,i n
order to control them to perform different actions according
to the Q-table.
This implementation separates the data-gathering phase
from the learning phase, so the rewards of state-action pairs
accumulated in the data-gathering phase cannot easily beexploited for guiding the sampling in a strategic manner. Inevery round of simulation, the simulator explores the state
space randomly, with unchanged probabilities of the actions.
Moreover, the
UTA models allow the most permissive behav-
iors of agents, such as wondering without executing any
tasks. The separation of phases makes the simulation unlikely
to reach the states where rare events happen, e.g., multipleiterations of tasks, or ﬁnishing a large number of tasks in a
strict time frame. Therefore, the new version of the method
embeds
MCRL into UPPAAL STRA TEGO to ﬁx this inconve-
nience, which will be introduced in the next subsection.
7.1 Integration of task scheduler and UPPAAL
STRATEGO
As shown in Algorithm 1, in the new version of MCRL , once a
run that satisﬁes our requirement is obtained from the simu-lation (line 11), it is directly fed into the learning algorithm tosynthesize a strategy (line 12). The strategy is not necessarily
complete, but it is then input into the next round of simula-
tion (line 10), where the simulator can exploit the existing
strategy by using the rewards accumulated in the past rounds
of simulation as the probabilities of actions (see Sect. 6.2.2 ).
Therefore, the actions with higher rewards will be chosenmore likely than the ones with lower rewards, and thus, the
learning phase is accelerated.
After a certain rounds of simulation (the number is con-
ﬁgurable), a candidate strategy is produced and sent to themodel checker to verify if it guarantees to enable the agents
to ﬁnish all tasks according to the requirement, regardless of
how the environment reacts. This process iterates until theveriﬁcation passes. In our previous implementation of
MCRL
[23], the movement and task execution UTA are modiﬁed,
and a UTA named conductor is created to control the models
according to the Q-table. In our current implementation, the
original movement and task execution TGare directly veri-
ﬁed in UPPAAL STRA TEGO by running queries in the format
of Query ( 7). When UPPAAL STRA TEGO veriﬁes the modelsagainst these queries, it calls back a function in the external
library of the learning algorithm, where the Q-table is stored,whenever it faces multiple available controllable actions.
This function searches the Q-table and returns the highest
priority for the actions with the highest rewards to the modelchecker.
UPPAAL STRA TEGO then exhaustively explores the
actions that have the same highest priority, but ignores the
ones with lower priorities. In this way, the models’ behavior
is under the control of the strategy without introducing newmodels, such as a conductor
UTA .
Additionally, the new version of MCRL is implemented in
an extensible scheme. The learning algorithm is programmedin standard CorC++ , and compiled into an external
library, which
UPPAAL STRA TEGO calls back when learning
is required. Hence, the users of the tool can replace the Q-learning with their own learning algorithms, and leverage theformal aspects of the method to guarantee the completeness
and correctness of the synthesized strategies.
8 Experimental evaluation
In this section, we evaluate the improved version of TAMAA
and the new version of MCRL in several experiments. The
experiments are conducted on a laptop running an Intel Corei7 processor with 12 cores, 16 GB of RAM, and a 64-bit
Linux OS.
8.1 Design of experiments
Figure 12depicts a working environment of agents created
inMMT . Our mission planner calculates paths that enable the
agents to visit the milestones in a certain order so that they
ﬁnish their tasks in a correct and efﬁcient way.
According to previous investigation [ 22], the number of
agents is the factor that impacts the computation time of
the mission planners most profoundly. As shown in Table 2,
UPPAAL TIGA could not handle more than 5 agents. There-
fore, we vary the number of agents from 3 to 6 in the
experiments in order to show that the new MCRL is capa-
ble of dealing with more agents than the improved versionof
TAMAA inUPPAAL TIGA . To demonstrate the extensibil-
ity of MCRL , the experiments are conducted on two versions
ofMCRL . One uses an external library of Q-learning and
one uses the Q-learning function in UPPAAL STRA TEGO [26],
which are called external and internal Q-learning for brevity,6
respectively. We experiment with both an internal and anexternal version of Q-learning to study the impact of (1) afully extensible implementation of the learning algorithm,
6Although the internal Q-learning is a part of UPPAAL STRA TEGO,
MCRL provides a post-veriﬁcation to it and thus it is called MCRL withinternal Q-learning.
123

--- Page 16 ---
410 R. Gu et al.
Fig. 12 A working environment of agents in MMT. Module Ais the
conﬁguration panel, where users conﬁgure the parameters of the map,vehicles, tasks, etc. Module Bis the map, where the environment is
visualized. Synthesized mission plans will also be shown in this mod-
ule. Pinpoints like Care the milestones, where tasks are assigned to.
Red areas like Dare the special areas, which can be ﬁxed/temporary
forbidden areas (a.k.a., static obstacles), crowed areas, etc. Tags like E
are the initial positions of agents
and (2) the overhead of communication between UPPAAL
STRA TEGO and the external library. In addition, this con-
struction allows us to deﬁne a custom strategy output format
for an integration into our toolset MALTA .W ea l s ov a r yt h e
number of milestones (correspondingly, tasks) to see how
this factor inﬂuences the computation time.
8.2 Results of experiments
Table 3shows the numbers of explored states and computa-
tion time for the three mission planners synthesizing missionplans for 3, 4, 5, and 6 agents, respectively.
The numbers of milestones and tasks are ﬁxed, such that
the difference of the results among the mission plannerswould only be caused by the increased number of agents.
We run the experiments 5 times for each mission planner in
each scenario containing different number of agents, and usethe mean values as the results. Clearly,
UPPAAL TIGA can
only deal with situations with less than 6 agents, whereas
MCRL can cope with 6 agents within reasonable computa-
tion times: 7.9 minutes or 14.8 minutes. The difference incomputation times of the two versions of
MCRL is due to the
different implementations of Q-learning and the overhead of
communication between UPPAAL STRA TEGO and the external
library. They collectively conﬁrm the conclusion that MCRL
outperforms TAMAA when the number of agents is large.
As depicted in Table 4, strategies synthesized by MCRL
with the external and internal Q-learning are complete in the
sense that they satisfy liveness queries in the form of Query
(7). When the number of agents is greater than 4, internal
Q-learning needs more simulation rounds to sample enoughruns for learning than that of the external Q-learning. The
reason for this is discussed in the next subsection.
Table 5shows the number of explored states and computa-
tion time for the three mission planners synthesizing mission
plans for 2 agents, but different numbers of milestones andtasks (tasks are assigned to milestones, thus N milestonesimply N tasks). As presented in the table, the number of
explored states and computation time of
UPPAAL TIGA do not
increase very fast with the increasing numbers of milestonesand tasks, which is consistent with our previous investiga-
tion [ 22]. However, two versions of
MCRL with the internal
and external Q-learning perform much worse than UPPAAL
TIGA when the numbers of milestones and tasks are greater
than 5. Note that, when the numbers of milestones and tasks
are 10, the rates of synthesizing complete strategies by usingthe external and internal Q-learning are lower than 10%. Wediscuss the reason for this result in the next subsection.
8.3 Discussion of the experimental results
As MCRL randomly searches the state space multiple times
during the learning process, the numbers of explored states ofthese two planners do not reﬂect the size of the agent model.Hence, we compare the numbers of explored states obtained
with
UPPAAL TIGA in Tables 3and 5, and conclude that the
size of the state space of the agent model is mainly inﬂuencedby the number of agents. The numbers of milestones and tasks
increase the state space much less signiﬁcantly, but the trend
of increase is still exponential.
The reason why
MCRL with the external Q-learning needs
less total rounds of simulation than that of the internal Q-
learning is because the intermediary strategies are adoptedin the external Q-learning during the course of simulationfor a heuristic exploration of the state space. The difference
of heuristic exploration in two versions of
MCRL results in
the different requested rounds of simulation, which also con-tributes to the worse performance of the simulation-based
algorithms when the numbers of milestones and tasks are
more than 8.
Currently, the learning algorithms can only leverage the
“good” runs that satisfy our requested condition (e.g., For-
mula ( 6)). When the milestones and tasks are few, random
simulation can easily get to the states where the propertyholds. As the numbers of milestones and tasks increase, it
becomes increasingly unlikely to reach the terminal state by
random simulations, which in turns implies that a guidedsearch cannot occur in the simulation. Runs that do not satisfy
the speciﬁed condition are not provided to the learning algo-
rithm, and thus, do not contribute to the heuristic explorationof the state space. Therefore, in cases with large numbers
of milestones and tasks, large numbers of simulation rounds
are needed to generate enough “good” runs, which result in ahigh number of explored states and a long computation time.
123

--- Page 17 ---
Veriﬁable strategy synthesis for multiple autonomous agents: a scalable approach 411
Table 3 Explored states and
computation time of
synthesizing mission plans fordifferent numbers of agentsStates Time Agents
TIGA 222,88 220 ms 3
MCRL with Internal Q-learning 143,044 572 msMCRL with External Q-learning 428,550 2.0 sTIGA 764,001 18.1 s 4MCRL with Internal Q-learning 772,619 2.2 sMCRL with External Q-learning 1,150,349 7.3 sTIGA 33,312,229 53.8 mins 5MCRL with Internal Q-learning 9,822,914 38.2 sMCRL with External Q-learning 6,700,782 53.0 sTIGA Out of memory Unknown 6MCRL with Internal Q-learning 10,322,666 7.9 minsMCRL with External Q-learning 100,901,760 14.8 mins
The environment contains 3 milestones and 3 tasks
Table 4 The numbers of
sampled traces and totalsimulation rounds that areneeded for synthesizingstrategies by using the MCRLwith the internal and external
Q-learning, as well as the
completeness of the synthesizedstrategiesSampled traces Total runs Completeness Agents
External Q-learning 100 2000 True 4
Internal Q-learning 100 2000 TrueExternal Q-learning 200 10,000 True 5Internal Q-learning 200 20,000 TrueExternal Q-learning 200 100,000 True 6Internal Q-learning 200 150,000 True
Table 5 Explored states and
computation time of threemethods synthesizing missionplans for different numbers ofmilestones and tasksStates Time Milestones & tasks
TIGA 11,746 61 ms 5
MCRL Internal Q-learning 136,113 347 ms
MCRL External Q-learning 200,963 1.1 sTIGA 161,953 1 s 8MCRL Internal Q-learning 49,489,463 3.4 minsMCRL External Q-learning 63,858,459 8.2 minsTIGA 586,124 3.9 s 10MCRL Internal Q-learning 324,257,087 33.7 minsMCRL External Q-learning 324,283,558 46.4 mins
The environment contains 2 agents
We leave the improvement of the method for future work,
but hypothesize that the inclusion of negative reinforcementfeedback (that is, runs that do not meet the goal will receive a
penalty) will improve the performance of
MCRL signiﬁcantly.
In summary, when the number of agents is large, MCRL
with the internal Q-learning is the ﬁrst option because it scales
better than UPPAAL TIGA and needs less computation time
than MCRL with the external Q-learning does in this case.
In the cases where the numbers of milestones and tasks are
large, UPPAAL TIGA is the ﬁrst option as it scales and provides
strategies that are guaranteed to cover all possible scenarios.When the users need to embed their own learning algorithmsin the method,
MCRL with the external Q-learning is the ﬁrstoption because the learning module is an external library that
can be replaced easily.
9 Related work
Synthesis of strategies for multiple autonomous agents has
become an increasingly studied area. Wang et al. [ 37]
attempt to address the scalability challenge of solvingPOMDP (Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes)
with safe-reachability objectives. Similar to the bounded
model-checking technique [ 8], their method constrains the
state-space of the model by using a goal-constrained belief
123

--- Page 18 ---
412 R. Gu et al.
space instead of the entire belief space. Bouton et al. [ 10]
focus on a concrete scenario of autonomous cars: naviga-tion in unsignalized intersections. Their method is based on
POMDP and Monte Carlo sampling, thus avoiding the scal-
ability problem. However, their method does not provideformal-veriﬁcation-based guarantees of correctness. Nikouet al. [ 32] propose a solution to synthesize controllers of
agents for path planning. Their synthesized controllers also
satisfy complex high-level constraints of tasks. However, noproof of scalability with the number of agents is provided.
Our approach is accompanied by a toolset that is capable of
handling mission-plan synthesis for multiple agents, mitigat-ing the associated lack of scalability caused by the numbers
of agents, milestones, and tasks.
Similar to our work, some studies also combine formal
veriﬁcation with learning algorithms. The
UPPAAL STRA T-
EGO [18] tool facilitates both sample-based optimization
and correct-by-construction controller synthesis. In addition,
both these methods can be combined for safe and (near-)optimal synthesis. Basile et al. [ 3]u s e
UPPAAL STRA TEGO
to solve the strategy synthesis problem for autonomous driv-
ing in a moving block railway system. They leverage thegame-theoretic method to synthesize safe strategies and rein-
forcement learning to optimize the strategies. To achieve
formal correctness of a learned controller,
UPPAAL STRA T-
EGO relies on learning under a prior construction of the safe
controller, speciﬁcally guarding the learning against unsound
actions. This is contrary to our simulation-based approach
(namely, MCRL ) where learning is conducted on the original
models directly to synthesize strategies with no guarantee
of correctness. The post-veriﬁcation in MCRL adds correct-
ness guarantees on the learned strategies, which eliminatesthe state-space explosion problem that exists in the original
models.
Similar to
TAMAA , the approach of Gleirscher et al. [ 21]
is also based on graphic search. Their approach is able tosynthesize and verify safety controllers for human-robot col-
laboration. Bersani et al. [ 7] present the PuRSUE (Planner for
RobotS in Uncontrollable Environments) approach, whichsupports users to conﬁgure their robotic applications and
automatically generate their controllers by using
UPPAAL
TIGA . The main difference between MCRL and theirs is that
their synthesis is based on graphic search and thus limited on
scalability.
Li et al. [ 31] focus on capturing complex and domain-
speciﬁc requirements of robotic systems by using formalspeciﬁcation languages. Their method also makes the reward
generation of the learning process interpretable and guaran-
tees the satisfaction of speciﬁcation, for critical componentsof the systems. The method proposed by Bouton et al. [ 11]
enforces probabilistic guarantees on agents during the course
of reinforcement learning. Brázdil et al. [ 12] provide algo-
rithms for searching MDP (Markov Decision Processes)to verify various reachability properties. Legay et al. [ 30]
present a scalable approach of veriﬁcation for MDP . Whencomparing to these studies, we apply model checking on the
learned strategies and facilitate the veriﬁcation for complex
models with large state spaces by using reinforcement learn-ing, rather than constructing initially a safe restriction of thesystem. Our work is orthogonal to that of Brázdil, Legay and
Bouton, that is, their methods could be utilized for the initial
construction of strategies to demonstrate the nonexistenceof rare events. Our method can be then used to verify their
strategies. In addition, our method has the ability to handle
timed systems and distributions over durations.
To the best of our knowledge, the earliest attempt to
employ reinforcement learning for solving the state-space
explosion problem of model checking is done by Behjatiet al. [ 4]. The authors propose a bounded rational veriﬁca-
tion approach for on-the-ﬂy model checking. However, this
method is limited to LTL properties, and it has not been
applied on autonomous agents.
10 Conclusion and future work
In this paper, we have presented our method of solving
the mission-plan synthesis problem of multiple autonomous
agents. The method is based on our tool named TAMAA
and improves the original TAMAA with the ability of han-
dling uncertain movement time and task execution time of
agents. Additionally, our method, called MCRL , combines
model checking with reinforcement learning, so that it is
capable of dealing with more agents than the improved
TAMAA , which applies model checking alone. MCRL pro-
vides a means for verifying and analyzing the synthesizedmission plans by using model checking, to ensure that safety-
critical requirements are met. The method is fully integrated
with
UPPAAL STRA TEGO . We demonstrate MCRL ’s ability of
handling multiple agents by experiments, and compare the
result with the original and improved TAMAA . The number of
explored states and computation time of MCRL increase much
slower than the two versions of TAMAA when the number of
agents increases. However, the improved version of TAMAA
inUPPAAL TIGA performs better than MCRL when the num-
ber of agents is less than two but the numbers of milestonesand tasks are more than ﬁve.
One of the future directions of work is to improve the
learning algorithm of
MCRL to perform better in environ-
ments with large numbers of milestones and tasks. Another
future work direction focuses on estimating the existence
of strategies of timed games before synthesis starts. Intro-ducing variables that evolve continuously, e.g., time, energy
consumption, in the models and strategies is another inter-
esting direction of future research, which would dramaticallycomplicate the strategy-synthesis problem.
123

--- Page 19 ---
Veriﬁable strategy synthesis for multiple autonomous agents: a scalable approach 413
Acknowledgements We acknowledge the support of the Swedish
Knowledge Foundation via the proﬁle DPAC—Dependable Platformfor Autonomous Systems and Control, grant nr: 20150022, and viathe synergy ACICS – Assured Cloud Platforms for Industrial Cyber-Physical Systems, Grant Nr. 20190038.
Funding Open access funding provided by Mälardalen University.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adap-tation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, aslong as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and thesource, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indi-cate if changes were made. The images or other third party materialin this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence,unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If materialis not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and yourintended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds thepermitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copy-right holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecomm
ons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ .
References
1. Abdeddaı, Y ., Asarin, E., Maler, O., et al.: Scheduling with timed
automata. Theor. Comput. Sci. 354(2), 272–300 (2006)
2. Alur, R., Dill, D.L.: A theory of timed automata. Theor. Comput.
Sci. 126, 183–235 (1994)
3. Basile, D., ter Beek, M.H., Legay, A.: Strategy synthesis for
autonomous driving in a moving block railway system with uppaalstratego. In: International Conference on Formal Techniques forDistributed Objects, Components, and Systems. Springer (2020)
4. Behjati, R., Sirjani, M., Ahmadabadi, M.N.: Bounded rational
search for on-the-ﬂy model checking of LTL properties. In: Sympo-sium on the Foundations of Software Engineering. Springer (2009)
5. Behrmann, G., David, A., Fleury, E., Larsen, K., Lime, D., Nantes,
E.: Uppaal-Tiga: Time for playing games! (tool paper). In: Interna-tional Conference on Computer Aided V eriﬁcation. Springer BerlinHeidelberg (2007)
6. Bengtsson, J., Yi, W.: Timed automata: Semantics, algorithms and
tools. Lecture Notes in Computer Science (2004)
7. Bersani, M.M., Soldo, M., Menghi, C., Pelliccione, P ., Rossi, M.:
Pursue-from speciﬁcation of robotic environments to synthesis ofcontrollers. Formal Aspects of Computing (2020)
8. Biere, A., Cimatti, A., Clarke, E.M., Strichman, O., Zhu, Y .:
Bounded Model Checking. Carnegie Mellon University (2003)
9. Bønneland, F.M., Jensen, P .G., Larsen, K.G., Muñiz, M., Srba, J.:
Stubborn set reduction for two-player reachability games. Preprint
arXiv:1912.09875 (2019)
10. Bouton, M., Cosgun, A., Kochenderfer, M.J.: Belief state planning
for autonomously navigating urban intersections. In: IntelligentV ehicles Symposium. IEEE (2017)
11. Bouton, M., Karlsson, J., Nakhaei, A., Fujimura, K., Kochenderfer,
M.J., Tumova, J.: Reinforcement learning with probabilistic guar-antees for autonomous driving. Preprint arXiv:1904.07189 (2019)
12. Brázdil, T., Chatterjee, K., Chmelik, M., Forejt, V ., Kˇ retínsk` y, J.,
Kwiatkowska, M., Parker, D., Ujma, M.: V eriﬁcation of markovdecision processes using learning algorithms. In: InternationalSymposium on Automated Technology for V eriﬁcation and Anal-ysis. Springer (2014)
13. Cassez, F., David, A., Fleury, E., Larsen, K.G., Lime, D.: Efﬁcient
on-the-ﬂy algorithms for the analysis of timed games. In: Interna-tional Conference on Concurrency Theory. Springer (2005)14. Clarke, E.M., Klieber, W., Nováˇ cek, M., Zuliani, P .: Model check-
ing and the state explosion problem. In: LASER Summer School.Springer (2011)
15. Daniel, K., Nash, A., Koenig, S., Felner, A.: Theta*: any-angle path
planning on grids. J. Artif. Intell. Res. 39, 533–79 (2010)
16. David, A., Du, D., Larsen, K.G., Legay, A., Mikuˇ cionis, M.,
Poulsen, D.B., Sedwards, S.: Statistical model checking forstochastic hybrid systems. Preprint arXiv:1208.3856 (2012)
17. David, A., Jensen, P .G., Larsen, K.G., Legay, A., Lime, D.,
Sørensen, M.G., Taankvist, J.H.: On time with minimal expectedcost! In: International Symposium on Automated Technology forV eriﬁcation and Analysis. Springer (2014)
18. David, A., Jensen, P .G., Larsen, K.G., Mikuˇ cionis, M., Taankvist,
J.H.: Uppaal Stratego. In: International Conference on Tools andAlgorithms for the Construction and Analysis of Systems. Springer(2015)
19. Fisher, H.: Probabilistic learning combinations of local job-shop
scheduling rules. In: Industrial Scheduling. Prentice Hall, Engle-wood Cliffs (1963)
20. Franklin, S., Graesser, A.: Is it an agent, or just a program?: A
taxonomy for autonomous agents. In: International Workshop onAgent Theories, Architectures, and Languages. Springer (1996)
21. Gleirscher, M., Calinescu, R., Douthwaite, J., Lesage, B., Pater-
son, C., Aitken, J., Alexander, R., Law, J.: V eriﬁed synthesis ofoptimal safety controllers for human-robot collaboration. PreprintarXiv:2106.06604 (2021)
22. Gu, R., Enoiu, E.P ., Seceleanu, C.: TAMAA: UPPAAL-based
mission planning for autonomous agents. In: ACM/SIGAPP Sym-posium On Applied Computing (2020)
23. Gu, R., Enoiu, E.P ., Seceleanu, C., Lundqvist, K.: V eriﬁable and
scalable mission-plan synthesis for multiple autonomous agents.In: International Conference on Formal Methods for Industrial Crit-ical Systems. Springer (2020)
24. Gu, R., Marinescu, R., Seceleanu, C., Lundqvist, K.: Towards a
two-layer framework for verifying autonomous vehicles. In: NASAFormal Methods Symposium. Springer (2019)
25. Gu, R., Seceleanu, C., Enoiu, E.P ., Lundqvist, K.: Model checking
collision avoidance of nonlinear autonomous vehicle models. In:Formal Methods 2021 (2021)
26. Jaeger, M., Jensen, P .G., Larsen, K.G., Legay, A., Sedwards, S.,
Taankvist, J.H.: Teaching stratego to play ball: Optimal synthesisfor continuous space MDPs. In: International Symposium on Auto-mated Technology for V eriﬁcation and Analysis. Springer (2019)
27. Kempf, J.F., Bozga, M., Maler, O.: As soon as probable: Optimal
scheduling under stochastic uncertainty. In: International Confer-ence on Tools and Algorithms for the Construction and Analysisof Systems. Springer (2013)
28. Konda, V .R., Tsitsiklis, J.N.: Actor-critic algorithms. In: Advances
in neural information processing systems (2000)
29. LaV alle, S.M.: Rapidly-exploring random trees: a new tool for path
planning. In: Technical Report (1998)
30. Legay, A., Sedwards, S., Traonouez, L.M.: Scalable veriﬁcation of
markov decision processes. In: International Conference on Soft-ware Engineering and Formal Methods. Springer (2014)
31. Li, X., Serlin, Z., Yang, G., Belta, C.: A formal methods approach to
interpretable reinforcement learning for robotic planning. ScienceRobotics (2019)
32. Nikou, A., Boskos, D., Tumova, J., Dimarogonas, D.V .: On the
timed temporal logic planning of coupled multi-agent systems.Automatica (2018)
33. Palopoli, L., Argyros, A., Birchbauer, J., Colombo, A., Fontanelli,
D., Legay, A., Garulli, A., Giannitrapani, A., Macii, D., Moro, F.,et al.: Navigation assistance and guidance of older adults acrosscomplex public spaces: the DALi approach. Intelligent ServiceRobotics (2015)
123

--- Page 20 ---
414 R. Gu et al.
34. Pelánek, R.: Fighting state space explosion: Review and evalua-
tion. In: International Conference on Formal Methods for IndustrialCritical Systems. Springer (2008)
35. Rabin, S.: Game Programming Gems, Chapter a* Aesthetic Opti-
mizations. Charles River Media (2000)
36. Sutton, R.S., Barto, A.G.: Reinforcement Learning: An Introduc-
tion. MIT press (2018)37. Wang, Y ., Chaudhuri, S., Kavraki, L.E.: Bounded policy synthesis
for POMDPs with safe-reachability objectives. In: InternationalConference on Autonomous Agents and Multi Agent Systems.Springer (2018)
38. Watkins, C.J.C.H.: Learning from Delayed Rewards. King’s Col-
lege, Cambridge United Kingdom (1989)
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to juris-
dictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
123
