--- Page 1 ---
Formal Analysis of Proactive, Distributed
Routing
Mojgan Kamali1, Peter H¨ ofner2,3, Maryam Kamali4, and Luigia Petre1
1˚Abo Akademi University, Finland
2NICTA, Australia
3University of New South Wales, Australia
4University of Liverpool, UK
Abstract. As (network) software is such an omnipresent component of
contemporary mission-critical systems, formal analysis is requi red to pro-
videthe necessarycertiﬁcationoratleastformal assurancesfor t hesesys-
tems. In this paper we focus on modelling and analysing the Opt imised
Link State Routing (OLSR) protocol, a distributed, proactive ro uting
protocol. It is recognised as one of the standard ad-hoc routing p rotocols
for Wireless Mesh Networks (WMNs). WMNs are instrumental in crit-
ical systems, such as emergency response networks and smart elec trical
grids. We use the model checker Uppaal for analysing safety prope rties
of OLSR as well as to point out a case of OLSR malfunctioning.
1 Introduction
Routing is at the centre of network communication, which in turn, is p art of
the backbone for numerous safety-critical systems. Examples are net works for
telecommunicationsystems,foremergencyresponse,orforelectric alsmartgrids.
In these and other examples, the communication is often truly distri buted, with-
outdependingonanycentralentity(router)forcoordination.Anotheri mportant
characteristics of these networks is that the network topology can change: in the
case of emergency networks nodes might just fail; in case of telecommun ication
systems nodes such as laptops and mobile phones can move within the ne twork,
and even enter or leave a network. In this paper we focus on distribu ted routing
mechanisms in such wireless networks; due to their wide-spread usage in critical
systems, we aim at a formal model, which paves the way for a formal analys is.
A routing protocol enables node communication in a network by dissemi -
nating information enabling the selection of routes. In this way, nod es are able
to send data packets to arbitrary (previously unknown) destination s in the net-
work. Shortcomings in the routing protocol immediately decrease the p erfor-
mance and reliability of the entire network. Due to the possibility of topology
changes information has to constantly be updated to maintain the latest rou ting
information within the network. In this paper we focus on such self- organising
wireless multi-hop networks which provide support for communicat ion without
relying on a wired infrastructure. They bear the beneﬁt of rapid and low-cost
network deployment. The Optimised Link State Routing (OLSR) proto col [4], a
proactive routing protocol, is identiﬁed as one of the standard routing p rotocol

--- Page 2 ---
for Wireless Mesh Networks (WMNs) by the IETF MANET working group.5
By distributing control messages throughout the network, proactive pr otocols
maintain a list of all destinations together with routes to them.
Traditionally, common methods used to evaluate and validate network pro-
tocols are test-bed experiments and simulation in ‘living lab’ cond itions. Such
an analysis is usually limited to very few topologies [7]. In such exper iments not
only the routing protocol is simulated, but also all other layers of the network
stack. When a shortcoming is found, it is therefore often unclear whe ther the
limitation is a consequence of the routing protocol chosen, or of another l ayer,
such as the underlying link layer. In this paper, we abstract from t he underly-
ing link layer; hence a shortcoming found is deﬁnitely a problem of the routing
protocol.
Another problem with speciﬁcations in general and with the descripti on of
OLSR in particular is that speciﬁcations are usually given in English pr ose.
Although this makes them easy to understand, it is well known that te xtual
descriptionscontainambiguities,contradictionsandoftenlackspeci ﬁcdetails.As
a consequence, this might yield diﬀerent interpretations of the s ame speciﬁcation
and to diﬀerent implementations [9]. In the worst case, implementat ions of the
same routing protocol are incompatible.
One approach to address these problems is using formal methods in gene ral
and model checking in particular. Formal methods provide valuable t ools for the
design, evaluation, and veriﬁcation of WMN routing protocols; they compl ement
alternatives such as test-bed experiments and simulation. These m ethods have
a great potential on improving the correctness and precision of design an d de-
velopment, as they produce reliable results. Formal methods allow the formal
speciﬁcation of routing protocols and the veriﬁcation of the desired be haviour
by applying mathematics and logics [3]. In this way, stronger and more gene ral
assurances about protocol behaviour can be achieved.
In this paper we present a concise and unambiguous model for the OLSR
protocol. The model is based on extended timed automata as they are used by
themodelcheckerUppaal.Asaconsequencewereportalsoonresultsofap plying
model checking techniques to explore the behaviour of OLSR. Mode l checking
(e.g. [3]) is a powerful approach used for validating key correctness p roperties in
ﬁnite representations of a formal system model.
The paper is structured as follows: in Section 2, we overview the OLS R
protocol and in Section 3 we shortly discuss the Uppaal model of OLSR based
on RFC 3626 [4]. Section 4 is the core of our paper where we present the resu lts
of our analysis. We review related work in Section 5 and propose future re search
directions in Section 6.
2 Optimized Link State Routing—An Overview
The Optimised Link State Routing (OLSR) protocol [4] is a proactive rout ing
protocol particularly designed for Wireless Mesh Networks (WMNs) and M obile
5http://datatracker.ietf.org/wg/manet/charter/

--- Page 3 ---
Ad hoc Networks (MANETs). The proactive nature of OLSR implies the beneﬁ t
of having the routes available at time needed. The underlying mech anism of this
protocol consists in the periodic exchange of messages to establish rou tes to pre-
viously unknown destinations, and to update routing information about k nown
destinations. OLSR works in a completely distributed manner withou t depend-
ing on any central entity. The protocol minimises ﬂooding of control m essages
in the network by selecting so-called Multipoint Relays (MPRs). Informally, an
MPR takes over the communication for a set of nodes that are one-hop neigh-
bours of this node; these one-hop neighbours receive all the routing i nformation
from the MRPs and hence do not need to send and receive routing inform ation
from other parts of the network.
Nodes running OLSR are not restricted to any kind of start-up synchron i-
sation. Every node broadcasts a HELLO message every 2 seconds and detects
its direct neighbour nodes by receiving these messages. Since HELLO messages
contain information about all one-hop neighbours of the originator, receiving
nodes can establish routes to their two-hop neighbours, too. HELLO message s
traverse only one wireless link (a single hop), and are not forwarded by any node.
After receiving HELLO messages from direct neighbours, every node sel ects
a particular one-hop neighbour, its MPR, and selected MPRs are aware of t hose
nodes that have selected them as an MPR. MPRs broadcast Topology Control
(TC) messages every 5 seconds to build and update topological information.
These messages are retransmitted (forwarded) through the entire net work by
MPRs. This means that if a node is not an MPR and receives TC messages, i t
processes those messages, but will not forward them. Every TC message contains
the routing information provided by the originator. While receiving control mes-
sages from other nodes, every node updates its routing table according to the
information received. After broadcasting and forwarding control messages via
nodes, routes to all reachable destinations should be established by all nodes.
Nodes can use the established routes to send data packets through the n etwork.
Information stemming from HELLO messages is considered valid for 6 sec-
onds (three times the interval between sending HELLO messages); inf ormation
from TC messages for 15 seconds (three times the interval between sen ding TC
messages). Routing table entries are marked as invalid if these times have passed.
More details about OLSR can be found in its speciﬁcation [4]; a concrete
example of OLSR running on a topology of 5 nodes can be found in [13].
3 Modelling OLSR in Uppaal
Uppaal [1,15] is a well-established model checker for modelling, simu lating and
verifying real-time systems. It is designed for systems that can b e modelled as
networksof(extended)timedautomata.WeuseUppaalforthefollowingre asons:
i) it provides two synchronisation mechanisms: broadcast and binary sy nchroni-
sation;ii) it provides common data structures, such as structs and arrays, and a
C-like programming language—these features are used to model routing tab les
and update-operations on such tables; last, but not least, iii) Uppaal provides

--- Page 4 ---
mechanismsandtoolsforconsideringtimedvariables—thisisneeded sinceOLSR
highly depends on on-time broadcasting of control messages. In the remain der,
we describe Uppaal to the extent needed in this paper.
3.1 Uppaal’s timed automata
ThemodellinglanguageofUppaalextendstimedautomatawithvariousfeatur es,
such as types and data structures [1]. A system state is deﬁned as the value of
all local and global variables. Every automaton can be presented as a graph with
locations (nodes) and edges between these locations together with guar ds, clock
constraints, updates and invariants. Clocks are variables that evaluate to real
numbers and that are used in order to measure the time progression.
Each location may have an invariant, and each edge may have a guard, a
synchronisation label, and/or an update of some variables. Guards on transiti ons
are used to restrict the availability (enabledness) of transitions . Synchronisation
happens via channels; for every channel athere is one label a! to identify the
sender, and a? to identify receivers. Transitions without a label are internal; all
other transitions use one of the two following types of synchronisation [1].
Inbinary handshake synchronisation, one automaton that has an edge with
a !-label synchronises with another automaton with the edge having a ?- label.
These two transitions synchronise only when both guards hold in the cu rrent
state. When the transition is taken, both locations will change, and the updates
on transitions will be applied to the variables; ﬁrst the updates wil l be done on
the !-edge, then the updates occur on the ?-edge. When having more t han one
possible pair, the transition is selected non-deterministically [1].
Inbroadcast synchronisation, one automaton with an !-edge synchronises
with several other automata that all have an edge with a relevant ?-label. The
initiating automaton is able to change its location, and apply its update if and
only if the guard on its edge is satisﬁed. It does not need a second automaton
to synchronise with. Matching ?-edge automata must synchronise if t heir guards
evaluate to true in the current state. They will change their locati on and update
their states. First the automaton with the !-edge updates its state, t hen the other
automata follow. When more than one automaton can initiate a transition on
an !-edge, the process of choosing occurs non-deterministically [ 1].
Uppaal’s veriﬁer uses Computation Tree Logic (CTL) (e.g. [6]) to model
system properties. CTL oﬀers two types of formulas: state formulas and path
formulas. State formulas describe individual states of the model, wh ile path for-
mulas quantify over paths in the model. A path contains an (inﬁnite) s equence
of states. In this paper we employ the path quantiﬁer Aand the temporal op-
eratorG.Aφmeans that the formula φholds for all paths starting from the
current state. Gφmeans all future states (including the current one) satisfy φ.
Formulas combine the path quantiﬁes and the temporal operators, e.g. AGφ
holds ifφholds on all states in all paths originating from the current state. This
is also denoted as A[]φin Uppaal [1].

--- Page 5 ---
isconnected(sip,ip)
(nextmsg()!=NONE)&&
idle[ip]isconnected(sip,ip)
imsg[ip]!sip:IP
dip:IPsip:IP
addmsg(msgglobal) addmsg(msgglobal)
create_add_packet(ip,dip)htc[sip]?
packet[ip][dip]?
msgglobal=msglocal[0],
deletemsg()pkt[sip][ip]?
Fig.1: The Queueautomaton.
3.2 A Uppaal model of OLSR
We now present an overview of our OLSR model. The model is describe d in
detail in [13] and can be downloaded at hoefner-online.de/sefm15/. We mode l
OLSR in Uppaal as a parallel composition of identical processes describin g the
behaviour of single nodes of the network. Each of these processes is i tself a
parallel composition of two timed automata, QueueandOLSR.
TheQueueautomaton (depicted in Fig. 1) has been chosen to store incoming
messages from other (directly connected) nodes. In other words, it d enotes the
inputbuﬀerofanode.Thereceivedmessagesarebuﬀeredandthen,i nturn,send
to theOLSRautomaton for processing. Both actions on the top of Fig. 1 receive
messages from other nodes in the network while the action on the lower r ight of
Fig. 1 receives data messages from the same node. Messages can only be rec eived
if a node ipis connected to the sender sip. The channel htc[sip] receives a
broadcasted message (HELLO or TC) from sipand stores the message to a local
data queue, using the function addmsg. Bothpktandpacketare handshake
synchronisations and handle data messages travelling through the netw ork and
new messages injected by a client, respectively. Whenever the message-handling
routineOLSRis ready to handle a message ( idle[ip] ), a message is moved from
the message queue to OLSR, using the channel imsg.
OLSRmodels the complete behaviour of the routing protocol as described
in [4]. It consists of 14 locations and 36 transitions precisely modelli ng the
broadcasting and handling of the diﬀerent types of messages. OLSRis busy while
sending messages, and can accept a new message from Queueonly once it has
completely ﬁnished handling a message. Whenever it is not process ing a mes-
sage and there are messages stored in Queue,QueueandOLSRsynchronise on
the channel imsg[ip] , transferring the relevant data from QueuetoOLSR. The
automaton uses a local data structure to model the routing table of a nod e.
Routing tables provide all information required for delivering pack ets. A routing
tablertis an array of entries, one entry for each possible destination. An entry
is modelled by the data type rtentry:
typedef struct {
IP dip; //destination address
int hops; //distance (number of hops) to the destination dip
IP nhopip; //next hop address along the path to the destination dip
SQN dsn; //destination dip sequence number
}rtentry;

--- Page 6 ---
IPdenotes a data type for all addresses and SQNa data type for sequence num-
bers. OLSR uses sequence numbers to check whether received me ssages are new
or have already been processed. In our model, integers are used for th ese types.
The predicate isconnected[i][j] denotes a node-to-node communication,
i.e., the nodes are in transmission range of each other. Communication be tween
nodes happens via channels. The broadcast channel htc[ip] models the prop-
agation of HELLO and TC messages where a message can be received by all
one-hop neighbours. Each node has a broadcast channel, and every node in
the range may synchronise on this channel. We also use the binary chann el
packet[i][j] to model the unicast sending of a data packet from itoj; this
packet is generated by the user layer.
To model rigorous timing behaviour, we deﬁne 3 diﬀerent clocks for every
OLSRautomaton: thelloandttcare used to model on-time broadcasting
HELLO and TC messages, and tsendmodels the time consumption for sending
messages. According to the speciﬁcation of OLSR, Hello messages are sent e very
2000 milliseconds. Considering a sending time of 500 milliseconds (in our model
timesending = 500), nodes have to broadcast a new message 1500 milliseconds
after the last message was successfully distributed. For each OLSRautomaton,
we use two clock arrays tresetrtandtresetrttopoof sizeN(the number
of nodes in the network) to indicate the expiry time of one-hop and two- hop
neighbours, and the expiry time of nodes which are more than two hops aw ay,
respectively.
To provide a realistic network set up, we model each node to send i ts ﬁrst
HELLO message non-deterministically between [0 ,timebetween hello). After-
wards, whenever thelloreachestimebetween hello,OLSRresetsthelloand
tsendto 0 before the HELLO message is broadcast.
Nodes receiving a HELLO message, update their routing tables for the orig-
inator of the message, learn about their two-hop neighbours and select thei r
MPRs and MPR selectors using the functions updatehello ,updatetwohop and
setmpr, respectively. Furthermore, tresetrtis reset for originator of the mes-
sage and its one-hop neighbours, which shows that new information has been
received and this information is valid for 6000 milliseconds.
After MPR nodes have been selected, each of them prepares for broadcas ting
TC messages to the connected nodes. TC messages are sent every 5000 mil-
liseconds. When ttcreachestimebetween tc,ttcandtsendare reset to
0. Then, a TC message is generated by createtc function and is broadcast to
other nodes.
While transferring a TC message from Queue,tresetrttopois reset to
0 for the originator of the message and its MPR selectors, and if the message
is considered for processing, the routing table is updated for the TC genera-
tor and its MPR selectors, using updatetc andupdatemprselector functions,
respectively.
If the receiver is an MPR then the TC messages can be forwarded. Forward -
ing messages also takes time in our model, namely timesending. We note that
OLSR might have to broadcast diﬀerent messages at the same time. As an ex-

--- Page 7 ---
ample, at some point a HELLO, a TC and maybe a TC to be forwarded are
supposed to be broadcast; the sending time timesending is counted only once
and these messages are broadcast simultaneously. We consider this beha viour
in our model as well. The full model, showing all details, is availab le online at
hoefner-online.de/sefm15/.
4 Analysis
We analyse properties of the OLSR protocol in two diﬀerent settings. F irst, we
assume static network topologies, and then we allow changes in the networ k.
The ﬁrst series of experiments focuses on three properties:
(1)route establishment for all topologies up to 5 nodes;
(2)packet delivery in all topologies up to 5 nodes;
(3)route optimality in topologies of up to 7 nodes.
We will show that OLSR does not always ﬁnd optimal routes and propose a
modiﬁcation of OLSR that addresses this problem.
For the second series of experiments we assume dynamic network topologi es
where an arbitrary link fails. We focus on another property:
(4) theroute discovery time , i.e., we investigate the time during which there is
no guaranteed packet delivery.
Afteranalysingtheroutediscoverytime,weproposeamodiﬁcationth atshortens
this time; this modiﬁcation will be analysed as well (Property (5)).
Due to the proactive nature of OLSR, our Uppaal model is pretty complex
and contains several clocks, next to a complex data structure. As a con sequence,
state space explosion is a problem for our experiments. To address thi s problem,
weapplydiﬀerenttechniquessupportedbyUppaaltominimisethes tatespaceof
our system model [5,16,17]. In particular, our model makes use of priority chan-
nels. By this we can order ‘internal actions’, i.e., actions that are ru nning on a
single node, and that are independent of other nodes and hence the orde r of the
actions does not matter. For Properties (1), (2), (4) and (5), we give the hi ghest
priority to channels of node a1and the lowest priority to channels of node a5.
Wealsotakeintoaccountsymmetriesoftopologies,i.e.,incasetwotopol ogies
are isomorphic (up to renaming of nodes), we only analyse one. As a consequ ence
we can reduce the number of experiments, by assuming, for Propertie s (1)–(5),
thattheoriginatorisalwaysthesamenode,denotedby OIP1,andthedestination
is always DIP1.
For the experiments we use the following set up: 3.2 GHz Intel Core i 5, with 8
GB memory, running the Mac OS X 10.9.5 operating system. For all experim ents
we use Uppaal 4.0.13.
4.1 Static Topologies
Set Up. In this ﬁrst series of experiments, we deﬁne another automaton, calle d
Tester1, which injects a data packet to OIP1to be delivered at destination

--- Page 8 ---
DIP1. It is depicted in Fig. 2. It provides a local clock clk, which is used for
invariants and guards. The location-invariant clk <= 3*time_between_tc in
combination with the transition-guard clk >= 3*time_between_tc guarantees
that the packet is injected at time point 3*time_between_tc ; hence a couple
of control messages (HELLO and TC) have already been sent and most of the
routes should have been established. The packet is injected to no deOIP1via the
channelpacket[OIP1][DIP1] .
clk<=3*time_between_tcclk>=3*(time_between_tc)
finalpacket[OIP1][DIP1]!
drop_link
Fig.2: The Tester1 automaton.
Theﬁrstpropertywearegoingtoanalyse(Property1)isrouteestablish ment.
It states that if the packet has been injected ( Tester1 is in location final), and
all messages have been handled by all nodes ( emptybuffers() ) then OLSR
has established a route between OIP1andDIP1. This safety property using the
Uppaal syntax is expressed as
A[]((Tester1.final&&emptybuffers ())imply
node(OIP1).rt[DIP1].nhopip!=0)(1)
Remember that the CTL formula A[]φis satisﬁed iﬀ φholds on all states along
all paths. The variable node(OIP1).rtrepresents the routing table of the orig-
inator node OIP1andnode(OIP1).rt[DIP1].nhopipexpresses the next hop for
the destination DIP1; if the next hop is not 0a route is established.
The second property, packet delivery, is that if a packet is inject ed to the
system, it is eventually delivered to the destination DIP1. In Uppaal this can be
expressed as
A[]((Tester1.final&&emptybuffers ())imply
node(DIP1).delivered !=0)(2)
Here,node(DIP1).delivered indicates whether the injected data packet is re-
ceived by the destination DIP1. Property 2 is stronger than Property 1 in the
sense that the route is not only established, but it must be correct an d used.
Moreover this property implies loop freedom of OLSR, meaning that no p acket
is sent in cycles forever, without ever reaching the ﬁnal destinat ion.
The ﬁrst two experiments are performed for all topologies up to ﬁve nod es,
up to isomorphism and renaming. There are 444 of such topologies.
The third property, route optimality, checks if OLSR establishes op timal
routes, after broadcasting, forwarding and processing TC messages. In ou r ex-
periments we measure optimality with regards to shortest routes. Si nce we have
full control over the topologies we are running the experiments with , we can
determine the shortest possible route. We investigate this proper ty for a ring

--- Page 9 ---
topology of 7 nodes, as shown in Table 1.6Property 3 is expressed as
A[]((Tester1.final&&node(OIP1).a!=0)imply
node(OIP1).rt[DIP1].hops==3)(3)
Here,node(OIP1).a! =0indicates whether OIP1has sent its packet to the next
node along the path to DIP1;node(OIP1).rt[DIP1].hopsshows the number of
hops from the originator OIP1to the destination DIP1which must be equal to 3.
We also checked Property 3 on all topologies up to 5 nodes. The results, however,
are not of real interest, since not much can go wrong w.r.t. shortest rout es. As
a consequence we picked topologies of size 7 to analyse route optimality.
Results. To analyse and verify OLSR, we evaluate Properties (1) and (2) in all
network topologies up to 5 nodes. Property (1) is satisﬁed for all these n etworks:
when the Tester1 is in location final, nodeOIP1has established a route to
nodeDIP1. This property conﬁrms the propagation of HELLO and TC messages
and also the correctness of the MPR selection mechanism. Hence, node OIP1is
ready to send data packets to node DIP1.
As mentioned before, Property (2) is stronger than Property (1). It mode ls
that all nodes have the information about all other nodes in the network, to
deliver their data packets. In theory, the originator node OIP1could have a
routing table entry for the destination node DIP1, stating that it should send a
packet to its immediate next neighbour along the path to the destinati onDIP1;
the next node itself might have no information about the destination DIP1, so
all packets for the destination DIP1stemming from the originator OIP1would
be lost. However, Property (2) is also satisﬁed for all topology up to size 5: all
nodes have updated their routing tables in the network; therefore , they are able
to deliver data packets to the arbitrary destination node DIP1.
While performing the analysis of Properties (1) and (2), we also perform ed
some statistics: the Uppaal veriﬁer analysed in average 1868996 states for each
experiment; the largest one has 5314328 states, and the median is 1688368.
Exploring these state spaces took on average 56 minutes.
Property (3), which analysis route optimality in topologies of size 7, is not
satisﬁed. This proves that OLSR is not always able to ﬁnd optimal routes .
Table 1 illustrates this phenomenon with an example found by Uppaal. In
this example, Tester1 synchronises with the Queueof nodea1, which is the
originator OIP1of the packet. The packet is intended for node a5. At some
point,a5broadcasts a TC message (here indicated by TC5) to its neighbours
a4anda6. Whilea4forwards the message to a3,a6is busy working on other
stuﬀ and the message is kept in the message queue of a6. The TC message is
forwarded subsequently via nodes a3anda2(Table 1: Step 2). As a consequence,
nodea1, updates its routing table entry for node a5(Table 1: Step 3). When
a1receives TC5 via node a7, it has already updated its table for this node, and
drops this message, since it has seen TC5 before. (Table 1: Step 4). By d ropping
6There are too many topologies of that size, so we cannot analyse all topologies.

--- Page 10 ---
Step 1: Broadcast TC Step 2: Forward TC
a1a2a3
a4
a5
a6 a7TC5
TC5a1a2a3
a4
a5
a6 a7TC5
TC5TC5TC5
Step 3: Update a1.rt[5] Step 4: Drop TC5
a1a2a3
a4
a5
a6 a7TC5
TC5TC5TC5
TC5
a1a2a3
a4
a5
a6 a7TC5 TC5 TC5
Table 1: Establishment of non-optimal routes in a 7 node topology
this message a1misses out the chance TC5 to establish a shorter route. Similar
examples are found for other routing protocols for WMNs [18].
Droppingamessagewiththesame sequencenumber followsthespeci ﬁcation:
“if there exists a tuple in the duplicate set, where:
Daddr == Originator Address,
AND
Dseqnum == Message Sequence Number
then the message has already been completely processed and M UST not be
processed again.” [RFC3626, page 17]
This text snippet, copied from the RFC, shows that our model reﬂec ts the
intention of OLSR; any message which is received and has already been hand led
(same sequence number) should be dropped. The idea is that the ﬁrs t message
received must have travelled via the optimal path, which is not th e case. A
simple solution to this problem is to compare the potentially new rout e versus
the routing table, in case the sequence numbers are the same. To red uce message
ﬂooding the message is only forwarded if the routing table is updated, i.e., if the
hop count is strictly smaller.
4.2 Dynamic Topologies
Set Up. In the second series of experiments, we investigate the behaviour of
OLSR after an arbitrary link is removed. Removing a link reﬂects a c hange in
the topology. We deﬁne an automaton, called Tester2 and depicted in Fig. 3,
which drops the link between the two nodes id_1andid_2. We assume that
the link breaks after 3*(time between tc + time sending) (in our model at

--- Page 11 ---
15000 milliseconds), a time when all nodes have received information ab out all
other nodes in the network (all routing tables have been updated for al l nodes).
Upon link breakage there is no connectivity between these two nodes ; yet, each
of them has the information about the other one. The packet, which should b e
sent from OIP1toDIP1is injected later on. By this we can analyse how quickly
OLSR recovers from topology changes.
clk<=3*(time_between_tc + time_sending) clk<=7*(time_between_tc + time_sending)clk>=3*(time_between_tc + time_sending)
delivery testdrop(id_1, id_2)
clk>=7*(time_between_tc + time_sending)packet[OIP1][DIP1]!
drop_link
Fig.3: The Tester2 automaton.
Based on RFC 3626 (see box below), the information about one-hop and
two-hop neighbours of a node is valid for 3*REFRESH INTERVAL , which equals
6000 milliseconds; information about nodes which are more than two hops awa y
from that node is valid for 3*TCINTERVAL , that equals 15000 miliseconds.
“NEIGHB HOLDTIME = 3*REFRESH INTERVAL
TOPHOLDTIME = 3*TC INTERVAL” [RFC3626, page 64]
This means information about one-hop and two-hop neighbours of a node is not
available any longer if their corresponding clocks in the routing tabl e have not
been refreshed during 6000 milliseconds; this indicates the break age of a link.
Also, if a node has not received TC messages from other MPR nodes for more
than 15 seconds, information about those nodes is removed from the table.
We consider one desirable property of this protocol which indicates w hether
or not the injected packet is delivered at the destination if one link has been
removed. In Uppaal syntax this safety property can be expressed as
A[]((Tester2.delivery &&emptybuffers ())imply
node(DIP1).delivered !=0)(4)
After the topology has been changed and the packet has been injected, the
automaton Tester2 is in location delivery . If then the message buﬀers are
empty (similar to the experiments described before) then we ch eck if the packet
has been delivered. ( node(DIP1).delivered ! =0).
Results. Property (4) is only satisﬁed for those topologies up to 5 nodes where
the dropped link is not critical. In our model, a link is said to be cr itical if after
link breakage there is no other link from that node to the other nodes al ong the
path to the destination to be substituted with the broken one.
This experiment shows that the recovery in these topologies takes ar ound 20
seconds(between15000–35000milliseconds),whichisalongperiod;inpart icular

--- Page 12 ---
since we only consider networks of small size. As a consequence, this means that
only after 35 seconds, the packet can certainly be delivered. The reas ons for this
long period are as following:
–After a link break occurred, some nodes might broadcast control message s
(HELLO or TC) with incorrect (old) information, since nodes have not res et
their tables for those nodes aﬀected by link breakage. Based on RFC 3626,
nodes reset their tables for the nodes from whom no control message is
received after 6 and 15 seconds, respectively.
–At the time a link breaks, there are usually messages in the queue wh ich
need to be processed. These messages contain again out-dated information .
So, the routing table is updated for the originator and one-hop neighbours
of the message when receiving a HELLO, and for the originator and MPR
selectors of the messages originator upon receiving a TC, even if the li nk
does not exist anymore.
–Even when some nodes learn about the link breakage and reset the corre-
sponding information in the routing table, it needs time to distrib ute this
new knowledge.
Modiﬁcations. A solution to decrease the long recovery time of OLSR is
to reduce NEIGHBHOLDTIMEandTOPHOLDTIMEto2*REFRESH INTERVAL and
2*TCINTERVAL , respectively. To verify our proposal, we consider Property (5).
This property states that refreshing routing tables in our proposed t iming helps
to reduce the recovery time.
A[]((Tester3.delivery &&emptybuffers ())imply
node(DIP1).delivered !=0)(5)
Similarly as for Property (4), Property (5) is satisﬁed for all topologies up to
5nodeswherethedroppedlinkisnotacriticallink.After25000milli seconds,the
packet is deﬁnitely delivered at the destination. Therefore, it i s feasible to reduce
the recovery time of OLSR about 10000 milliseconds (the diﬀerence betw een
35000 and 25000) using our proposed timing.
An alternative solution would be the introduction of error messages. As so on
as a link break is identiﬁed, an error message should be sent to MPRs to inform
thenodesandtocorrecttheinformationintheroutingtablesassoonasp ossible.
This modiﬁcation would be in the same spirit as error messages used for ot her
routing protocols, such as the AODV routing protocol. However, the anal ysis of
this improvement is left for future work.
5 Related Work
While modelling and verifying protocols is not a new research topic , attempts to
analyse routing protocols for dynamic networks are still rather new and r emain
a challenging task. Model checking techniques have been applie d to analyse pro-
tocols for decades, but there are only a few papers that use these tech niques in

--- Page 13 ---
the context of mobile ad-hoc networks, e.g. [2]. In the area of WMNs, Uppaal
has been used to model and analyse the routing protocols AODV and DYMO,
see [7,8,10]. However, to the best of our knowledge, our study is the ﬁrs t aiming
at a formal model of OLSR core functionality considering time variables.
Clausen et al. [4] specify the OLSR protocol in English prose. This pape r is
the oﬃcial description currently standardised by the IETF. Jacque t et al. [12]
also provide a high-level description of OLSR describing the advant ages of this
protocol, when compared to the others. However, none of these papers pr ovide
a formal model or a formal analysis of the protocol.
Steele and Andel [20] provide a study of OLSR using the model checker
Spin[11].TheydesignamodelofOLSRinwhichLinearTemporalLogic(LTL)i s
usedtoanalysethecorrectfunctionalityofthisprotocol.Theyveri fytheirsystem
forcorrectroutediscovery,correctrelayselection,andloopfree dom.Duetostate
space explosion their analysis is limited to four node topologies only. W hen
taking symmetries into account they analyse 17 topologies. Moreover, a t iming
analysis is not possible by Spin. Hence the model given by Steele and An del
abstracts from timing; as we have shown analysing OLSR with time variabl es
reveales more shortcomings.
Fehnker et al. [8] describe a formal and rigorous model of the Ad hoc On-
Demand Distance Vector (AODV) routing protocol in Uppaal; the model is
derived from a precise process-algebraic speciﬁcation that reﬂect s a common
and unambiguous interpretation of the RFC [19]. Their model is also a net work
of timed automata and they analyse network topologies up to 5 nodes. However ,
in their original analysis they abstract from time, which was added later on [10].
AlthoughthetwoprotocolsAODVandOLSRbehavediﬀerently,weuseth esame
modelling techniques and experiments as for AODV, to make the compar ison
study of these two protocols feasible for our future work.
Kamali et al. [14] use reﬁnement techniques for modelling and analysin g
wireless sensor-actor networks. They prove that failed actor links c an be tem-
porarily replaced by communication via the sensor infrastructure, gi ven some
assumptions. They use an Event-B formalisation based on theorem provin g and
their proofs are carried out in the RODIN tool platform. There is a str ong sim-
ilarity between the nature of the distributed OLSR protocol and the n ature of
distributed sensor-based recovery. However, the tools employe d for analysis in
the two frameworks are diﬀerent in nature (model checking vs. the orem prov-
ing). Our decision to use Uppaal is based on the fact that it provides mod elling
means for time constraints and fully automatic reasoning. The treatment of time
in Event-B is still incipient, involving a rather diﬀerent per spective of treating
variables as continuous functions of time.
6 Conclusions and Outlook
Inthispaperwehaveprovidedaformalanalysisforthedistributed andproactive
routing protocol OLSR. Our analysis is performed using the model che cker Up-
paal. We have provided a Uppaal model which is in accordance with the OLS R

--- Page 14 ---
standard. It models all core functionalities, including sophistic ated timers. To
validateourmodelwecomparedourmodelwithexamplesfoundinthelit erature.
UsingUppaalwewereabletoﬁndshortcomingsoftheprotocol:insomecases,
an optimal route for message delivery cannot be established and the recov ery
time in case of link breakage is huge. For both shortcomings we have sketch ed
improvements that can easily be implemented. A more careful analysi s for link
breaks on critical paths is left for future work.
We see these results as the starting point for further research. Fi rst, our
analysis is restricted to small networks (of 5 and 7 nodes), due to th e nature
of model checking. Wireless Mesh Networks draw their strength from employing
potentially dozens (maybe hundreds) of nodes. Hence, we need to ex tend our
analysis to larger networks. This can be achieved by working with stati stical
model checking, where simulation concepts are combined with model checking
to establish the statistical evidence of satisfying hypotheses. W hile this does not
guarantee a correct result w.r.t. the hypothesis, the probability of error can be
made vanishingly small. Another approach suitable to deal with larger net works
is that of theorem-proving, where, e.g. we can prove the required sy stem prop-
erties as invariants for all systems (of all sizes) that verify certain assumptions.
Second, our model for the proactive, distributed OLSR can be generalis ed
to distributed control. The latter is a concept with high relevance for systems
where, e.g. self-repairing is important, as it can enable the indepe ndence of
the system from central coordinators. Even maintaining proactively t he optimal
communication routes, as OLSR does, is instrumental in this. The appl icability
of distributed control to critical systems such as emergency respon se networks
or smart electrical grids is very relevant, as these are complex syste ms, for which
global solutions cannot be provided.
Acknowledgements This research belongs to the Academy of Finland FResCo
project (grant number 263925, FResCo: High-quality Measurement Infrastru c-
ture for Future Resilient Control Systems). NICTA is funded by th e Australian
Government through the Department of Communications and the Australian
Research Council through the ICT Centre of Excellence Program.
References
1. Behrmann, G., David, A., Larsen, K.G.: A tutorial on Uppaal. In : International
School on Formal Methods for the Design of Computer, Communicati on, and
Software Systems, SFM-RT 2004. Revised Lectures. pp. 200–236. Springer Ver-
lag (2004)
2. Chiyangwa, S., Kwiatkowska, M.Z.: A timing analysis of AO DV. In: FMOODS.
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 3535, pp. 306–321. Sp ringer (2005)
3. Clarke, E.M., Emerson, E.A., Sifakis, J.: Model checking: Al gorithmic veriﬁcation
and debugging. Commun. ACM 52(11), 74–84 (2009)
4. Clausen, T., Jacquet, P.: Optimized link state routing prot ocol (OLSR). RFC 3626
(Experimental) (2003), http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc3626
5. David, A., H˚ akansson, J., Larsen, K.G., Pettersson, P.: Mod el checking timed au-
tomata with priorities using DBM subtraction. In: 4th Internatio nal Conference on

--- Page 15 ---
Formal Modelling and Analysis of Timed Systems (FORMATS06). Lecture Notes
in Computer Science, vol. 4202, pp. 128–142. Springer Berlin H eidelberg (2006)
6. Emerson, E.A.: Temporal and modal logic. In: Handbook of Theo retical Computer
Science (vol. B): Formal Models and Semantics, pp. 995–1072. MIT (1995)
7. Fehnker, A., van Glabbeek, R., H¨ ofner, P., McIver, A., Portman n, M., Tan, W.L.:
Modelling and analysis of AODV in UPPAAL. In: 1st Internation al Workshop on
Rigorous Protocol Engineering. pp. 1–6. Vancouver (2011)
8. Fehnker, A., van Glabbeek, R., H¨ ofner, P., McIver, A., Portman n, M., Tan, W.L.:
Automated analysis of AODV using UPPAAL. In: 18th Internatio nal Conference
on Tools and Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis of Sy stems (TACAS
2012). pp. 173–187. Springer, Tallinn, Estonia (2012)
9. van Glabbeek, R., H¨ ofner, P., Portmann, M., Tan, W.L.: Seque nce numbers do not
guarantee loop freedom —AODV can yield routing loops—. In: Model ing, Analysis
and Simulation of Wireless and Mobile Systems (MSWiM’13). pp . 91–100. ACM
(2013)
10. H¨ ofner, P., McIver, A.: Statistical model checking of wirel ess mesh routing pro-
tocols. In: 5th NASA Formal Methods Symposium (NFM 2013). vol. 7871, pp.
322–336. Springer, Moﬀett Field, CA, USA (2013)
11. Holzmann, G.J.: The model checker spin. IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng. 23(5), 279–295
(1997)
12. Jacquet, P., M¨ uhlethaler, P., Clausen, T., Laouiti, A., Qayyum, A., Viennot, L.:
Optimized Link State Routing Protocol for Ad Hoc Networks. In: M ulti Topic
Conference, 2001. IEEE INMIC 2001. pp. 62 – 68. IEEE (2001)
13. Kamali, M., Kamali, M., Petre, L.: Formally analyzing proac tive, distributed rout-
ing. Tech. Rep. 1125, TUCS – Turku Centre for Computer Science (2 014)
14. Kamali, M., Laibinis, L., Petre, L., Sere, K.: Formal develo pment of wireless sensor-
actor networks. Science of Computer Programming 80, Part A(0), 2 5 – 49 (2014)
15. Larsen, K.G., Pettersson, P., Yi, W.: Uppaal in a nutshell. International Journal
on Software Tools for Technology Transfer (STTT) 1(1), 134–152 (1 997)
16. Larsen, K.G., Larsson, F., Pettersson, P., Yi, W.: Compact d ata structures and
state-space reduction for model-checking real-time systems. Real-Time Systems
25(2-3), 255–275 (2003)
17. Larsen, K.G., Pettersson, P., Yi, W.: Model-checking for rea l-time systems. In:
FCT. pp. 62–88 (1995)
18. Miskovic, S., Knightly, E.W.: Routing primitives for wirel ess mesh networks: De-
sign, analysis and experiments. In: Conference on Information Co mmunications
(INFOCOM ’10). pp. 2793–2801. IEEE (2010)
19. Perkins, C., Belding-Royer, E., Das, S.: Ad hoc On-Demand Dis-
tance Vector (AODV) Routing. RFC 3561 (Experimental) (2003) ,
http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc3561
20. Steele, M.F., Andel, T.R.: Modeling the optimized link- state routing protocol for
veriﬁcation.In:SpringSim(TMS-DEVS).pp.35:1–35:8.Societ yforComputerSim-
ulation International (2012)
