--- Page 1 ---
Uppaal Stratego⋆
Alexandre David, Peter Gjøl Je nsen, Kim Guldstrand Larsen,
Marius Mikuˇ cionis, and Jakob Haahr Taankvist
Department of Computer Science, Aalborg University,
Selma Lagerl¨ ofs Vej 300, 9220 Aalborg Øst, Denmark
Abstract. Uppaal Stratego is a novel tool which facilitates genera-
tion,optimization,comparisonaswellasconsequenceandperformanceex-
ploration of strategies for stochastic pricedtimedgames ina user-friendly
manner. The tool allows for eﬃcient and ﬂexible “strategy-space” explo-
ration before adaptation in a ﬁnal implementation by maintaining strate-
giesasﬁrstclassobjectsinthemodel-checkingquerylanguage.Thepaper
describesthestrategiesandtheirproperties,constructionandtransforma-
tion algorithms and a typical tool usage scenario.
1 Introduction
Model checking may be used to verify that a proposed controller prevents an
environment from causing dangerous situations while, at the same time, operat-
ing in a desirable manner. This approach has been successfully pursued in the
setting of systems modeled as ﬁnite-state automata, timed automata, and prob-
abilistic automata of various types with nuSMV [7], FDR [11], Uppaal [3] and
PRISM [13] as prime examples of model checking tools supporting the above
mentioned formalisms. Most recentl y the simulation-based method of statistical
model checking has been introduced in Uppaal SMC [4], allowing for highly
scaleable analysis of fullystochastic Sriced Timed A utomata with respect to a
wide range of performance properties. F or instance, expected waiting-time and
cost, and time-bounded and cost reachability probabilities, may be estimated
(and tested) with an arbitrary precision and high degree of conﬁdence. Com-
bined with the symbolic model checking of Uppaal this enables an adequate
analysis of mixed critical systems, whe re certain (safety) properties must hold
with absolute certainty, whereas for other quantitative (performance) properties
a reasonably good estimati on may suﬃce, see e.g. [10].
Rather than verifyinga proposed controller,synthesis – whenpossible –allows
analgorithmicconstructionofacontrollerwhichisguaranteedtoensurethatthe
resulting systems will satisfy the desired correctness properties. The extension
of controller synthesis to timed and hybrid games started in the 90s with the
seminalwork ofPnueli et al.[1,14]on co ntrollersynthesis for timed gameswhere
⋆The research has received funding from the European FET projects SENSATION
and CASSTING, the ARTEMIS project MBAT as well as the Sino-Danish Basic
Research Center IDEA4CPS.
©Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2015
C. Baier and C. Tinelli (Eds.): TACAS 2015, LNCS 9035, pp. 206–211, 2015.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-662-46681-0 _16

--- Page 2 ---
Uppaal Stratego 207
thesynthesisproblemwasprovendecidablebyasymbolicdynamicprogramming
technique.In Uppaal Tiga [2,5] aneﬃcient on-the-ﬂyalgorithmforsynthesisof
reachability and safety objectives for timed games has been implemented, with
a number of successful industrial applications having been made including zone-
basedclimatecontrolforpig-stables[12]andcontrollersforhydraulicpumpswith
60% improvement in energy-consumption compared with industrial practice at
t h et i m e[ 6 ,1 5 ] .
However, once a strategy has been synthesized for a given objective no further
analysishas been supportedso far. In particularit has notbeen possible to make
a deeper examination of a synthesized st rategy in terms of other additional
properties that may or may not hold under the strategy. Neither has it been
possible to optimize a synthesized non-deterministic safety strategy with respect
to desired performance measures. Both o f these issues have been addressed by
the authors in recent work [8,9], and in this paper we present the tool Uppaal
Stratego which combines these techniques to generate, optimize, compare and
explore consequences and per formance of strategies synthesized for stochastic
priced timed games in a user-friendly manner. In particular, the tool allows for
eﬃcient and ﬂexible “strategy-space” exploration before adaptation in a ﬁnal
implementation.
Uppaal Stratego1integrates Uppaal and the two branches Uppaal SMC
[4] (statistical model checking), Uppaal Tiga [2] (synthesis for timed games)
and the method proposed in [9] (synthesis of near optimal schedulers) into one
tool suite. Uppaal Stratego comes with an extended query language where
strategies are ﬁrst class objects that m ay be constructed, co mpared, optimized
and used when performing (statistical) model checking of a game under the
constraints of a given synthesized strategy.
Consider the jobshop scheduling problem shown in Fig. 1 which models a
number of persons sharing a newspaper. Each task process reads a section of
the paper, whereas only one person can read a particular section at a time.
Each reader wants to read the newspaper i n diﬀerent orders, and the stochastic
environment chooses how long it takes to read each section. This makes the
problem a problem of ﬁnding a strategy, rather than ﬁnding a static scheduler
as in the classical jobshop scheduling problem.
Fig. 1. Uppaal Stratego template of a single person reading a newspaper
1Uppaal Stratego is available at http://people.cs.aau.dk/ ~marius/stratego/

--- Page 3 ---
208 A. David et al.
Figure 1 shows a stochastic priced timed game (SPTG) which models one
person reading the newspaper. The circles are locations and the arrows are tran-sitions. The solid arrows are transitions controlled by the controller and the
dashed are transitions controlled by the stochastic environment. The model re-
ﬂects the reading of the four sections in the preferred order (here comics, sport,
local and economy) for the preferred amo unt of time. In the top locations the
person is waiting for the next section t o become available; here four Boolean
variables are used to ensure mutex on the reading of a section. In the bottom
locations, the person is reading the par ticular section for a duration given by a
uniform distribution on the given interval, e.g. [10,11]for our person’s reading ofsport. The stopwatch WTimeis only running in the waiting locations thus eﬀec-
tivelymeasuringthe accumulatedtime when the personiswaitingto read.Given
a complete model with several persons co nstantly competing for the sections, we
are interested in synthesiz ing strategies for several multi-objectives, e.g. syn-
thesize a strategy ensuring that all per sons have completed reading within 100
minutes, and then minimize the expected waiting time for our preferred person.
2 Games, Automata and Properties
Using the featuresof Uppaal Stratego we can analyzethe SPTG in Fig. 1. In-
ternally, Uppaal Stratego has diﬀerent models and re presentations of strate-
gies, an overview of these and their relations are given in Fig. 2. The model seen
in Fig. 1 is a SPTG, as WTimeis a cost function or price with location dependent
rate (here 0 or 1), and we assume that environment takes transitions accordingto a uniform distribution over time.
As shown in Fig. 2 we can abstract a SPTG into a timed game (TGA). This
abstraction is obtained simply by ignoring the prices and stochasticity in the
model. Note that since prices are observers, this abstraction does not aﬀect
the possible behavior of the model, but merely forgets the likelihood and cost ofvariousbehaviors.Theabstractionmaps a 1
1/2-playergame,where the opponent
is stochastic into a 2-player game with an antagonistic opponent.
Given a TGA ( G)w ec a nu s e Uppaal Tiga to synthesize a strategy σ(ei-
ther deterministic or non-deterministic). This strategy can, when put in parallel
with the TGA, G|σ, be model-checked in the same way as usual in Uppaal.W e
P
Stochastic Priced Timed GameP|σ σ◦
StrategyP|σ◦
Statistical Model Checking
Stochastic Priced Timed AutomataGTimed Game
σStrategy
G|σ(Statistical) Model Checking
Timed Automata
Abstraction
SynthesisφSynthesis
Uppaal Tiga
φ
Fig. 2.Overview of models and their relations. The lines show diﬀerent actions. The
dashed lines show that we use the object.

--- Page 4 ---
Uppaal Stratego 209
can also use the strategy in a SPTG P,a n do b t a i n P|σ. Under a strategy it
is possible to do statistical model checking (estimation of probability and cost,and comparison), which enables us to observe the behavior and performance of
the strategy when we assume that the environment is purely stochastic. This
also allows us to use to use prices under σ, even though they were not consid-
ered in the synthesis of σ.F r o mb o t h PandP|σlearning is possible using the
method proposed in [9]. The learning algorithm uses a simulation based method
for learning near-optimal strat egies for a given price metric. If σis the most
permissive strategy guaranteeing some goal, then the learning algorithm can op-
timize under this strategy, and we will get a strategy σ
◦which is near-optimal
but still has the guarantees of σ. As the last step we can construct P|σ◦,w h i c h
we can then do statistical model checking on.
3S t r a t e g i e s
InUppaal Stratego we operate three diﬀerent kinds of strategies, all mem-
oryless. Non-deterministic strategies are strategies which give a setof actions
in each state, with the most permissive strategy – when it exists – oﬀering the
largest set of choices. In the case of time d games, most permissive strategies ex-
ist for safety and time-bounded reachability objectives. Deterministic strategies
give oneactionin eachstate. Stochastic strategies givea distribution overthe set
of actions in each state. Fig. 3 shows how strategies are generated and used. For
generating strategies, we can use Uppaal Tiga o rt h em e t h o dp r o p o s e di n[ 9 ]
on SPTGs. Uppaal Tiga generates (most permissive) non-deterministic orde-
terministic strategies. The method proposed in [9] generates strategies which
are deterministic. A strategy generated with Uppaal Stratego can undergo
diﬀerent investigations: model checking, statistical model checking and learning.
Learning consume non-deterministic strategies (potentially multiple actions perstate) and may produce a deterministic one by selecting a single action for each
state, such that the ﬁnal deterministic strategy is optimized towards some goal.
Figure 3 shows that currently it is possible to model check only under symbol-ically synthesized strategies (as oppos ed to optimized ones) as symbolic model
checking requires the strategy to be repre sented entirely in terms of zones (con-
straint systems over clock values and thei r diﬀerences). Statistical model check-
ing can only be done under stochastic strategies. All deterministic strategies can
be thought of as stochastic by assigning a probability of 1 to the onechoice.
Model
Optimization [9]Statistical MC
Uppaal SMCSymbolic synthesis
Uppaal TigaSymbolic MC
Uppaal
Near-optimal Strategies [9] Uppaal Tiga Strategies
Fig. 3.Overview of algorithms and data structures in Uppaal Stratego

--- Page 5 ---
210 A. David et al.
To evaluate non-deterministic strategies statistically we applying a stochastic
uniform distribution over the non-deterministic choices.
4 Query Language
We let strategies become ﬁrst class citi zens by introducing strategy assignment
strategy S = and strategy usage under S where Sis an identiﬁer. These are
appliedto the queriesalreadyused in Uppaal,Uppaal Tiga andUppaal SMC
as well as those proposed in [9]. An overview of these queries is given in Table 1.
Notice that we changed the syntax of the queries presented in [9]. Recall the
example with the four authors sharing a newspaper as presented in Fig. 1. We
compute a strategyfor Kim to reachhis plane within one houron line 1 in Fig. 4.
Respecting this, we ﬁnd that Marius cannot join, as the query on line 2 is not
satisﬁed. Instead, we optimize that Peter joins in on line 3 ( [<=60]is a bound
on how long the simulations we learn from used can be). Finally, line 4 estimates
that Jakob is done with probability ≥0.9 under Peter’s optimizations.
Table 1. Types of queries
UppaalSafety A[] prop under NS
Liveness A<> prop under NS
TigaGuarantee objective strategy NS = control: A<> prop
Guarantee objective strategy NS = control: A[] prop
SMCEvaluation Pr[bound](<> prop) under SS
Expected value E[bound;int](min: prop) under SS
Simulations simulate int [bound]{expr1,expr2} under SS
[9]Minimize objective strategy DS = minE (expr) [bound]: <> prop under NS
Maximize objective strategy DS = maxE (expr) [bound]: <> prop under NS
Fig. 4. Uppaal Stratego queries and results for the model in Fig. 1
References
1. Asarin, E., Maler, O., Pnueli, A.: Symbolic controller synthesis for discrete and
timed systems. In: Antsaklis, P.J., Kohn, W., Nerode, A., Sastry, S.S. (eds.) HS
1994. LNCS, vol. 999, Springer, Heidelberg (1995)
2. Behrmann, G., Cougnard, A., David, A., Fleury, E., Larsen, K.G., Lime, D.:
UPPAAL-tiga: Time for playing games !I n :D a m m ,W . ,H e r m a n n s ,H .( e d s . )C A V
2007. LNCS, vol. 4590, pp. 121–125. Springer, Heidelberg (2007)

--- Page 6 ---
Uppaal Stratego 211
3. Behrmann, G., David, A., Larsen, K.G., H˚ akansson, J., Pettersson, P., Yi, W.,
Hendriks, M.: Uppaal 4.0. In: Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on
the Quantitative Evaluation of Systems, QEST 2006, IEEE Computer Society,Washington, DC (2006)
4. Bulychev, P.E., David, A., Larsen, K.G., Mikuˇ cionis, M., Poulsen, D.B., Legay, A.,
Wang,Z.:UPPAAL-SMC:statistical modelcheckingforpricedtimedautomata.In:Proceedings 10th Workshop on Quantitative Aspects of Programming Languages
and Systems, QAPL 2012, Tallinn, Estonia. EPTCS, vol. 85 (March 2012)
5. Cassez, F., David, A., Fleury, E., Larsen, K.G., Lime, D.: Eﬃcient on-the-ﬂy algo-
rithmsfor theanalysis oftimedgames. In:Abadi,M.,deAlfaro, L.(eds.)CONCUR
2005. LNCS, vol. 3653, pp. 66–80. Springer, Heidelberg (2005)
6. Cassez, F., Jessen, J.J., Larsen, K.G., Raskin, J.-F., Reynier, P.-A.: Automatic
synthesis of robust and optimal controllers – an industrial case study. In: Majum-
dar, R., Tabuada, P. (eds.) HSCC 2009. LNCS, vol. 5469, pp. 90–104. Springer,
Heidelberg (2009)
7. Cimatti, A., Clarke, E., Giunchiglia, E., Giunchiglia, F., Pistore, M., Roveri, M.,
Sebastiani, R., Tacchella, A.: NuSMV 2: An openSource tool for symbolic model
checking. In: Brinksma, E., Larsen, K.G. (eds.) CAV 2002. LNCS, vol. 2404, p.359. Springer, Heidelberg (2002)
8. David, A., Fang, H., Larsen, K.G., Zhang, Z.: Veriﬁcation and performance evalu-
ation of timed game strategies. In: Legay, A., Bozga, M. (eds.) FORMATS 2014.LNCS, vol. 8711, pp. 100–114. Springer, Heidelberg (2014)
9. David, A., Jensen, P.G., Larsen, K.G., Legay, A., Lime, D., Sørensen, M.G.,
Taankvist, J.H.: On time with minimal expected cost! In: Cassez, F., Raskin, J.-F.(eds.) ATVA 2014. LNCS, vol. 8837, pp. 129–145. Springer, Heidelberg (2014)
10. David, A., Larsen, K.G., Legay, A., Mikuˇ cionis, M.: Schedulability of herschel-
planck revisited usingstatistical model checking.In:Margaria, T., Steﬀen,B. (eds.)ISoLA 2012, Part II. LNCS, vol. 7610, pp. 293–307. Springer, Heidelberg (2012)
11. Gibson-Robinson, T., Armstrong, P., Boulgakov, A., Roscoe, A.W.: FDR3 — A
modern reﬁnement checker for CSP. In: ´Abrah´am, E., Havelund, K. (eds.) TACAS
2014 (ETAPS). LNCS, vol. 8413, pp. 187–201. Springer, Heidelberg (2014)
12. Jessen, J.J., Rasmussen, J.I., Larsen, K.G., David, A.: Guided controller synthesis
for climate controller using uppaal tiga . In:Raskin,J.-F., Thiagarajan, P.S. (eds.)
FORMATS 2007. LNCS, vol. 4763, pp. 227–240. Springer, Heidelberg (2007)
13. Kwiatkowska, M., Norman, G., Parker, D.: PRISM 4.0: Veriﬁcation of probabilistic
real-time systems. In: Gopalakrishnan, G., Qadeer, S. (eds.) CAV 2011. LNCS,vol. 6806, pp. 585–591. Springer, Heidelberg (2011)
14. Maler, O., Pnueli, A., Sifakis, J.: On the synthesis of discrete controllers for timed
systems. In: Mayr, E.W., Puech, C. (eds.) STACS 1995. LNCS, vol. 900, Springer,
Heidelberg (1995)
15. Zhao, H., Zhan, N., Kapur, D., Larsen, K.G.: A ”hybrid” approach for synthesizing
optimal controllers of hybrid systems: A case study of the oil pump industrial
example (2012)
