--- Page 1 ---
Optimal Scheduling using PricedTimed Automata
Gerd Behrmann andKim G.Larsen andJacob I.Rasmussen∗
BRICS, Aalborg University, Denmark
Abstract
This contribution reports on the considerable effort made re-
centlytowardsextendingandapplyingwell-establishedtimed
automata technology to optimal scheduling and planning
problems. The effort of the authors in this direction has to a
large extent been carried out as part of the European projects
VHS(VHS 2005) and A METIST (AMETIST 2005) and are
available in the recently released U PPAALCORA(UPPAAL
CORA 2005), a variant of the real-time veriﬁcation tool U P-
PAAL(Larsen, Pettersson, & Yi 1997; Behrmann, David, &
Larsen2004)specializedforcost-optimalreachabilityforthe
extended modelof so-called pricedtimed automata.
IntroductionandMotivation
Since its introduction by Alur and Dill (Alur & Dill 1994)
themodeloftimedautomatahasestablisheditselfasastan-
dard modeling formalism for describing real-time system
behaviour. A number of mature model checking tools (e.g.
KRONOS, UPPAAL, IF (Bozga et al.1998; Larsen, Petters-
son, & Yi 1997; IF 2005)) are by now available and have
beenappliedtothequantitativeanalysisofnumerousindus -
trialcase-studies (UPPAAL 2005).
An interesting application of real-time model checking
that has recently been receiving substantial attention is t o
extend and retarget the timed automata technology towards
optimal scheduling and planning. The extensions include
most importantly an augmentation of the basic timed au-
tomata formalism allowing for the speciﬁcation of the ac-
culumationofcostduringbehavior(Behrmann etal.2001a;
Alur, La Torre, & Pappas 2001). The state-exploring algo-
rithms have been modiﬁed to allow for “guiding” the (sym-
bolic) state-space exploration in order that “promising” a nd
“cheap” states are visited ﬁrst, and to apply branch-and-
bound techniques (Behrmann et al.2001b) to prune parts
of the search tree that are guaranteed not to improve on so-
lutions found so far. Also new symbolic data structures al-
lowingforefﬁcientsymbolicstate-spacerepresentationw ith
additional cost-information have been introduced and im-
plemented in order to efﬁciently obtain optimal or near-
optimal solutions (Larsen et al.2001). Within the V HSand
AMETISTprojectssuccessfulapplicationsofthistechnology
∗Work partially done within the European IST project
AMETIST.havebeenmadetoanumberofbenchmarkexamplesandin-
dustrial case studies. With this new direction, we are enter -
ing the area of Operations Research with a well-established
and extensive list of existing techniques (MILP, constrain t
programming, genetic programming, etc.). However, what
we put forward is a completely new and promising technol-
ogybasedontheefﬁcientalgorithms/datastructurescomin g
from timed automta analysis, and allowing for very natu-
ral and compositional descriptions of highly non-standard
scheduling problems withtimingconstraints.
Abstractly, a scheduling or planning problem may be un-
derstood in terms of a number of objects(e.g. a number of
different cars, persons) each associated with various dist in-
guishingattributes(e.g. speed,position). Thepossiblep lans
solving the problem are described by a number of actions,
the execution of which may depend on and affect the val-
uesof(someof)theobjectsattributes. Solutions,orfeasi ble
schedules, come in(atleast) twoﬂavors:
FiniteSchedule: a ﬁnite sequence of actions that takes the
system from the initial conﬁguration to one of a desig-
nated collection of desiredﬁnal conﬁgurations.
Inﬁnite Schedule: an inﬁnite sequence of actions that –
when starting in the initial conﬁguration – ensures that
thesystemconﬁgurationstaysindeﬁnitelywithinadesig-
nated collection of desiredconﬁgurations.
In order to reinforce quantitative aspects, actions may
additionally be equipped with constraints on durations and
have associated costs. In this way one may distinguish dif-
ferentfeasibleschedulesaccordingtotheiraccumulatedc ost
ortime(forﬁniteschedules)ortheircostpertimeratioint he
limit (for inﬁnite schedules) in identifying optimalsched-
ules. It is understood that independent actions, in terms of
thesetobjectstheactionsdependuponandmayaffect,may
overlap time-wise.
One concrete scheduling problem is that of optimal task
graph scheduling (TGS) consisting in scheduling a number
of interdependent tasks (e.g. performing some arithmetic
operations) onto a number of heterogenous processors. The
interdependenciesstatethatataskcannotstartexecuting be-
foreall itspredecessors have terminated. Furthermore, ea ch
task can only execute on a subset of the processors. An ex-
ample task graph with three tasks is depicted in Figure 1.
The task t3cannot start executing until both tasks t1andt2

--- Page 2 ---
t1(3,−)
t2(−,5)
t3
(10,7)Processor costs:
Processor1-Idle: 2-InUse: 5
Processor2-Idle: 1-InUse: 4
Figure1: Taskgraphschedulingproblemwith3tasksand2
processors.
haveterminated. Theavailableresourcesaretwoprocessor s
p1andp2. Thetasks(nodes)areannotatedwiththerequired
execution times on the processors, that is, t1can only exe-
cuteon p1,t2onlyon p2whilet3canexecuteonboth p1and
p2. Furthermore,theidlingcostspertimeunitoftheproces-
sors are 2 and 1, respectively, and operations costs per time
unit are5 and 4, respectively.
Now, scheduling problems are naturally modeled using
networks of timed automata. Each object is modelled as
a separate timed automaton annotated with local, discrete
variables representing the attributes associated with the ob-
ject. Interaction often involves only a few objects and can
be modeled as synchronizing edges in the timed automata
modelsoftheinvolvedobjects. Actionsinvolvingtimedura -
tions are naturally modeled using guarded edges over clock
variables. Furthermore, operation costs can be associated
withstatesandedgesinthemodelofpricedtimedautomata
(PTA) which was, independently, introduced in (Behrmann
etal.2001a)and(Alur,LaTorre,&Pappas2001). Thesep-
arationofindependent objects intoindividual processes a nd
representing interaction between objects as synchronizin g
actions allows timed automata to make explicit the control
ﬂowofschedulingproblems. Inturn,thismakesthemodels
intuitively understood and easy to communicate. Figure 2
depicts PTA models for the task graph in Figure 1 and is
explained indetail inSection .
The outline of the remainder of the paper is as follows:
in Sections 2 and 3 we introduce the model of PTA, the
problem of cost-optimal reachability and sketches the sym-
bolic branch-and-bound algorithm used by U PPAALCORA
forsolvingthisproblem. TheninSection4weshowhowto
model a range of generic scheduling problems using PTA,
provide experimental evaluation and describe two industri al
scheduling case-studies. Finally, in Section 5, we comment
onotherPTA-relatedoptimizationproblemstobesupported
infuturereleases of U PPAALCORA.
PricedTimedAutomata
In this section we give a more precise and formal deﬁnition
ofpricedtimedautomata(PTA)andtheirsemantics1. LetX
be a set of clocks. Intuitively, a clock is a non-negative rea l
valued variable that can be reset to zero and increments at a
1We ignore the syntactic extensions of discrete variables and
parallel composition of automata and note that these can be added
easily.ﬁxed rate with the passage of time. A priced timed automa-
ton over Xis an annotated directed graph with a vertex set
L, an edge set Eand a distinguished vertex l0∈Lcalled
the initial location. In the tradition of timed automata, we
callvertices locations. Edgesarelabelledwithguardexpres-
sionsandaresetset. Aguardisaconjunctionofsimplecon-
straints x ⊲ ⊳ k, where xis a clock in X,kis a non-negative
integer value, and ⊲ ⊳∈{<,≤,=,≥,>}. We say that an
edge is enabled if the guard evaluates to true and the source
location is active. A reset set is a subset of X. The intuition
isthattheclocksintheresetsetaresettozerowheneverthe
edge istaken. Finally, locations arelabelledwithinvaria nts.
An invariant is a conjunction of simple conditions x≺k,
where xis a clock in X,kis a non-negative integer-value,
and≺ ∈ { <,≤}. Intuitively, an invariant must evaluate
to true whenever its location is active. The previous deﬁni-
tion is in fact that of a timed automaton. To form a priced
timed automaton, we annotate the edges and the locations
withcostsandcostrates,respectively. Formally,thisisd one
by introducing afunction P:L∪E→N0.
The semantics of a PTA is easily deﬁned as a priced
transition system . Transitions of a priced transition system
are labelled with a non-negative real-valued cost p. We
skip the formal deﬁnition of a priced transition system
and proceed with the semantics of PTA. A state of a PTA
contains the active location l∈Land a valuation of all
clocks v:X→R≥0such that the invariant of levaluates
to true for v. There are two types of transitions: edge
transitions anddelay transitions . Edge transitions are the
result of following an enabled edge in the PTA. As a result,
the destination location is activated and the clocks in the
reset set are set to zero. The cost of the transition is given
by thecost of theedge.
More formally, we have (l,v)→p(l′,v′)if there is an edge
efromltol′, such that the guard of eevaluates to true in
the source state (l,v),v′is derived from vby resetting all
clocks in the reset set of e, andp=P(e)is the cost of the
edge.
Delay transitions are the result of the passage of time
and do not cause a change of location. A delay is only
valid if the invariant of the active location is satisﬁed by a ll
intermediate states. The cost of a delay transition is given
by the product of the length of the delay and the cost rate of
theactive location.
More formally, we have (l,v)δ→p(l,v′)ifp=δ·P(l),v′
is derived from vby incrementing all clocks by δand the
invariantof lissatisﬁedby (l,v),(l,v′)andallintermediary
states.
Finally, the initial state is s0= (l0,v0), where l0is
the initial location, and v0evaluates to zero for all clocks.
For networks of timed automata we use vectors of locations
and the cost rate of a vector is the sum of cost rates in
locations.

--- Page 3 ---
Figure 2: Screen shot of the U PPAALCORAsimulator forthetask graph scheduling problem of Figure 1.
OptimalScheduling
We now turn to the deﬁnition of the optimal reachability
problem for PTA and provide a brief and intuitive overview
of UPPAALCORA’s branch and bound algorithm for cost-
optimal reachability analysis.
Cost-optimal reachability is the problem of ﬁnding the
minimum cost of reaching a given goal location. More for-
mally, an execution of a PTA is a path in the priced transi-
tion system deﬁned by the PTA, i.e., α=s0a1→p1s1a2→p2
s2···an→pnsn. The cost, cost(α), of execution αis the
sumofallthecostsalongtheexecution. Theminimumcost,
mincost (s)of reaching a state sis the inﬁmum of the costs
of all ﬁnite executions from s0tos. Given a PTA with lo-
cation l, thecost-optimal reachability problem is to ﬁnd the
largest cost ksuch that k≤mincost ((l,v))for all clock
valuations v.
Since clocks are deﬁned over the non-negative reals, the
priced transition system generated by a PTA can be un-
countablyinﬁnite,thusanenumerativeapproachtothecost -
optimalreachabilityproblemisinfeasible. Instead,webu ild
upon the work done for timed automata by using priced
symbolic states . Priced symbolic states provide symbolic
representations of possibly inﬁnite sets of actual states a nd
their association with costs. The idea is that during explo-
ration, the inﬁmum cost along a symbolic path (a path of
symbolic states) is stored in the symbolic states itself. If
the same state is reached with different costs along differ-COST:=∞
PASSED:=∅
WAITING:={S0}
whileWAITING/ne}ationslash=∅do
selectS∈WAITING//based on branching strategy
C←mincost (S)
ifPASSED≤/domSandC+remain (S)<COSTthen
PASSED←PASSED∪{S}
ifS∈GOALthen
COST←C
else
WAITING← {S′|S′∈WAITINGorS→S′}
returnCOST
Figure 3: branch and bound algorithm.

--- Page 4 ---
ent paths, the symbolic states can be compared, discarding
the more expensive state. Analogous to timed automata,
the priced symbolic states we encounter for PTA are rep-
resentable by simple constraint systems over clock differ-
ences(oftenreferedtoasaclock-zoneinthetimedautomata
literature). The cost is given by an afﬁne plane over the
clock-zone. For a formal description of priced symbolic
states and priced zones we refer to (Larsen et al.2001;
Rasmussen, Larsen, & Subramani 2004).
In UPPAALCORA, cost-optimal reachability analysis is
performed using a standard branch and bound algorithm.
Branchingisbasedonvarioussearchstrategiesimplemente d
in UPPAALCORAwhich, currently, are breadth-ﬁrst, ordi-
nary, random, or best depth-ﬁrst with or without random
restart, best-ﬁrst, and user supplied heuristics. The latt er
enables the user to annotate locations of the model with a
special variable called heurand the search can be ordered
according to either largest or smallest heurvalue. Bound-
ingisbasedonauser-supplied,lower-boundestimateofthe
remaining cost toreach thegoal from each location.
The algorithm depicted in Figure 3 is the cost-optimal
reachability algorithm used by U PPAALCORA. It main-
tainsa P ASSED-listofelementsthathavebeenexploredand
a WAITING-list of elements that need to be explored and is
instantiated with the initial symbolic state S0. The variable
COSTholds the currently best known cost of reaching the
goal location; initially it is inﬁnite. The algorithm itera tes
until no more states need to be explored. Inside the while-
loop we select and remove a state, S, from W AITINGbased
on the branching strategy. If Sis dominated2by another
state that has already been explored or it is not possible to
reach the goal with a lower cost than C OST, we skip this
state. Otherwise, we add Sto PASSEDand ifSis a goal
locationweupdatethebestknowncosttothebestcostin S.
If not, we add all successors of Sto WAITINGand continue
tothenext iteration.
Modeling
As mentioned earlier, one of the main strengths of using
pricedtimedautomataforspecifyingandanalyzingschedul -
ingproblemsisthesimplicityofthemodelingaspect. Inthi s
section, we show how to model generic scheduling prob-
lems, provide experimental results, and describe two indus -
trialcase studies.
Scheduling problems often consist of a set of passive ob-
jects, called resources, and a set of active objects, called
tasks. The resources are passive in the sense that they
provide a service that tasks can utilize. Traditionally, th e
scheduling problem is to complete the tasks as fast as pos-
sible using the available resources under some constraints ,
e.g. limited availability of the resource, no two tasks can,
simultaneously, use the same resource, etc. The models we
provideinthissectionareallcostextensionsoftheclassi cal
scheduling problem.
2A state, S′, dominates another state, S, ifS′contains at least
the same actual states as S, all of which have been reached with a
lower cost.InUse
c <= busyIdle
c == busydone! start?
Done Using Init
done? start!
busy = x
a) b)Synchronization
Guard
InvariantVariable update
Figure 4: a) Resource template with clock c. b) Task tem-
plate.
Agenericresourcemodel(seeFigure4a)isatwo-location
cyclic process with a single local clock, c. The two loca-
tions indicate whether the resource is IdleorInUse. The
resource moves from IdletoInUse, when a task initiates a
synchronization over the channel startand in the process,
cis reset. The resource will maintain InUseuntil the clock
reachessomeusagetime, busy,ittheninitiatessynchroniza-
tionover thechannel done.
Agenerictaskmodel(seeFigure4b)isanacyclicprocess
progressing from an initial location, Init, to a ﬁnal location
Done, indicating that the task is complete. Intermediate lo-
cationsdescribeacquiringresourcesandreleasingthem,i .e.
thetaskwilltransittostate Usingbyinitiatingsynchroniza-
tion over a startchannel and setting the busyvariable of
the resource. The task will remain here until the resource
initiatessynchronization using the donechannel.
Tosolvetheschedulingproblem,weposethereachability
question of whether we can reach a state in which all tasks
are in the location Done. In the following three sections we
presentsomeclassicalschedulingproblems,allofwhichar e
slightmodiﬁcations ofthe generic templates.
Job Shop Scheduling
Problem: We are given a number of machines (resources)
and a number jobs (tasks) with corresponding recipes. A
recipe for a job dictates the subset of machines that the job
should be processed by, the order in which the processing
should happen, and the duration of each processing step.
Now, the scheduling problem is to assign to each job
a starting time for every required machine such that no
machine isoccupied by twojobs at thesame time.
Cost:Themodelcanbeextendedwithcostsbyassigningto
each machine anidling cost and aoperation cost.
Modeling: Figure 5a depicts a job and a machine. The
model of the machine is identical to the resource template,
except that both locations have been extended with cost
rates. The job model is a “serial” composition of the
task template, i.e. the job serially requests the machines
describedbytherecipe,inthiscasemachines0,1,and2for
7, 5, and 15 timeunits,respectively.
Task Graph Scheduling
Problem: This problem isdescribed inSection .
Cost:We assign to each processor an energy consumption

--- Page 5 ---
rate while idle and while executing. Now, the overall
objectiveistoﬁndtheschedulethatminimizesthetotalcos t
whilerespecting aglobal (ortaskindividual) deadline.
Modeling: The models for a task and a processor are
depictedinFigure2. Again,theprocessormodelisanexact
instance of the resource template with added cost rates.
Tasks1and2areexactinstancesofthetasktemplate,while
task 3 is not. The reason is that tasks 1 and 2 can only
execute on one processor each, while task 3 can execute
on both, thus, task 3 is an extension of the task template
with a nondeterministic choice between the processors.
Furthermore, the edges leaving the initial state have been
extended with a guard specifying the dependencies of the
task graph, i.e. task 3 requires tasks 1 and 2 to be ﬁnished,
f[1]&&f[2].
Aircraft Landing
Problem: Given a number of aircrafts (tasks) with desig-
nated type and landing time window, assign a landing time
and runway (resource) to each aircraft such that the aircraf t
lands within the designated time window while respecting
a minimum wake turbulence separation delay between
aircraftsof various types landing on thesame runway.
Cost:The cost extended problem associates with each
aircraft an additional target landing time corresponding
to approaching the runway at cruise speed. Now, if an
aircraft is assigned a landing time earlier than the target
landing time, a cost per time unit is incurred, correspondin g
to powering up the engines. Similarly, if an aircraft is
assigned a later landing time than the target landing time a
cost per time unit is added corresponding to increased fuel
consumption while circlingabove the airport.
Modeling: Figure 5b depicts a runway that can handle
aircraftsoftypesB747andA420,andanaircraftwithtarget
landing time 153, type A420 and time window [129,559].
Unlike the other models, the runway model has only a
single location in its cycle indicating both that the resour ce
isIdleAndInUse . A single location is used since the
duration that a runway is occupied depends solely on the
types of consecutively landing aircrafts. Thus, the runway
maintains a clock per aircraft type holding the time since
the latest landing of an aircraft of the given type and access
to the runway is controlled by guards on the edges. The
nondeterminism of the aircraft model does not distinguish
between the runway to use, but whether to land early
([129,153]) or late ([153,559]). Choosing to land early, th e
aircraft model moves to the OnTime location and must
remain here until the target landing time while incurring
a cost rate per time unit for landing early, similarly, the
aircraft can choose to land late and move to Delayed may
remain there until the latest landing time while paying a
cost ratefor landing late.
PTAversusMILP
We only provide experimental results for the aircraft land-
ing problem comparing the PTA approach to that of MILP.
For performance results of the job shop and task graphRWPlanes 101520 20 20 3044
Types 222 2 2 42
1MILP(s) 0.45.22.7220.4 922.0 33.110.6
MC(s) 0.85.62.820.9 49.9 0.62.2
Factor 2.01.081.04 10.5 18.5 55.248.1
MILP(s) 0.61.83.81919.9 11510.4 1568.1 0.2
2MC(s) 2.79.63.9138.5 187.1 6.00.9
Factor 4.55.31.02 13.9 61.5261.3 4.5
3MILP(s) 0.10.10.22299.2 1655.3 0.2N/A
MC(s) 0.20.30.71765.6 1294.9 0.6
Factor 2.03.03.51.30 1.28 3.0
4MILP(s) N/AN/AN/A 0.2 0.2N/AN/A
MC(s) 3.3 0.7
Factor 16.5 3.5
Figure6: Computationalresultfortheaircraftlandingpro b-
lem using PTAand MILPon comparable machines.
scheduling problems, we refer to (Behrmann et al.2001b;
Rasmussen, Larsen, & Subramani 2004; Abdeddaim, Ker-
baa, & Maler 2003).
Figure 6 displays experimental results for various in-
stancesoftheaircraftlandingproblemusingMILPandPTA.
The results for MILP have been taken from (Beasley et al.
2000)andtheresultsforPTAhavebeenexecutedonacom-
parable computer. Factors in bold indicate the performance
differenceinfavorofPTAandsimilarlyforitalicsandMILP .
The experiments clearly indicate that PTA is a competi-
tive approach to solving scheduling problems and for one
non-trivial instance it is even more than a factor 250 faster
than the MILP approach. However, the required computa-
tiontimeofthePTAapproach growsexponentially withthe
numberofaddedrunways(andthusclocks)whilenosimilar
statement can be made for the MILP approach. Thus, PTA
is a promising method for solving scheduling problems, but
furtherexperimentsneedtobeconductedbeforesayingany-
thing moreconclusive.
IndustrialCaseStudy: SteelProduction
Problem: Proving schedulability of an industrial plant via
reachability analysis of a timed automaton model was ﬁrst
applied to the SIDMAR steel plant, which was included as
a case study of the Esprit-LTR Project 26270 VHS (Veriﬁ-
cation of Hybrid Systems). The plant consists of ﬁve pro-
cessingmachines placedalongtwotracksandacastingma-
chinewheretheﬁnishedsteelsleavesthesystem. Thetracks
and machines are connected via two overhead cranes. Each
quantityofrawironentersthesysteminaladleanddepend-
ingonthedesiredﬁnalsteelqualityundergoestreatmentsi n
the different machines for different durations. The planni ng
problem consists in controlling the movement of the ladles
ofsteel between thedifferent machines, taking thetopolog y
(e.g. conveyor belts and overhang cranes) into considera-
tion.
Performance: A schedule for three ladles was produced
in (Fehnker 1999) for a slightly simpliﬁed model using U P-
PAAL. In (Hune, Larsen, & Pettersson 2001) schedules for
upto60ladleswereproducedalsousingU PPAAL. However,
in order to do this, additional constraints were included th at
reducethesizeofthestate-spacedramatically,butalsopr une
possibly sensible behavior. A similar reduced model was
used by Stobbe (Stobbe 2000) using constraint program-

--- Page 6 ---
a) Job: Machine:
Done
UsingM2
Done1 UsingM1 Done0UsingM0Init
done[2]?
start[2]!busy[2] = 15
done[1]? start[1]!busy[1] = 5done[0]?start[0]!
busy[0] = 7
InUsec <= busy[1]
&& cost' == 6Idle
cost' == 2
c == busy[1]done[1]!start[1]?
c = 0
b) Aircraft: Runway:
Approachingtime <= 153
Delayedtime <= 559 &&
cost' == 10OnTimetime <= 153 && 
cost' == 10
Donetime == 153
time == 153land[A420]!time >= 129
land[A420] ! Temp
IdleAndInUseland[B747] ?
c[0] = 0land[A420] ?
c[1] = 0
c[0]>=wait[B747][B747] &&
c[1] >= wait[A420][B747]
land[B747] ?
c[0] = 0c[0] >=wait[B747][A420] &&
c[1] >= wait[A420][A420]
land[A420] ?
c[1] = 0
Figure 5: Priced timedautomata models fortwoclassical sch eduling problems.
ming to schedule 30 ladles. All these works only consider
ladles with the same quality of steel. In (Behrmann et al.
2001b), using a search order based on priorities, a schedule
for ten ladles with varying qualities of steels is computed
within 60 seconds cpu-time on a Pentium II 300MHz. The
initial solution found is improved by 5% within the time
limit. Allowing the search to go on for longer, models with
more ladles can be handled.
IndustrialCaseStudy: Lacquer Production
Problem:The problem was provided by an industrial part-
ner of the European AMETIST project as a variation on job
shopscheduling. Thetaskistoschedulelacquerproduction .
Lacquer is produced according to a recipe involving the use
ofvariousresources,possiblyconcurrently,seeFigure7. An
orderconsistsofarecipe,aquantity,anearlieststartingdate
and a delivery date. The problem is then toassign resources
to the order such that the constraints of the recipes and of
the orders are met. Additional constraints are provided by
the resources, as they might require cleaning when switch-
ing from one type of lacquer to another, or might require
manual labor and thus are unavailable during the night or in
weekends.
Cost:Thecostmodelissimilartothatoftheaircraftland-
ing problem. Orders ﬁnished on the delivery date do not in-
curanycosts(exceptregularproductioncostswhicharenot
modeledastheseareﬁxed). Ordersﬁnishinglatearesubject
todelay costs and orders ﬁnishing too early are subject to
storage costs . Cleaning resources might generate additional
costs.
Modeling: Resources are modeled using the resource
d o s e s p i n n e rl a bf i l l i n g s t a t i o n
d i s p e r g i n g l i n e
d i s p e r s e rw
a i ta r b i t r a r y ,i f n o t s p e c i f i e ds y n c h r o n i z e
m
i x i n g v e s s e l u n i
[ 0 , 4 ][ 2 , 4 ]
1 1 .
0 25 . 1 87 . 3 523 . 9 525 . 6 9
[6
,6
]48 . 9 8
26 .
4 4
Figure 7: A lacquer recipe. Each bar represents the use of
aresource. Horizontallinesindicatesynchronizationpoi nts.
Timing constraints for how long resources are used or sep-
aration times between the use of resources can be provided
either as aﬁxed timeor timewindow.

--- Page 7 ---
template. Resources requiring cleaning are extended with
additional information to keep track of the last type of lac-
quer produced on the resource. Cleaning costs are typically
a ﬁxed amount and are added to the cost when cleaning is
performed. Ordersaremodeledsimilarlytotasksinthetask
graph scheduling problem, except that multiple resources
may be acquired simultaneously. Storage and delay costs
are modeled similarly to costs in the aircraft landing prob-
lem.
Other Optimization Problems
At present U PPAALCORAsupports cost-optimal location-
reachability for PTAs. However, a number of other opti-
mization problems are planned to be included in future re-
leases.
For several planning problems the objective is to repeat
a treatment or process indeﬁnitely and to do so in a cost-
optimal manner. Now let α=s0a1→p1s1a2→p2s2···an→pn
sn···be an inﬁnite execution of a given PTA, let cn(tn)
denote the accumulated cost (time) after nsteps (i.e. cn=/summationtextn
i=1pi). Then the limit of cn/tnwhenn→∞describes
the cost per time of αin the long run and is the cost of α.
The optimization problem is to determine the (value of the)
optimal such inﬁnite execution α∗. In (Bouyer, Brinksma,
& Larsen 2004) this problem has been shown decidable for
PTA using an extension of the so-called region-technique.
Though this technique nicely demonstrates decidability of
the problem (and many other decision problems for timed
automata) it does not provide a practical implementation,
which is still to be identiﬁed. However a method for de-
termining approximate optimal inﬁnite schedules have been
identiﬁed and applied tothesynthesis ofso-called Dynamic
Voltages Scaling scheduling strategies.
Optimization problems may involve multiplecost vari-
ables (e.g. money, energy, pollution, etc.). Currently U P-
PAALCORAis only capable of optimizing with respect to
single costs. However, for scheduling problems with multi-
ple costs, there might well be several optimal solutions due
to “negative” dependencies between costs: minimizing one
cost-variable (e.g. money) might maximize others (e.g. pol -
lution). In (Larsen & Rasmussen 2005) an extension of the
pricedzonetechnologyforPTAhasbeenextendedtomulti-
price TA allowing efﬁcient synthesis of solutions optimal
with respect to a chosen primarycost-variable but subject
to user-speciﬁed upper bounds on the remaining secondary
cost-variables.
Finally, scheduling problems may involve uncertainties
due to certain actions being under the control of an adver-
sary. In this case the (optimal) scheduling problem is a
game-theoreticproblemconsistingofdeterminingawinnin g
and optimal strategy for how to respond to any action cho-
sen by this adversary. In (Bouyer et al.2004a) the prob-
lem of synthesizing optimal, winning strategies for priced
timed games has been shown to be computable under cer-
tain non-zenoness assumptions. However, the problem is
notsolvableusingzone-basedtechnology,butneedsgenera l
polyhedral support in order to represent the optimal strate -
gies (see (Bouyer et al.2004b) for a methodology usingHYTECH).
References
Abdeddaim, Y.; Kerbaa, A.; and Maler, O. 2003.
Task graph scheduling using timed automata. Proc. of
IPDPS’03 .
Alur, R., and Dill, D. 1994. A theory of timed automata.
Theoretical Computer Science 126(2):183–235.
Alur,R.;LaTorre,S.;andPappas,G. 2001. Optimalpaths
in weighted timed automata. Lecture Notes in Computer
Science2034:pp. 49–62.
AMETIST. 2005. Advanced methods in timed systems
http://ametist.cs.utwente.nl .
Beasley, J. E.; Krishnamoorthy, M.; Sharaiha, Y. M.; and
Abramson, D. 2000. Scheduling aircraft landings - the
staticcase. Transportation Science 34(2):pp. 180–197.
Behrmann, G.; Fehnker, A.; Hune, T.; Larsen, K.; Petters-
son, P.; Romijn, J.; and Vaandrager, F. 2001a. Minimum-
cost reachability for priced timed automata. Lecture Notes
inComputer Science 2034:pp. 147+.
Behrmann, G.; Fehnker, A.; Hune, T.; Larsen, K.; Petters-
son, P.; and Romijn, J. 2001b. Efﬁcient guiding towards
cost-optimality in Uppaal. In Proc. of TACAS’01 , num-
ber 2031 in Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 174–188.
Springer–Verlag.
Behrmann, G.; David, A.; and Larsen, K. 2004. A tutorial
on Uppaal. In Formal Methods for the Design of Real-
Time Systems , number 3185 in Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, 200–236. Springer Verlag.
Bouyer, P.; Cassez, F.; Fleury, E.; and Larsen, K. 2004a.
Optimalstrategiesinpricedtimedgameautomata. In Proc.
ofFSTTCS’04 ,volume3328of LectureNotesinComputer
Science, 148–160. Springer–Verlag.
Bouyer, P.; Cassez, F.; Fleury, E.; and Larsen, K. 2004b.
Synthesis of optimal strategies using HyTech. In Proc.
GDV’04, Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Sci-
ence. Elsevier Science Publishers. To appear.
Bouyer, P.; Brinksma, E.; and Larsen, K. 2004. Staying
alive as cheaply as possible. In Proc. of HSCC’04 , vol-
ume2993of LectureNotesinComputerScience ,203–218.
Springer–Verlag.
Bozga, M.; Daws, C.; Maler, O.; Olivero, A.; Tripakis, S.;
and Yovine, S. 1998. Kronos: A model-checking tool for
real-timesystems. In Proc.ofCAV’98 ,volume1427,546–
550. Springer-Verlag.
Fehnker, A. 1999. Scheduling a steel plant with timed
automata. In Proc. of RTCSA ’99. , 280. IEEE Computer
Society.
Hune, T.; Larsen, K.; and Pettersson, P. 2001. Guided
synthesis of control programs using Uppaal. Nordic J. of
Computing 8(1):43–64.
IF. 2005. http://www-verimag.imag.fr/
˜async/IF .

--- Page 8 ---
Larsen, K., and Rasmussen, J. 2005. Optimal conditional
reachabilityformulti-pricedtimedautomata. Toappearin
proceedings of FOSSACS’05 .
Larsen, K.; Behrmann, G.; Brinksma, E.; Fehnker, A.;
Hune, T.; Pettersson, P.; and Romijn, J. 2001. As
cheap as possible: Efﬁcient cost-optimal reachability for
pricedtimedautomata. LectureNotesinComputerScience
2102:pp. 493+.
Larsen, K.; Pettersson, P.; and Yi, W. 1997. Uppaal in
a nutshell. Int. Journal on Software Tools for Technology
Transfer1(1-2):134–152.
Rasmussen, J.; Larsen, K.; and Subramani, K. 2004.
Resource-optimalschedulingusingpricedtimedautomata.
InProc. of TACAS’04 , volume 2988 of Lecture Notes in
Computer Science , pp. 220–235. Springer Verlag.
Stobbe, M. 2000. Results on scheduling the sidmar steel
plant using constraint programming. Internal report.
UPPAAL CORA. 2005. http://www.cs.aau.dk/
˜behrmann/cora .
UPPAAL. 2005. http://www.uppaal.com .
VHS. 2005. Veriﬁcation of hybrid systems http://
www-verimag.imag.fr/VHS/ .
