--- Page 1 ---
International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887)  
Volume 58 – No.19, November 2012  
32 Formal Verification of Device Discovery Mechanism 
using UPPAAL
Shivangi Arry  
Punjabi University Regional Centre for I.T. and 
Mgmt., Mohali  
 Amardeep Kaur  
Assistant Professor in (CS)  
Punjabi University Regional Centre for I.T. and 
Mgmt., Mohali  
 
ABSTRACT  
Wireless communication among the mobile devices is the 
growing area of research. Ad hoc networks are created among 
them for exchanging information over the small distances. 
The distance among the devices uniquely determines the 
topology of these ad hoc net works. Bluetooth is a low -cost 
and low -power wireless technology used to form short -range 
wireless ad hoc networks. It is based on frequency hopping 
technique. In order to guarantee the accurate functioning and 
to verify the connectivity of the devices, th ere are numerous 
tools and techniques exits. Formal verification is one of the 
technique used to validate and verify the correctness of any 
protocol. Using the verification tool UPPAAL a Bluetooth ad 
hoc system is modeled  to formally verify the device disc overy 
mechanism. In the tool, an ad hoc network consisting of 
Bluetooth transmitter and receiver is designed using 
frequency hopping technique. The transmitter and receiver 
verified the properties in the tool. These properties are for 
checking the connecti vity of transmitter and receiver and 
reception of data among them. The connectivity of transmitter 
and receiver is confirmed by verifying the receivers reply to 
the transmitter and data connectivity is verified by checking 
the energy level of receiver. Fro m the simulation, it is found 
that the high energy level of receiver depicts the acceptance of 
data and the zero energy level depicts the non -acceptance of 
data. These results were verified using the verifier component 
of the tool and proved to be satisfie d. 
Keywords  
Bluetooth  Ad hoc Networks , Spread spectrum , Bluetooth 
Device Discovery,  Formal ve rification, UPPAAL model 
checker.  
1. INTRODUCTION  
Wireless networks have changed the way various devices are 
interconnected. There are various features that provide ease to 
communicate in the wireless medium like, devices can move 
freely, communication between these does not require any 
central access point, reduction in complexity for establishing 
the connections and many more. Among most promising 
wireless technolog ies that can be effectively used by the 
wireless mobile devices, Bluetooth technology is one of them.  
Bluetooth technology, that is widely used to create ad hoc 
connections, provides the short -range wireless 
communication. It is considered as a Wireless Pe rsonal Area 
Network (WPAN) system that is intended for cable 
replacement and short distance ad hoc connectivity. Its main 
goals include robustness, low power, low cost, and low 
complexity. Using Bluetooth technology devices like cell  
phones, computer, lapt ops, PDAs etc. can be easily connected 
for exchanging information. The Bluetooth device establishes 
communication with other devices after discovering each 
other in their neighboring environment. So, in order to   
communicate, they must first discover each  other. The work 
under study covers the Bluetooth device discovery mechanism 
and uses the formal approach to verify it.  
There are various methods for analyzing the systems, which 
include simulation, testing, and formal verification. Among 
all, simulation c annot cover the complicated situations in the 
real networks, and so some subtle bugs may not be found out. 
Moreover, the testing can be performed only after a protocol 
is implemented. However, the formal verification verifies 
some properties of the specifi cations and finds the latent bugs 
in the design of the protocols. Formal Verification Techniques 
are used to provide a systematic way to assess the correctness 
of protocols, process, and systems. Compared to the other 
methods, the main difference lies in t he fact that instead of 
only examining a limited area of the operational space of the 
system, they are used to examine the complete state space of 
possible operations. It implies that all possible combinations 
of inputs and actions can be taken into accoun t and, therefore, 
all possible outputs can be derived.  
The paper has been organized  as follows. Sections 2 presents 
the background and cover  the topics: Bluetooth ad hoc 
network, formal verification, spread spectrum, frequency 
hopping . Section 3 talked about the model checker UPPAAL.  
Modeling specifications of the system and results of formal 
verification is described in the section 4. Section 5 consists of  
the conclusion  and future scope of the work. Finally, the 
section 6 gives the acknowledgem ents. 
2. BACKGROUND  
An ad hoc network is a network with temporary plug -in 
connections, in which the network devices are part of the 
network only for the duration of a communications session. 
Ad hoc networks are infrastructure less networks that do not 
require  any central information hub for making connectivity. 
Connections between the devices are set up based on wireless 
media like, two PCs equipped with wireless adapter cards can 
set up an independent network whenever they are within 
range of one another. The re are various wireless technologies 
available to create ad hoc network like Induction Wireless, 
Infrared Wireless, Ultra Wideband, ZigBee, IEEE 802.11b 
and Bluetooth [1]. Among all technologies, Bluetooth is the 
most promising wireless technology. It is a  Personal Area 
Network technology, which aimed in particular at low -power 
devices communicating over short distances. It replaces the 
cable connectivity with wireless communication and promotes  
ad hoc netw orking [12 ]. Bluetooth technology is increasing at 
a rapid rate now days, many devices such as mobile phones, 
PDA‟s and laptop computers have Bluetooth built into them.  
 

--- Page 2 ---
International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887)  
Volume 58 – No.19, November 2012  
33 2.1 Bluetooth  
Bluetooth technology is designed for wireless communication 
between wide varieties of different Bluetooth enabled devices 
[30].  It reduces the need of cable connectivity. Bluetooth 
enabled devices transmit and receive in an unlicensed ISM 
(Industrial, Scientific, and Medical) frequency band of 2.4 
GHz that is available globally [ 12]. The ISM band is free for 
use by other wireless devices and it creates a potential 
problem of interference. Thus, the interference immunity 
becomes a very important issue for Bluetooth. In order to 
avoid interference, Bluetooth uses a frequency -hopping 
spread -spectrum (FHSS) communication, which transmi ts 
data over different frequencies at different time intervals and 
devices alternate rapidly among 79 available frequencie s in a 
pseudo -random fashion [15 ].  
2.2 Spread spectrum technique  
Spread Spectrum is a modulation method applied to digitally 
modulated signals that increases the transmit signal bandwidth 
to a value much larger than is needed to transmit the 
underlying information bits. Spread Spectrum, originally 
developed for the military guidance and int elligence 
requirements [5 ], “break a call into mu ltiple parts, and uses 
constantly changing radio frequencies to improve data transfer 
reliability, reduce sensitivity to interference and jamm ing, and 
deny eavesdropping” [18 ].  
It provide many benefits like, transmission security, resistance 
to interferen ce from other radio sources, redundancy, 
resistance to multipath and fading effects, etc. As a result, 
Spread Spectrum systems can coexist with other radio 
systems, without being disturbed by their presence and 
without disturbing their activity. There are two forms of 
spread -spectrum techniques: frequency hopping spread 
spectrum (FH) and direct s equence spread spectrum (DS) 
[18]. 
2.2.1 Frequency Hopping Spread Spectrum 
(FHSS)  
FHSS is a method of transmitting radio signals by rapidly 
switching a carrier among many frequency channels, using a 
pseudorandom sequence known to b oth transmitter and 
receiver [18 ].The pseudorandom sequence or the hopping 
sequence is also known as FH code. If a long enough pseudo -
random FH -code is used then unintended users are no t able to 
determine the hopping pattern and use that information to 
intercept the transmission. It supports the anti -jamming 
capability and protection against undesired interception. It is a 
very robust technology, with little influence from noises, 
reflec tions, other radio stations,  or other environment factors 
[19]. This technique is more suited to relatively low -data rate, 
low-power systems [ 13]. 
2.2.2 Direct Sequence Spread Spectrum (DSSS)  
DS involves transmitting at a much higher rate than the data -
rate, and convoluting the data with pseudo random spreading 
(chip) sequence [21]. Both the transmitter and receiver use the 
same pseudo random sequence to spread and de -spread the 
information signal [34]. At the receiver, the signal can be  
decoded by using co rrelation techniques, comparing the 
incoming signal with the spreading codes. DSSS can be used 
to increase the security of the transmission and also overcome 
jamming, multi -path and signal fading problems.  
DSSS has the advantage of providing higher capacit ies than 
FHSS, but it is a very sensitive technology, influenced by 
many environme nt factors mainly reflections [1 9]. DSSS is more complex to implement than FHSS and is not suitable to 
low-power systems due to t he high data rates involved [ 13]. 
2.3 Device Disc overy in Bluetooth  
Devices in mobile ad hoc environments initially have no 
information about their surrounding environment. There is no 
centralized instance to query about the environment. 
Therefore, there must exist a protocol that provides means for 
detecting devices and enables devices to set up a connection, 
Bluetooth uses the Baseband protocol for this task. Two 
procedures are used in the device discovery procedure; 
inquiry and page  [18]. For communicating, Bluetooth devices 
organize themselves into sm all networks called piconets, 
comprising one master and up to seven slave devices, in 
which the frequency hopping sequences are synchronized and 
controlled by the master. The master follows the two 
procedures to d iscover the device as follow [20, 15 ]:  
 Inquiry: In the inquiry phase, the master invites other 
devices to join itself to form a piconet. Essentially, the 
master solicits responses from other devices. Devices 
willing to join a piconet respond to the master‟s 
solicitation. In the inquiry phase, the master solicits 
responses by transmitting a standard packet, called ID 
(identifier) packets, on different hop channels (i.e., on 
different frequencies), and listens for response packets, 
called FHS (frequency hopping sequence) packets, from 
potential slave  devices. The sender of an FHS packet 
puts its own address and clock values in the packet. 
When the master receives an FHS packet, it knows what 
device is willing to join the master to form a piconet. 
However, mere response of a device with an FHS packet 
does not form a piconet. After receiving an FHS packet, 
the master executes the paging step.  
 Page: After receiving the address and clock values of a 
(potential) slave device, the master communicate with 
the device via the paging process. During the paging 
process, the master establish es a connection with a slave 
[10]. The paging procedure takes a very short time (at 
most 20 ms) while the inquiry procedure might cause a 
significant delay (up to a few seconds on average) [ 14]. 
The device discovery is performe d by each node randomly 
entering into an inquiry mode. Inquiry nodes select a repeated 
pattern of 32 frequencies and send signal on selected 
frequency in given spot. Inquiry scan nodes also select a 
frequency at random in each spot and listen to the 
transm ission at the selected frequency. The discovery (and 
establishment of master -slave relationship) occurs when both 
sender and receiver nodes are at the same frequency . 
2.4 Formal Verification  
In order to increase the quality of the protocols, designers of 
the p rotocol must validate the design of the protocol. There 
are several methods for validation like using a software model 
of protocol and performing it on virtual devices in simulated 
environment or doing live test on real hardware. These tests 
can be used to  identify bugs but cannot exclude protocols 
blueprint errors [3]. Another method used to confirm the 
routing protocols is the Formal verification.  
Formal verification is a systematic process that uses 
mathematical reasoning for the specification, development, 
and verification of computer –based sof tware and hardware 
systems [2][6 ]. It provides the systematic way to access the 
correctness of protocol, process, and system. It checks 
whether a design satisfies some requirements (properties). 
There are three types of Formal verification techniques [3]:  

--- Page 3 ---
International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887)  
Volume 58 – No.19, November 2012  
34  Model checking:  It is the technique in which a system 
verifies certain properties by means of an exhaustive 
search of all possible states that a system could enter 
during its execution. SPIN, SMV model checker, and 
UPPAAL are the model checking tools .  
 Theorem proving: It is the technique in which a system 
attempts to produce a formal proof, given a description 
of the system, a set of logical axioms, and a set of 
inference rules. Some of theorem proving tools are 
Isabelle, HOLY, PVS, ACL2.  
 Equivalence checking:  It formal ly checks the 
equivalence of two models, which are at different 
abstraction level. CVE toolset, and Synopsys are 
equivalence checking tools.  
There are various tools and techniques used for formal 
modeling and verification of the ad hoc network routing 
protocols. It ranges from Petri nets, SPIN Model Checker, 
PROMELA, AVISPA, HLPSL, UPPAAL Model Checker, 
SDL and BAN logic [3].  
3. UPPAAL  
UPPAAL is a formal verification tool for modeling, 
simulation, and verification of real time system. Real time 
systems like c ommunication protocol, multimedia application, 
and real time controller. It has been jointly developed by 
Department of Computer science, Uppsala University in 
Sweden and BRICS, at Aalborg University in Denmark[g]. It 
is an established model checker for ne tworks of timed 
automata, used in particu lar for protocol verification [4 ]. The 
software is split into a graphical user interface (GUI) 
implemented in JAVA and verification engine in C++ both 
availa ble for most common platform [16 ]. For installing the 
tool, the system must be configured properly with Java 
version 6 (e.g. J2SE Java Runtime Environment) or newer. 
The software runs under the Windows, Linux,  and Mac OS X 
[7]. UPPAAL is freely available for non -commercial 
applications in academic and for private  persons at 
http://www.uppaal.com/. The usage of UPPAAL can be  
obtained from the tutorials [9 ]. 
UPPAAL is designed for the formal verification of system 
that can be represented as networks of timed automata  
extended with elementary and structured data type s and 
channel synchronization. Time automata are fini te state 
machine with clocks [16 ]. These clocks handle time in 
UPPAAL. Time will progress globally at the sa me pace for 
the whole system [17 ]. As clock variables are used to 
represent time and permit mea suring of time progress. Thus, 
the behavior of timed automata can be res tricted by clock 
constraints [16 ]. 
UPPAAL uses client -server architecture and split the tool into 
a graphical user interface and a model -checking engine. The 
user interface, or client,  is implemented in Java and the 
engine, or server, is compiled for different platfor ms (Linux, 
Windows, Solaris) [9 ]. The GUI interface of UPPAAL has 
three main tool components: the system editor, the simulator, 
and the verifier. These tools are integrated  on one common 
interface and work on same internal system model. This 
makes the exchange of information easier, e.g. loading 
diagnostic trace generated by the verifier into the sim ulator 
for further inspection [8 ]. 4. MODELING SPECIFICATION AND   
VERIFICATION  RESULTS  
In this study, a network of timed automata has been created 
using UPAAL. For this, three templates has been modeled to 
represent sender, receiver and to synchronize the frequency of 
sender and receiver. The template modeled for sender is 
shown in Figure 1.  
 
Fig. 1: Sender Template in Editor   
There are three states defined for sender: sleep, sending and 
listening. The sender synchronizes with the receiver over the 
channels: run_sender, suspend_sender. Sender defines its 
local clock with variable „clock t‟. There are four anonymous 
state defined to show the sender changing states. Sender 
initially starts with sleep mode and after synchronization with 
the receiver, it shifts to the sending mode. Sender checks its 
status of current frequency with the  defined frequency module 
each time before transmitting a signal and changes its state.  
The template for th e receiver is shown in Figure 2. The 
receiver is defined with the states: sleep, scan, respond, and 
reply. Each state is given with time slots and one time slot is 
equal to  0.3125ms, specified in Table 1. 
Table 1: Showing time slots with respect to different 
modes  
Modes  Time slots  
Sleep  2012 time slots (628.75 
ms) 
Scan  36 time slots (11.25 ms)  
Respond  2 time slots (0.625 ms)  
 
Receiver will first synchronize with the frequency hopping 
over the channel run_frequency and suspend_frequency and 
then synchronize with the sender over the channels: 
run_sender, suspend_sender, in order to create links . 


--- Page 4 ---
International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887)  
Volume 58 – No.19, November 2012  
35 . 
Fig. 2: Receiver Template in Editor  
In the scanning state, the receiver synchronizes with the 
frequency with respect to phase. After sender and receiver 
synchronize over the channels, receiver will scan the 
incoming signal. While receiver is scanning the signal, it will 
receive the data depending u pon its energy level.  
Finally, a template showing the receivers frequency is created 
to synchronize the sender and re ceiver as depicted in Figure 3 . 
It is the receiver‟s frequency, which keep track of the 
frequency that the receiver will use next time to s tart a scan. 
Since the transmitter uses frequency -hopping spread -
spectrum, the receiver device will synchronize its hops along 
with the sender‟s hop.  
 
Fig. 3: Receiver -Frequency Template in Editor.  
This will allow the receiver to communicate with the sen der at 
the same frequency hopping at which the synchronization 
between them takes place. Sender and receiver will 
automatically form a connection when they come within the 
range of one another. When the receiver is in scanning state, it 
continuously listen s to the current frequency. The frequency 
of the receiver changes with respect to its phase. Receiver, 
cycles through the 32 frequencies and changes frequently. 
Once the links are established between the sender and 
receiver, they start transmitting the mes sages.  
4.1 Simulation  
In the simulation, all -possible states of the system are 
implemented. Receiver synchronizes using the frequency 
hopping to set its hopping environment. Then it set up its path with sender by synchronizing over the channels. After 
synchronizing, sender shifts from sleep state to sending state 
and starts connection with receiver over the same frequency 
hopping. Now when receiver and sender connect, they will 
transmit signal and da ta over the channels. Each time receiver 
checks for the frequency to synchronize with the sender, 
establishes connection with the sender. During scanning, the 
energy level of receiver is checked. If energy level of receiver 
is „zero‟, it shows that the dat a is not received over the 
connected link and if energy level is more than zero, it shows 
that the receiver is accepting the data over the connected 
links. Receiver will keep on scanning whether it is receiving 
data or not, and will changes its frequency e ach time in order 
to coordinate with respect to the phase. Simulation will keep 
on performing different transitions between the sender and 
receiver.  
4.2 Results  
This section presents the verification of the simulation results 
using the verifier component  of UPPAAL. Verifier checks the 
properties to confirm the reply by receiver in establishing the 
connection. It verifies the reply of the receiver between 
different time intervals. Verifier evaluated the properties on 
bounded runs by time and checked the pr operty as follows:  
Pr [time<=30000] (<> receiver1.Reply): It checks the 
probability of replying within 30000 time units and the result 
is between [0.594986, 0.694986].  
Similarly, probability to reply within 5000 -70000 time units 
are checked and proved to be satisfied.  
To check the receival of data between the sender and receiver, 
energy level of receiver is checked. Property in the verifier 
checks whether receiver is responding for the energy level 
within specified interval. Following shows the checked 
property:  
Pr [energy<=1000] (<> time>=10000): It checks the 
probability of letting time pass 10000 time units with a limited 
energy budget and the result is between [0.95, 1].  
Verification checks the probability of satisfying the property 
within the interv als. 
 
 
Fig. 4:  Verifier  
As shown in the Figure 5.5, all the properties are satisfied as 
represented by green dots. In the results described above, the 
connectivity of the receiver and sender in verified. It shows 
the time consumption of receiver to reply the sender. It checks 
whether the replies are received in the prescribed bounded 


--- Page 5 ---
International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887)  
Volume 58 – No.19, November 2012  
36 time or not. It also detects the probability of receivers energy. 
Simulation shows that „zero‟ energy level of receiver depicts 
that receiver is not accepting the data or ther e is a loss of data 
and increase in the energy shows the receiver is accepting the 
data. The verifier of the tool gives the probability of energy 
detection and satisfies the property showing that the sender 
and receiver are connected over the network link.  
5. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE 
WORK  
Bluetooth is a widely used ad hoc technology for the 
communication over short distances . To verify the device 
discovery mechanism of Bluetooth ad hoc network, a 
Bluetooth ad hoc system consisting of a sender and a receiver 
is designed in UPPAAL. In the model designed, sender and 
receiver establish their connections using frequency hopping 
techniques.  Two properties are checked to confirm the 
connectivity of the network, one confirming the connectivity 
of sender and receiver and  another confirming the acceptance 
of data. The results are verified in the verifier component of 
the tool.  
The send er and receiver connectivity is confirmed by 
verifying the receivers reply to the sender. The verifier 
component verifies the connectivity by checking the replies of 
receiver in different time intervals. The properties are proved 
to be satisfied in the verifier.  
In order to confirm the data reception between sender and 
receiver, the energy level of the receiver is checked. From the 
simulation, it is found that the high energy level of receiver 
depicts the acceptance of data and the zero energy level 
depicts the non -acceptance of data. Th ese results were verified 
using the verifier component of the tool and proved to be 
satisfied.  
In future, this work can be extended by increasing the number 
of receivers and tracking the replies of different receivers in 
the tool. The sender and receiver c an change their role by 
providing both side data communication. Verification of the 
tool can be checked for the properties such as trust between 
the different nodes.   
6. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  
Genuinely thank s to my supervisor and my respectable 
teachers who one or  in another way contributed and extended 
their valuable assistance in the prep aration and completion  of 
this work.  
7. REFERENCES  
[1] A. Dursch, D. C. Yen, D. Her Shih, “Bluetooth 
technology: an exploratory study of the analysis and 
implementation frameworks”, Jou rnal. Computer 
Standards & Interfaces, vol. 26, no. 4, pp. 263 -277, 
August 2004.  
[2] A. Sanghavi, “What is formal verification?”  Available at: 
http:// ww.eetasia.com/.../EEOL_2010MAY21_EDA_TA
_01, May 21, 2010.  
[3] A. Verma, “Formal  Verification of Ad hoc Networks 
Routing Protocols”, International Journal of Advanced 
Research in Computer Science, vol. 2, no.4, July -August 
2011.  
[4] A. Fehnker, R.V.Glabbeek, P.Hofner, A.McIver, 
M.Portmann, and W.Lum Tan “Automated Analysis of 
AODV using U PPAAL”, 18th International Conference 
on Tools and Algorithm for the Construction and Analysis of System, TACAS 2012, Tallinn, Estonia, 
ISSN. 0302 - 9743, pp. 173 - 187, 2012.  
[5] C. Bisdikian, “An overview of the Bluetooth wireless 
technology” IEEE Communicat ions, Magazine, vol. 39, 
pp. 86 -94, 2001.  
[6] D.Camara, A.A.F.Loureiro, F.Filali, “Methodology for 
Formal Verification of Routing Protocols for Ad Hoc 
Wireless Networks” Global Telecommunication 
Conference, GLOBECOM‟ 07, pp. 705 - 709, November 
26-30, 2007.  
[7] F.W.Vaandrager, “A First Introduction to 
UPPAAL”,  International Journal Tretmans, editor. 
Quasimodo Handbook, Submitted, 2012.  
[8] G. Behrmann, K. G. Larsen, O. Moller, A. David, P. 
Pettersone, and W. Yi, “UPPAAL – Present and Future”, 
Proceedings of 40th IEEE Conference on Decision and 
Control, Orlando, Florida USA, December 2001.  
[9] G. Behrmann, A. David, K. G. Larsen, “A Tutorial on 
UPPAAL” , Available at: 
http://doc.utwente.nl/51010/1/Tutor ial-UPPAAL -
Behrmann.pdf , November  17, 2004.  
[10] G. Chakraborty, K. Naik, D. Chakraborty, N. Shiratori, 
and D. Wei, “Analysis of the Bluetooth device discovery 
protocol”, Journal of  Wireless Networks , vol. 16, issue . 
2, pp. 421-436, February 2010 . 
[11] J. Karlsson and A. Persson, “Device and Service 
Discovery in Bluetooth Networks”, M.S. thesis, 
Department of Telecommunications and Signal 
Processing, Blekinge institute of Technology, Sweden, 
June 4, 2002.  
[12] J. Valimaki, “Bluetooth and Ad hoc Networking”,  
Available at: 
http://www.netlab.tkk.fi/opetus/s38030/k02/Papers/16 -
Jari.pdf.  
[13] K. H. Torvmark, “Frequency Hopping Systems”,  
Available at:  
http://www.ti.com/lit/an/swra077/swra077.pdf.  
[14] M. Asa,  and G. Hildesheim, “ An efficient algorithm for 
inquiry process in Blu etooth ”, Available at : 
http://www.seniku.com/pdf_cn_spring_03.html , August 
25, 2012.  
[15] M. Duflot, M. Kwiatkowska, G. Norman and D. Parker, 
“A Formal Analysis of  Bluetooth Device Discovery ”, 
Internati onal Journal on Software Tools for Technology 
Transfer , STTT, vol.  8, issue . 6, pp. 621 -632, Springer -
Verlag,  November 2006.  
[16] M. Instenberg, A. Schneider, S.schnetter, U. Heinkel, K. 
G. Larsen, and G. Behrmann, “Formal Methods for 
Abstract Specifications - A Comparison of Concepts” , 
Department of Computer Science CISS - Center for 
Embedded Software Systems Distributed Systems and 
Semantics, Technical Report, IEEE press , pages - 6, 
2006.  
[17] M. Stigge, “UPPAAL 4.0: Small Tutorial” , Available at : 
http://www.it.uu.se /research/group/darts/uppaal/small_tu
torial.pdf , Nov  16, 2009.  
[18] R. Brown, “Frequency  Hopping Over Wireless Network 
..Why Not?” , Available at: 

--- Page 6 ---
International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887)  
Volume 58 – No.19, November 2012  
37 http://www.cistp.gatech.edu/.../files /CALLAHAN_AWA
RD_Brown.pdf,  March 26, 2002.  
[19] S. M. Schwartz, “Frequency Hopping Spread Spectrum 
(FHSS) vs. Direct  Sequence Spread Spectrum (DSSS) in 
Broadband Wireless Access (BWA) and Wireless LAN (WLAN)” , Available at: http://sorin -
schwartz.com/white_papers/fhvsds.pdf.   
[20] “Spread Spectrum transmission”, Available at:  
http://www.audiotelsupport.com/site/appnotes/Spread%2
0Spectru m%20transmissions.pdf .  
 
