--- Page 1 ---
Online Testing of Real-time Systems Using U PPAAL :
Status and Future Work
Kim G. Larsen, Marius Mikucionis, and Brian Nielsen
Department of Computer Science, Aalborg University
Fredrik Bajers Vej 7B, 9220 Aalborg Øst, Denmark
{kgl,marius,bnielsen }@cs.auc.dk
Abstract. We present the development of T-U PPAAL — a new tool for online black-box
testing of real-time embedded systems from non-deterministic timed automata speciﬁca-tions. It is based on a sound and complete randomized online testing algorithm and is im-
plemented using symbolic state representation and manipulation techniques. We propose
the notion of relativized timed input/output conformance as the formal implementationrelation. A novelty of this relation and our testing algorithm is that they explicitly take
environment assumptions into account, generate, execute and verify the result online using
the U
PPAAL on-the-ﬂy model-checking tool engine.
This paper introduces the principles behind the tool, describes the present implementationstatus, and future work directions.
1 Introduction
The goal of testing is to gain conﬁdence in a physical computer based system by means of
executing it. More than one third of typical project resources is spent on testing embedded and
real-time systems, but still it remains ad-hoc, based on heuristics, and error-prone. Therefore
systematic, theoretically well-founded and effective automated real-time testing techniques is of
great practical value.
1.1 Model Based Testing
Testing conceptually consists of three activities: test case generation , test case execution and
verdict assignment . Using model based approach, a behavioral model can be interpreted as a
speciﬁcation that deﬁnes the required and allowed observable (real-time) behavior of the im-plementation. It can therefore be used for automatic generation of sound and (theoretically)
complete test suites.
An embedded system interacts closely with its environment which typically consists of the
controlled physical equipment (the plant) accessible via sensors and actuators, other computer
based systems or digital devices accessible via communication networks using dedicated pro-
tocols, and human users. A major task of the embedded system development is to ensure that
it works correctly in its real operating environment. Due to lack of development resources it is
not feasible to validate the system for all possible environments. Also it is not necessary if thesystem environments are known to a large extent. However, the requirements to the system and
the assumptions made about the environment should be clear and explicit.

--- Page 2 ---
RealENVinput
output
o ESIUT
i
(a) Abstraction of an embedded system.coin?weakCoffee!
strongCoffee!
req? req?l0
l3l1
l2x:= 0
x:= 0x>10
x>30
x>30
x:= 0x<50
x<50 x<30
(b) Example Speciﬁcation Sc.
strongCoffee?weakCoffee?coin!
req!k0
k1
k2x≥60x:= 0
x:= 0
(c) Example environment Ec.
Fig. 1. Embedded system and example models.
We denote the system being developed IUT, and its real operating environment RealENV .
These communicate by exchanging input andoutput signals (seen from the perspective of
IUT). Using a model-based development approach, the environment assumptions and system
requirements are captured through abstract behavioral models denoted EandSrespectively,
communicating on abstract signals i∈Ainando∈Aoutcorresponding (via a suitable abstrac-
tion) to the real input andoutput . This setup is depicted in Figure 1(a).
1.2 Online Testing
Test cases can be generated from the model ofﬂine where the complete test scenarios and verdicts
are computed apriori and before execution. Another approach is online (on-the-ﬂy) testing that
combines test generation and execution: only a single test primitive is generated from the model
at a time which is then immediately executed on the IUT. Then the produced output by the IUT
as well as its time of occurrence are checked against the speciﬁcation, a new test primitive is
produced and so forth until it is decided to end the test, or an error is detected. An observed test
run is a timed trace consisting of an alternating sequence of (input or output) actions and timedelays.
There are several advantages of online testing: 1) testing may potentially continue for a
long time (hours or even days), and therefore long, intricate, and stressful test cases may be
executed; 2) the state-space-explosion problem experienced by many ofﬂine test generation tools
is reduced because only a limited part of the state-space needs to be stored at any point in time;
3) online test generators often allow more expressive speciﬁcation languages, especially wrt.allowed non-determinism in real-time models.
Non-deterministic speciﬁcation allows great ﬂexibility in modeling. The implementation
model can be precise, following the exact computation. If the exact implementation model be-
comes so large or complex that it cannot be interpreted online in real-time, it may be replaced
by a more abstract one, where the functional and/or timed behavior is more important than the
computation result itself. Moreover, the model can be a mixture of abstraction and precisionwhere its needed. If desired, the observed trace can then be analyzed ofﬂine against the detailed
implementation model.

--- Page 3 ---
1.3 Relativized Online Testing
The goal of relativized conformance testing is to check whether the behavior of the IUTis correct
(conforming) to its speciﬁcation Swhen operating under assumptions Eabout the environment.
We propose relativized timed input/output conformance relation between model and IUT which
coincides with timed trace inclusion taking the environment behavior into account.
The environment models the use of the system whereas the implementation speciﬁcation
models the required and allowed system behavior. An online test generation tool uses the envi-ronment model to generate relevant input stimuli sequences to the implementation. Thus, from
a testing perspective the environment model functions as a load generator or environment sim-
ulator. Similarly, the test tool uses the implementation model to check whether the actual ob-served (timed) input-output sequences are legal according to the implementation relation. The
implementation speciﬁcation Sthus monitors the implementation and functions as a test oracle .
Figure 2 shows the test setup of relativized online testing, where the real environment is substi-
tuted by testing tool behaving according to the model of environment and monitoring based on
the model of implementation.
Implementation Environment
assumptions specification
Simulated Environmentin!out!
in?"in"
out?Under TestImplementation
outputinput
"out"
AdapterAdapter APIT−UPPAAL engine
Physical API
Fig. 2. Test setup in online relativized testing.
Modeling the environment explicitly and separately and taking this into account during test
generation has several advantages, which we are going to elaborate further in this section.
The test generation tool can synthesize only relevant andrealistic scenarios for the given
type of environment, which in turn reduces the number of required tests and improves the quality
of the test suite.
The test engineer can use the environment model to guide the test generator to more speciﬁc
situations of interest. This can be used to concentrate on positive behavior testing of early pro-
totypes rather than all possible situations for robustness testing. Later, testing can be based on
a more generic environment which allows any input sequences required for negative and stress-
testing. Further, the implementation model often contain parts that may be hard to reach by a
random chance and a more intelligent guiding is needed. Finally, it allows the test engineer toguide testing on speciﬁc parts of the speciﬁcation, either for regression testing ordebugging .
A separate environment model makes it easy to test the system under different assumptions
anduse patterns . It is sometimes the case that the same basic controller is reused in a slightly dif-
ferent setup, e.g. temperature regulator in refrigeration plants and incubation houses, embedded
software in PC CD-ROM controller and portable CD players, etc.. The implementation can be
designed to work in a number of different environments and might never be used in their strange
superposition at the same time. Relativized testing allows to concentrate on different function-
ality aspects which are identiﬁed in application usage patterns. Also it is worth mentioning thatour assumption that the implementation models are input enabled can be relaxed; they need only
be input enabled in the speciﬁc assumed environment. This eases the construction of the model.

--- Page 4 ---
From a testing tool implementation point of view, the online testing consists of environment
simulation andverdict assignment , which are quite independent tasks concentrating on different
models in the system speciﬁcation: simulation mainly follows the model of environment, deals
with test generation and execution and therefore is time critical, while test oracle is focusing on
possible violations in the implementation model and therefore can be postponed to a time where
there are more processing power or time available. We can separate the simulator and oracle into
two processes, potentially running on different hosts or even postponing verdicts to ofﬂine traceanalysis.
1.4 Related Work
Model based test generation for real-time speciﬁcations has been investigated by others (see
e.g., [6, 9, 11, 13, 14, 18,21,22, 27,28, 30]), but remain relatively immature.
A solid and widespread implementation relation used in model based conformance test-
ing of untimed systems is the input/output conformance relation by Tretmans [32]. Informally,input/output conformance requires that, for all traces in the speciﬁcation, the implementation
never produces an output not allowed by the speciﬁcation, and that it never refuses to produce
an output (stays quiescent) when the speciﬁcation requires one.
As also noted in [18,21] a timed input/output conformance relation can be obtained (assum-
ing input enabledness) as timed trace inclusion between the implementation and its speciﬁcation.
Our work further extends this to a relativized conformance relation taking environment assump-
tions explicitly into account. In [32] the speciﬁcation is permitted to be non-input enabled (thusmaking the conformance relation non-transitive in general) in order to capture environmental
constraints. However, this requires explicit rewriting of the speciﬁcation when different envi-
ronments are to be used. Following the seminal work [19] our approach is based on an separatemodel of the environment. In particular, once conformance has been established with respect to
a particular environment we can automatically conclude conformance under more restricted en-
vironments. Also, when the IUTis to be used in different environments, it sufﬁces to test it under
the most liberal environment assumptions. Furthermore, relativized conformance is transitive.
Model based ofﬂine testing is often based on a coverage criterion of the model like in [13,15],
on a test purpose as e.g. [17, 18], or a fault-model as [11, 14]. When speciﬁcations allow non-
determinism, the generated test cases cannot simply be a sequence, but take the form of behav-
ior trees adaptive to implementation controlled actions, e.g different outputs or timing. There-
fore, most ofﬂine test generation algorithms explicitly determinize the speciﬁcation [10,17,27].
However, for expressive formalisms like timed automata this approach is infeasible becausein general they cannot be determinized [2] and their unobservable actions cannot always (and
when they can it may be very costly) be removed [34]. Much work on timed test generation
from timed automata therefore restricts the amount and type of allowed non-determinism. Someworks [11, 13, 30] completely disallow non-determinism, whereas others [18, 27] restrict the
use of clocks, guards or clock resets. However, in many cases it is important to allow non-
determinism, because 1) speciﬁcations are often given as a parallel composition of model-
components, 2) it allows the implementor some freedom, and 3) the tester is usually concerned
with abstract requirements rather than concrete details of the IUT. Note that in particular for
real-time systems it may be crucial to allow speciﬁcation of timing uncertainty, e.g., that an
output is expected in some interval of time (e.g., between 1 and 5 time units from now), but not

--- Page 5 ---
exactly when. Timed automata model this by a non-deterministic choice of letting time pass or
outputting an event.
In contrast, online testing is automatically adaptive and only implicitly determinizes the
speciﬁcation, and only partially up to the concrete trace observed so far. The (untimed) online
testing algorithm proposed by Tretmans et. al. in [4, 36] continually computes the set of states
that the speciﬁcation can possibly occupy after the observations made so far. Based on this the
tester can at any time decide to either perform one of the inputs enabled in the speciﬁcation, orwait for output from the implementation, and then check whether the output (or its absence) is
allowed in the state-set. Online testing from Promela [36] and L
OTOS speciﬁcations for untimed
systems have been implemented in the T ORX [35] tool, and practical application to real case
studies show promising results [4, 33, 35]. However, T ORX provides no support for real-time.
Our work generalizes the T ORX approach to timed systems and to the handling of the explicit
environment assumptions. We allow a quite generous (non-deterministic) timed automata lan-
guage. In addition, we compute the state-set symbolically to track the (potentially dense) timed
state space.
Online testing from unrestricted non-deterministic timed automata using symbolic state-set
computation [29] was ﬁrst published by Krichen and Tripakis [21]. We implement a similar ap-
proach by extending the U PPAAL model-checker resulting in an integrated and mature testing
and veriﬁcation tool. Our work (originating from [7, 24, 26]; an abstract appeared in [25]) is
different from [21] in that 1) the exact timed automata language variant is different and includes
separable environment models, 2) we propose a relativized version of timed input/output con-
formance, 3) our algorithm (presented in much greater detail) generates tests relevant only for
the speciﬁed environment, and 4) is shown to be sound and complete under certain assumptions,and ﬁnally 5) we provide experimental evidence of the feasibility of the technique.
1.5 Contributions
In this paper we describe a tool for online testing of real-time systems. Our main contributions
are the notion of relativized timed input/output conformance and an implementation of a sym-
bolic algorithm in testing tool T-U
PPAAL , which is based on U PPAAL model checking engine.
T-U PPAAL performs online testing of timed systems from a (possibly densely timed and poten-
tially non-deterministic) timed automata model of the IUT and its assumed environment. Under
a certain testing hypothesis, we prove that our algorithm is complete (in a precise probabilistic
sense) and sound. Furthermore, we apply T-U PPAAL to a medium sized case that demonstrates
good error detection potential and very encouraging performance. We describe the status and
future work of our testing concept and implementation.
2 Test Speciﬁcation
This section formally presents our semantic framework, and introduces TIOTS, timed automata,
and our relativized input/output conformance relation.
2.1 Timed I/O Transition Systems
We assume a given set of actions Apartitioned into two disjoint sets of output actions Aout
and input actions Ain. In addition we assume that there is a distinguished unobservable action
τ/negationslash∈A. We denote by Aτthe set A∪{τ}.

--- Page 6 ---
Deﬁnition 1. A timed I/O transition system (TIOTS) Sis a tuple (S, so,Ain,Aout,−→), where
Sis a set of states, s0∈S, and−→⊆S×(Aτ∪R≥0)×Sis a transition relation satisfying the
usual constraints of time determinism (ifsd−→s/primeandsd−→s/prime/primethens/prime=s/prime/prime) and time additivity
(ifsd1−→s/primeands/primed2−→s/prime/primethensd1+d2−−−−→s/prime/prime),d∈R≥0, where R≥0denotes non-negative real
numbers.
Notation for TIOTS. Leta, a1...n∈A,α∈Aτ∪R≥0, andd, d1...n∈R≥0. We write sα−→iff
sα−→s/primefor some s/prime.W eu s e ⇒to denote the τ-abstracted transition relation such that sa⇒s/prime
iffsτ−→∗a−→τ−→∗s/prime, andsd⇒s/primeiffsτ−→∗d1−→τ−→∗d2−→τ−→∗···τ−→∗dn−→τ−→∗s/primewhere d=d1+d2+
···dn. We extend ⇒to sequences of actions and delays in the usual manner.
We assume that the TIOTS Sis strongly input enabled andnon-blocking .Sis strongly input
enabled iff si−→for all states sand for all input actions i.Sis non-blocking iff for any state sand
anyt∈R≥0there is a timed output trace σ=d1o1...o ndn+1such that sσ⇒and/summationtext
idi≥t.
ThusSwill not block time in any input enabled environment.
To model potential implementations it is usefull to deﬁne the properties of isolated outputs
anddeterminism . We say that Shas isolated outputs if whenever so−→for some output action o,
thens/negationslashτ−→ands/negationslashd−→for all d>0and whenever so/prime
−→theno/prime=o. Finally, Sis deterministic if
for all delays or actions αand all states s, whenever sα−→s/primeandsα−→s/prime/primethens/prime=s/prime/prime.
An observable timed trace σ∈(A∪R≥0)∗is of the form σ=d1a1d2...a kdk+1. We deﬁne
the observable timed traces TTr(s)of a state sas:
TTr(s)={σ∈(A∪R≥0)∗|sσ⇒} (1)
For a state s(and subset S/prime⊆S) and a timed trace σ,sAfterσis the set of states that can
be reached after σ:
sAfterσ={s/prime|sσ⇒s/prime},S/primeAfterσ=/uniondisplay
s∈S/primesAfterσ (2)
The set Out/parenleftbig
s/parenrightbig
of observable outputs or delays that can occur in s∈S/prime⊆Sis deﬁned as:
Out/parenleftbig
s/parenrightbig
={a∈Aout∪R≥0|sa⇒},Out/parenleftbig
S/prime/parenrightbig
=/uniondisplay
s∈S/primeOut/parenleftbig
s/parenrightbig
, (3)
Timed Automata [2] is an expressive and popular formalism for modelling real-time systems.
LetXbe a set of R≥0-valued variables called clocks . LetG(X)denote the set of guards on
clocks being conjunctions of simple constraints of the form x⊿ /triangleleftc , and let U(X)denote the set
ofupdates of clocks corresponding to sequences of statements of the form x:=c, where x∈X,
c∈N, and⊿/triangleleft∈{ ≤,<,=,>,≥}.Atimed automaton over(A, X)is a tuple (L,/lscript 0,I,E), where
Lis a set of locations, /lscript0∈Lis an initial location, I:L→G(X)assigns invariants to locations,
andEis a set of edges such that E⊆L×G(X)×Aτ×U(X)×L. We write /lscriptg,α,u−−−−→/lscript/primeiff
(/lscript,g,α,u,/lscript/prime)∈E.
The semantics of a timed automaton is deﬁned in terms of a TIOTS over states of the form
s=(/lscript,¯v), where /lscriptis a location and ¯v∈RX
≥0is a clock valuation satisfying the invariant of /lscript.
Intuitively, there are two kinds of transitions: delay transitions and discrete transitions. In delay
transitions, (/lscript,¯v)d−→(/lscript,¯v+d), the values of all clocks of the automaton are incremented by the
amount of the delay, d. Discrete transitions (/lscript,¯v)α−→(/lscript/prime,¯v/prime)correspond to execution of edges
(/lscript,g,α,u,/lscript/prime)for which the guard gis satisﬁed by ¯v. The clock valuation ¯v/primeof the target state is
obtained by modifying ¯vaccording to updates uand satisﬁes the invariants on /lscript/prime.

--- Page 7 ---
Figure 1(b) shows a timed automaton specifying the requirements to a coffee machine. It has
a facility that allows the user, after paying, to indicate his eagerness to get coffee by pushing arequest button on the machine forcing it to output coffee. However, allowing insufﬁcient brewing
time results in a weak coffee. Waiting less than 30 time units deﬁnitely results in weak coffee,
and waiting more than 50 deﬁnitely in strong coffee. Between 30 and 50 time units the choice
is non-deterministic, meaning that the IUT/implementor may decide what to produce. After
the request, it takes the machine an additional (non-deterministic) 10 to 30 (30 to 50) timeunits to produce weak coffee (strong coffee). The timed automaton in Figure 1(c) models a
potential (nice) user of the machine that pays before requesting coffee and wants strong coffee
thus requesting only after 60 time units.
TIOTS Composition. LetS=(S, s
0,Ain,Aout,−→)be an input enabled, non-blocking
TIOTS. An environment EforSis itself an input enabled, non-blocking, TIOTS E=(E,e o,
Aout,Ain,−→). Here Eis the set of environment states and the set of input (output) actions of E
is identical to the output (input) actions of S. The parallel composition of SandEforms a closed
system S/bardblE whose observable behavior is deﬁned by the TIOTS (S×E,(s0,e0),Ain,Aout,−→)
where −→is deﬁned as
sa−→s/primeea−→e/prime
(s, e)a−→(s/prime,e/prime)sτ−→s/prime
(s, e)τ−→(s/prime,e)eτ−→e/prime
(s, e)τ−→(s, e/prime)sd−→s/primeed−→e/prime
(s, e)d−→(s/prime,e/prime)(4)
The timed automata ScandEcrespectively shown in Figure 1(b) and 1(c) can be composed
in parallel on actions Ain={req,coin}andAout={weakCoﬀee ,strongCoﬀee }forming a
closed network1.
2.2 Relativized Timed Conformance
In this section we deﬁne our notion of conformance between TIOTSs. Our notion derives from
the input/output conformance relation ( ioco) of Tretmans and de Vries [32, 36] by taking time
and environment constraints into account. Under assumptions of input enabledness our rela-
tivized timed conformance relation coincides with relativized timed trace inclusion. Like ioco,
this relation ensures that the implementation has only the behavior allowed by the speciﬁcation.
In particular, 1) it is not allowed to produce an output at a time (too late or too early) when
one is not allowed by the speciﬁcation, 2) it is not allowed to omit producing an output whenone is required by the speciﬁcation by delaying more than allowed. Thus, timed trace inclusion
offers the notion of time-bounded quiescence [8] that—in contrast to ioco’s conceptual eternal
quiescence—can be observed in a real-time system.
Deﬁnition 2. Given an environment e∈Ethee-relativized timed input/output conformance
relation rtioco
ebetween system states s, t∈Sis deﬁned as:
srtioco etiﬀ∀σ∈TTr(e).Out/parenleftbig
(s, e)Afterσ/parenrightbig
⊆Out/parenleftbig
(t, e)Afterσ/parenrightbig
Whenever srtioco etwe will say that sis a correct implementation (or reﬁnement) of the spec-
iﬁcation tunder the environmental constraints expressed by e. Under the assumption of input-
enabledness of both SandEwe may characterize relativized conformance in terms of trace-
inclusion as follows:
1To avoid cluttering the ﬁgures we have not made them explicitly input enabled; for the unspeciﬁed inputs
there is an undrawn self looping edge that merely consumes the input without changing the location.

--- Page 8 ---
Lemma 1. LetSandEbe input-enabled with states s, t∈Sande∈Erespectively. Then
srtioco etiﬀTTr(s)∩TTr(e)⊆TTr(t)∩TTr(e)
Thus if srtioco etdoes not hold then there exists a trace σofesuch that sσ⇒butt/negationslashσ⇒.G i v e n
the notion of relativized conformance it is natural to consider the preorder on environments
based on their discriminating power, i.e. for two environments eandf:
e/subsetsqequalfiﬀrtioco f⊆rtioco e (5)
(to be read fis more discriminating than e). It follows from the deﬁnition of rtioco that
e/subsetsqequalfiffTTr(e)⊆TTr(f). In particular there is a most (least) discriminating input en-
abled and non-blocking environment U(O) given by TTr(U)=( A∪R≥0)∗/parenleftbig
TTr(O)=
(Aout∪R≥0)∗/parenrightbig
. The corresponding conformance relation rtioco U(rtioco O) specializes to sim-
ple timed trace inclusion (timed output trace inclusion) between system states. In Figure 3(a) and
Figure 3(b) the most-discriminating and the least-discriminating environments are given whenA
in={req,coin}andAout={weakCoﬀee ,strongCoﬀee }.
req!coi
n!strongCoffee?
weakCoffee?
k0
(a) most- /subsetsqequalenvironment EU.weakCoffee?strongCoffee?
k0
(b) least- /subsetsqequalenvironment EO.req? req?
strongCoffee!coin?weakCoffee!
l2 l3l1l0
x≥41
x:= 0
x==DS
x≤40x:= 0
x:= 0x==DW
x≤DWx≤DS
(c)IUT:I(DS,DW).
Fig. 3. Implementation of coffee machine
2.3 Examples
The speciﬁcation machine Scand environment Ecwere described in Section 2.1. The (de-
terministic) implementation I(DS,DW)in Figure 3(c) produces weak coffee (strong coffee)
after less than 40 time units (more than 41 time units) and an additional brewing time of
DS(resp. DW) time units. Observe that any trace of the implementation I(40,20)(in any
environment) can be matched by the speciﬁcation; hence I(40,20)rtioco EUS. Thus also
I(40,20)rtioco EcSc. In contrast I(70,5)rtiocoEUScfor two reasons: 1) it has the timed
tracecoin·30·req·5·weakCoﬀee thatScdoes not, i.e., it may produce weak coffee too soon
(no time to insert a cup); 2) it has the trace coin·50·req·70not in Scmeaning that it produces
strong coffee too slowly. Assume now that the strong coffee error is ﬁxed, and that the machine
I(40,5)is used in the restricted environment of nice users Ec. Here, despite the remaining weak
coffee error in EU,I(40,5)rtioco EcScbecause Ecnever requests weak coffee.
3 Test Generation and Execution
We present the main algorithm, its soundness and completeness proof, and how to implement it.

--- Page 9 ---
3.1 The Main Algorithm
The input to Algorithm 1 is two TIOTSs S/bardblE respectively modelling the IUTand environment.
It maintains the current reachable state set Z⊆S×Ethat the test speciﬁcation can possibly
occupy after the timed trace observed so far. Knowing this, state estimate allows it to chooseappropriate test primitives and to validate IUT outputs.
Algorithm 1 Test generation and execution: TestGenExe (S,E,IUT,T).Z:={(s0,e0)}.
while Z/negationslash=∅∧/sharpiterations ≤Tdoswitch( action ,delay ,restart ) randomly:
action : // offer an input
ifEnvOutput (Z)/negationslash=∅
randomly choose a∈EnvOutput (Z)
sendatoIUT
Z:=ZAftera
delay : // wait for an output
randomly choose δ∈Delays (Z)
sleep for δtime units and wake up on output o
ifooccurs at δ/prime≤δthen
Z:=ZAfterδ/prime
ifo/∈ImpOutput (Z)then return fail
elseZ:=ZAftero
else // no output within δdelay
Z:=ZAfterδ
restart : //reset and restart
Z:={(s0,e0)}
resetIUT
ifZ=∅then return fail
else return pass
The tester can perform three basic actions: either send an input (enabled environment output)
to the IUT, wait for an output for some time, or reset the IUT and restart. If the tester observes
an output or a time delay it checks whether this is legal according to the state set. The state set
is updated whenever an input is offered, or an output or delay is observed. Illegal occurrenceor absence of an output is detected if the state set becomes empty which is the result if the
observed trace is not in the speciﬁcation. The functions used in Algorithm 1 are deﬁned as:
EnvOutput (Z)={a∈A
in|∃(s, e)∈Z.ea−→},ImpOutput (Z)={a∈Aout|∃(s, e)∈
Z.sa−→}, andDelays (Z)={d|∃(s, e)∈Z.ed⇒}. Note that EnvOutput is empty if the
environment has no outputs to offer. Similarly, Delays cannot pick at random from the entire
domain of real-numbers if the environment must produce an input to the IUT model before
a certain moment in time. We use the efﬁcient reachability algorithm implementation [3] to
compute the operator After . It operates on bounded symbolic states, checks for inclusions and
thus always terminates even if the model contains τaction loops.
3.2 Soundness and Completeness
Algorithm 1 constitutes a randomized algorithm for providing stimuli to (in terms of input and
delays) and observing resulting reactions from (in terms of output) a given IUT. Assuming the

--- Page 10 ---
behavior of the IUTis a non-blocking, input enabled, deterministic TIOTS with isolated outputs
the reaction to any given timed input trace σ=d1i1...d kikdi+1is completely deterministic.
More precisely, given the stimuli σthere is a unique ρ∈TTr(IUT)such that ρ↑Ain=σ,
where ρ↑Ainis the natural projection of the timed trace ρto the set of input actions.
Under a certain (theoretically necessary) testing hypothesis about the behavior of IUT and
given that the TIOTSs SandEsatisfy certain assumptions, the randomization used in Algo-
rithm 1 may be chosen such that the algorithm is both complete and sound in the sense that it(eventually with probability one) gives the verdict “fail” in all cases of non-conformance and
the verdict “pass” in cases of conformance. The hypothesis and assumptions are based on the
results on digitization techniques in [31]
2which allow the dense-time trace inclusion problem
between two sets of timed traces to be reduced to discrete time. In particular it sufﬁces to choose
unit delays in Algorithm 1 (assuming that the models and IUT share the same magnitude of a
time unit).
Theorem 1. Assume that the behavior of IUT may be modelled3as an input enabled, non-
blocking, deterministic TIOTS with isolated outputs. Furthermore assume that TTr(IUT)and
TTr(E)areclosed under digitization and that TTr(S)isclosed under inverse digitization . Then
Algorithm 1 with only unit delays is sound and complete in the following senses:
1. Whenever TestGenExe (S,E,IUT,T)=failthenIUTrtiocoES.
2. Whenever IUTrtiocoESthenProb/parenleftbig
TestGenExe (S,E,IUT,T)=fail/parenrightbigT→∞−−−−→1
where Tis the maximum number of iterations of the while-loop before exiting.
Proof. See [20]
From [16, 31] it follows that the closure properties required in Theorem 1 are satisﬁed if
the behavior of IUT andEare TIOTSs induced by closed timed automata (i.e. where all guards
and invariants are non-strict) and Sis a TIOTS induced by an open timed automaton (i.e. with
guards and invariants being strict). In practice these requirements are not restrictive, e.g. for
strict guards one can always scale the clock constants to obtain arbitrary high precision.
3.3 Symbolic State-set Computation
The concrete realization of Algorithm 1 is described in [20]. We use (well established) symbolic
constraint solving techniques to represent sets of clock valuations compactly by so-called zones.
A zone over a set of clocks Xis a conjunction of clock in-equations of the form xi−xj≺
ci,j,xi≺ciu, andcil≺xi, where ≺∈ {<,≤},ci,j,cil,ciuare integer constants including
±∞, andxi,xj∈X.Asymbolic state is a pair /angbracketleft¯/lscript, Z/angbracketrightconsisting of a vector ¯/lscriptof locations for
each parallel automaton and the zone Z.Zdenotes a set of clock valuations, i.e., a symbolic
state represents a set of concrete states: /angbracketleft¯/lscript,Z/angbracketright={(¯/lscript,¯v)|¯v∈Z}.
The required symbolic algorithms are similar to those used for model checking [1,3] except
that only states up to a certain time limit need to be computed. This is most easily accomplished
by introducing an auxiliary clock tthat is set to zero whenever an observable action occurs.
2We refer the reader to [31] for the precise deﬁnition of digitization and inverse digitization.
3The assumption that the IUT can be modelled by a formal object in a given class is commonly referred
to as the test hypothesis . Only its existence is assumed, not a known instance. In particular it may be
extremely large, and structurally totally unrelated to the speciﬁcation.

--- Page 11 ---
4 Experiments
We implemented our algorithm by extending the mature U PPAAL model-checker tool to the
testing tool T-U PPAAL . Besides a graphical timed automata editor, U PPAAL provides an efﬁcient
implementation of the needed basic symbolic operations. Unlike U PPAAL ,T - U PPAAL does not
store the reached state space, but only the current symbolic state set. We allow the full U PPAAL
timed automata language, including non-deterministic (action and timing) speciﬁcations and
discrete variables. The IUT is connected to T-U PPAAL via an adapter component translating
abstract I/O actions into their real representation, and sends (receives) them to (from) the IUT.
This section presents the results of the ﬁrst set of experiments using our implementation.
The purpose is to give an indication of the feasibility of our technique in terms of applicability,error detection capability, and performance in terms of state-set size and computation time.
4.1 Test Speciﬁcation
For our experiment we used a slightly changed and adopted speciﬁcation of a simple railway
control system originally published in [37] and found in U
PPAAL distribution. A rail-road inter-
section controller monitors trains on a set of rail-road tracks with a shared track segment, e.g. atrain-station. Its main objective is to ensure that only one train occupies the shared segment at
a time, and to grant access in arrival order. In this setup we assume 4 tracks, and for simplicity
1 train per track at a time. Trains on track isignal the controller when they approach and leave
the station using signals appr
iandleave irespectively. When train iapproaches an occupied sta-
tion the controller is required to issue a stop iwithin 5 mtu(model time units), and is similarly
required to issue goiwithin 5 mtuafter the station becomes free.
Safe
StopStation
Appr Startx>=10
x:=0
x<=10stop_1?x:=0x>=3leave_1!
x:=0
appr_1!
x:=0x>=7
x:=0
go_1?x:=0
(a) Train 1 of 4.Remove
ApproachFree
SignalRed
x<=5
HoldingTrainWaitForLeave
SignalGreen
x<=5leave_1?e:=1
stop_1!rem!
appr_1?e:=1
x:=0add!len>0
e==1
release?x:=0go_1!len==0add!
e==1
release?
(b) Controller 1 of 4.Start
Shiftdown
i < len
list[i]:=list[i+1],
i++len==i,len==0
list[i] := 0len>=1,
e==list[0]
rem?
len--,
i := 0add?
list[len]:=e,
len++
len==i,len>0
list[i]:=0,
e:=list[0]release!
(c) Queue
Fig. 4. Test speciﬁcation for train controller: trains as environment, controller and queue as implementation.
The environment assumption model consists of 4 concurrent timed automata each modeling
the assumed behavior of a train. The model for train 1 is shown in Figure 4(a); the remaining
trains are identical except for the train-id. The model of the IUT requirements consists of 4
concurrent train control automata (Figure 4(b)) tracking the position of each potential train, andone queue automaton tracking their arrival order (Figure 4(c): listis an array of integers, and iis
an index into the array). We use U
PPAAL syntax to illustrate timed automata. Initial locations are

--- Page 12 ---
marked using a double circle. Edges are by convention labeled by the triple: guard, action, and
assignment in that order. The internal τ-action is indicated by an absent action label. Committed
locations are indicated by a location with an encircled “C”. A committed location must be left
immediately as the next transition taken by the system. Finally, bold-faced clock conditions
placed under locations are location invariants.
The complete test speciﬁcation is a reasonably large and nontrivial ﬁrst experiment: it con-
sists of 9 concurrent timed automata, 8 clocks, and a sequential queue data structure.
4.2 Implementation Under Test
TheIUTis implemented as an approximately 100 line C++ program following the basic structure
of the speciﬁcation. It uses POSIX Threads and POSIX locks and condition variables for multi-
threading and synchronization. It consists of one thread per train, and queue data structure whose
access is guarded by mutual exclusion and condition variables. In the experiment, the IUT runs
in the same address space as the T-U PPAAL tool, and input and output actions are communicated
to and from the driver/adapter via two single place bounded buffers.
In addition we have created a number of erroneous mutations based on the assumed correct
implementation ( M0):
M1: Thestop 3signal is issued 1 mtutoo late.
M2: The controller issues stop 1instead of stop 3.
M3: The controller never issues stop 3
M4: The controller uses a bounded queue limited to 3 trains. Thus, the fourth train overwrites the third
train in the queue.
M5: The controller uses LIFO queue instead of FIFO.
M6: The controller ignores appr 3signals if a train arrives before 2 mtuafter entering the location Free.
4.3 Error Detection Capability
The experiments are run on a 8x900 MHZ Sun Sparc Fire v880R workstation with 32 GB
memory running Sun Solaris 9 (SunOS 5.9). T-U PPAAL runs on one CPU whereas the IUT may
run on one or more of the remaining. T-U PPAAL itself does not require these extreme amount
of resources, and it runs well on a standard PC, but a multiprocessor allows T-U PPAAL and the
IUT to run in parallel as they would normally do in a black-box system level test.
To allow for faster and more experiments and reduce potential problems with real-time clock
synchronization between the engine and IUT, the experiments are run using a simulated clock
progressing when both T-U PPAAL and the IUT needs to let time pass. Each mutant is tested
1100 times each with an upper time limit of 100000 mtu. All runs of M1-6 mutants failed and
all runs of M0passed with timeout for testing. The minimum, maximum, and average running
time and number of used input actions are summarized on the left side of Table 5.
The results show that all erroneous mutants are killed surprisingly quickly using less than
100 input actions and less than 2100 mtu. In contrast the assumed correct implementation M0
was not killed and was subjected to at least 3500 inputs stimuli and survived for more than300 times longer than other mutants in average. In conclusion, the results indicate that online
real-time testing may be a highly effective technique.

--- Page 13 ---
Table 5. Error detection and performance measures:
Error detection capability
 State-set size
 Execution time, µs
Mu-
 Input actions
 Duration, mtu
 After (delay)
 After (action)
 After (delay)
 After (action)
tant
 Min
 Avg
 Max
 Min
 Avg
 Max
 Avg
 Max
 Avg
 Max
 Avg
 Max
 Avg
 Max
M1
 2
 4.8
 16
 0
68.8
 318
 2.3
 18
 2.7
 28
 1113
 3128
 141
 787
M2
 2
 4.6
 13
 1
66.4
 389
 2.3
 22
 2.8
 30
 1118
 3311
 147
 791
M3
 2
 4.7
 14
 0
66.4
 398
 2.2
 22
 2.7
 30
 1112
 3392
 141
 834
M4
 6
 8.5
 18
 28
165.0
 532
 2.8
 24
 3.1
 48
 1113
 3469
 125
 936
M5
 4
 5.6
 12
 14
89.8
 364
 2.8
 24
 3.3
 48
 1131
 3222
 146
 919
M6
 2
14.1
 92
 0
299.6
 2077
 2.7
 27
 2.9
 36
 1098
 3531
 110
 861
M0
 3565
 3751.4
 3966
 105
105
105
2.7
 31
 2.9
 46
 1085
 3591
 101
 950
4.4 Performance
Based on the same setup from Section 4.3 we instrumented T-U PPAAL to record the number of
symbolic states in the state-set, and the amount of CPU time used to compute the next state-
set after a delay and an observable action. The right side of Table 5 summarizes the results. The
state-set size is in average only 2-3 symbolic states per state-set, but it varies a lot, up to 48 states.
In average, the state-set sizes reached after performing a delay appear larger than after an action.In average it costs only 1.1msto compute the successor state-set after a delay, and less than
0.2msafter an action. Thus it seems feasible to generate tests from much larger speciﬁcations,
obviously depending on the scale of time units.
To examine these variations in greater detail and the dependency of computation time on
state-set size, we created the scatter plot in Figure 6, also including the regression line of the
mean. The ﬁgure shows the distribution of After (delay) successor computation time of as func-
tion of state-set size. The ﬁgure shows graphically by far that most of the population of state-set
sizes are concentrated below 5 symbolic states, and that very few are larger than 25. We found a
similar, but less dispersed, pattern for After (action) successor computation time.
Figure 7 plots the average successor state computation time as function of the state-set size.
TheAfter (delay) computation time appear to depend linearly on the state-set size, where as
After (action) appear even sub-linear. But this conclusion is uncertain because only few mea-
surements points are available for large state-set sizes. The scatter plot in Figure 7(a) shows the
average of After (delay) successor computation times as function of state-set size. Figure 7(b)
displays After (action) with a similar pattern as After (delay), but is about 10 times cheaper to
compute (varies between 0.4 and 1 ms).
In conclusion, the performance of our technique looks very promising and appears to be fast
enough for many real-time systems. Obviously, more experiments on varying size and complex-
ity models are needed to ﬁnd the ﬁrm limitations of the technique.
4.5 Industrial Case Study
We applied T-U
PPAAL on a ﬁrst industrial case study provided by Danfoss Refrigeration Con-
trols Division. The system under test is an Electronic Cooling Controller (EKC) for industrial
cooling plants. Its main objective is to keep the refrigerator room air temperature at a user de-ﬁned set point by switching a compressor on and off. It monitors the actual room temperature,
and sounds an alarm if the temperature is too high (low) for too long a period. In addition it

--- Page 14 ---
Fig. 6. Distribution of After (delay) state-set successor computation on state-set size.
0 5 10 15 20 25 302500 3000 3500 4000
Symbolic state set sizemean CPU time, micro−s
(a)After delay.0 1 02 03 04 0100 300 500
Symbolic state set sizemean CPU time, micro−s
(b)After action.
Fig. 7. The scatter plots of average CPU time per state-set size with linear regression lines.
offers a myriad of features (e.g. defrosting and safety modes in case of sensor errors) and ap-
proximately 40 user set-able parameters. Figure 8 depicts the photo of EKC unit.
The EKC obtains input from a room air temperature sensor, a defrost temperature sensor,
and a two-button keypad that controls approximately 40 user set-table parameters. It delivers
output via a compressor relay, a defrost relay, an alarm relay, a fan relay, and a LED display unitshowing the currently calculated room air temperature as well as indicators for alarm, error and
operating mode.
Figure 9 shows a simpliﬁed view of control objective, namely to keep the temperature within
setPoint andsetPoint +differential . The regulation is to be based on an weighted averaged room

--- Page 15 ---
Fig. 8. Photo of EKC unit on a desk.
temperature Tncalculated from periodically sampling the air temperature sensor such that a new
sample Tis weighted by 20% and the old average Tn−1by 80%:
Tn=Tn−1∗4+T
5
A certain minimum duration must pass between restarts of the compressor, and similarly
the compressor must remain on for a minimum duration. An alarm must sound if the tempera-
ture increases (decreases) above (below) highAlarmLimit (lowAlarmLimit ) for alarmDelay time
units. All time constants in the EKC speciﬁcation are in the order of seconds to minutes, and a
few even in hours.
Temperature
Timesetpointsetpoint
+differentialhighAlarm
Deviation
lowAlarm
LimithighAlarm
Limit
lowAlarm
Deviationdifferentialstart 
compressor
stop
compressorstart 
compressor
stop
compressorstart
alarm
normal min restart 
time not elapsedmin cooling 
time not elapsedalarm delay
Fig. 9. Main Control Objective of an EKC is to maintain temperature within bounds.

--- Page 16 ---
Test Interface. The test interface deﬁnes how the IUT can be controlled and observed. Danfoss
proposed to test the EKC by reading and writing its parameter database. Nearly every input,output or system parameter is stored in a so-called parameter database in the EKC, essentially
a parameter id indexed table that contains the value, type and permitted range of each variable.
The parameter database is accessible from a PC host computer ﬁrst via a LON network from
the EKC to a EKC-gateway, from there via a RS-232 bus to the PC host, and ﬁnally via pro-
tocol software implemented as a Microsoft COM object. We implemented adaptation softwareallowing T-U
PPAAL running on a UNIX host to interact with the COM object via a TCP/IP con-
nection. In addition the adaptation translated changes in the parameter database into events and
vice versa.
The model. We modeled a central subset of the functionality of the EKC as a network of
UPPAAL timed automata, namely basic temperature regulation, alarm monitoring, and defrost
modes with manual and automatic controlled (ﬁxed) periodical defrost (de)activation. The al-
lowed timing tolerances and timing uncertainties introduced by the adaptation software is mod-
eled explicitly by allowing output events to be produced within a certain error envelope, typically2 seconds. The model consists of the main components depicted in Figure 10, and explained be-
low:
OutputInputIUT-Model
alarm
Relaycompressor
RelaytempMeasurement
compressornewTemp newTemp
on/off on/offEnvironment
TemperatureGenerator
defrost
RelaydefrostautoDefrost
on/offdefrostEventGen
alarm
Displayon/offhighTempAlarm
Fig. 10. Main timed automata components in model
Compressor controls the compressor relay based on the estimated room temperature, alarm
and defrost status.
Defrost Controls the events that must take place during a defrost cycle.
Auto Defrost automatically engages defrost mode periodically, according to a user setting. In
this mode the compressor and alarm handling functions are disengaged until delayAfterDe-
frost time units have elapsed.
Relay automata model a digital physical output (compressor, defrost alarm, alarm display) that
when given command switches on (respectively off) within a certain time bound.
Temperature Generator (part of the environment) simulates the variation in room tempera-
ture, currently either as a sinus curve or randomly.
Defrost Event Generator (part of the environment) randomly issues manual defrost on/off
commands.

--- Page 17 ---
Experiences. Our preliminary experiences shows that it is possible to accurately model the
behavior of EKC like devices as timed automata and use the resulting model as a test speciﬁca-tion for online testing. It is also possible to model only selected desired aspects of the system
behavior, i.e. a complete and detailed behavioral description is not required for system test-
ing. However making the model was not trivial because the system speciﬁcation was generally
incomplete and ambiguous. This meant that much time was spent on questioning Danfoss en-
gineers, qualiﬁed guessing, and reverse engineering. We conclude that explicit modeling is astrong method of understanding and capturing the required system behavior. Once the behavior
is understood we ﬁnd it important to simulate and verify the model to ensure that it has the
intended behavior; some errors were introduced in the model and detected by spurious behaviorof the resulting test run.
We also learned that the provided test interface is not ideal. Originally the AK-online soft-
ware is designed for basic monitoring and changing conﬁguration of the EKC rather than test-
ing. It lacks controllability of some physical sensor inputs and synchronization features with the
tester. We are collaborating with Danfoss to propose a better test interface for new generationEKCs with improved control and observation.
Before the submission deadline of this report we encountered numerous test runs where the
EKC disengages defrosting earlier than expected. According to Danfoss a possible explanationis that the EKC uses a low resolution timer with a precision of around 5 seconds to control
defrosting, whereas the model expects 2 seconds. It remains to be seen if this can explain all
failing test runs, but it indicates that our method indeed candetect such timing errors.
5 Status and Future Work
T-U PPAAL is based on symbolic model-checking techniques based on different bound matrices,
which are efﬁciently implemented in the U PPAAL veriﬁcation engine. The test speciﬁcation can
be created through a user friendly U PPAAL timed automata network graphical editor. The envi-
ronment and the IUTseparation is speciﬁed by deﬁning the observable communication channels
between them. In addition, for testing, T-U PPAAL needs an adapter (loaded as dynamic library)
to connect to the IUT.
The tool implementation has been released to the public and the latest T-U PPAAL versions
can be downloaded for non-commercial use at [23]. The experiments can be re-examined and a
few more examples can be tried out using scripts from the distribution.
Our ﬁrst experience with online timed-model-based testing has been encouraging so far.
We observed promising error detection capabilities having just random guiding techniques and
the model-checking engine provided us with fast enough reachability algorithms—not just to
generate tests online—but also to execute them, analyze and compute the conformance verdict in
real-time. The abstract and non-deterministic test speciﬁcation minimized the effort in modelingand testing various event and timing combinations. Non-determinism proved to be useful to deal
with some practical issues like uncertainty in ﬂoating point computation, possible timing drifts
and could even partially substitute the basic value passing.
Test generation imp rovements. Although generally successful, our ﬁrst applications also re-
vealed the lack of certain modeling features, e.g., for interprocess communication since U
PPAAL
channels deﬁne only handshake communication and data sharing via global variables which

--- Page 18 ---
need to be categorized into IUT and environment in the T-U PPAAL framework. During testing
an input action has to be (non-deterministically) selected and/or pre-computed in the model ofenvironment. We plan to improve the value passing by implementing variable value binding to
channel synchronization. To improve the data selection, a special types of variables could be in-
troduced. Further, it would be interesting to combine with state of the art testing data generators
(e.g. GAST [12]) from symbolic speciﬁcations, especially when complex C-like data structures
are soon to be available in U
PPAAL engine.
Some speciﬁcations happen to contain (probabilistically) narrow passages that may be hard
to reach by a randomized algorithm. Moreover it is not trivial to detect such bottlenecks whilemodeling. To improve the guiding in such cases, we plan to combine the results from ofﬂine
test case generators by converting the generated test traces into models of the environment.
Speciﬁcally for online testing, there are even bigger expectations from online model coverageanalysis described below.
Although the test runs can be long, there is still too little support implemented for estimating
the conﬁdence of successful test runs and the tester is left in doubt whether all behavior com-
binations have been tried out. To complement this lack of conﬁdence, a coverage of the system
model can be measured according to various criteria. The coverage of structure, variables usage,
and functional behavior for U
PPAAL speciﬁcations has recently been proposed in [5, 13] and
are awaiting to be implemented for online testing. However the coverage criteria for real-timeproperties need more fundamental research.
When a test run fails the tester needs to ﬁnd out why test failed and what parts of speciﬁcation
were potentially violated, i.e. the test failure diagnostic information needs to be provided and
most preferably automatically. To provide this knowledge we propose to analyze the evolution of
the state-set, more speciﬁcally dead-ends which are cut off by observable actions and branchingpoints which start alternative histories of computation. The coverage estimate of the system
model by various test traces can provide probabilistic clue of what went wrong according to
speciﬁcation. In some cases, the coverage of the executed IUT code can be examined too and
the erroneous parts spotted when a failing test run is identiﬁed.
Test execution imp rovements. One of the main problems for the real-time system developer
is the uncontrollable progression of time. Mainly there are two ways of designing real-time
applications to be time-aware: schedule events based on absolute clock values or schedule events
based on offset from previous (internal or observable input/output) events. Both approacheshave their pros and cons, but the later may have timing drifts. The situation becomes even more
complicated if the system is built mixing both approaches are used. We propose to introduce
timing uncertainties in input/output event observation in order to synchronize model clocks with
the ones in IUT, which requires further future research.
So far the testing algorithm proved to be efﬁcient enough for online execution, but still
the performance is unpredictable because of highly varying state-set size, which may strain
time synchrony. Therefore, more sophisticated algorithms could be used to allow state-set pre-
computation in advance, faster algorithms allowing testing of larger speciﬁcations and/or with
ﬁner time units. One alternative is to investigate whether the tool should be separated into two
parts, the environment simulator and test oracle (monitor). This would allow ﬁner computingpower distribution in time. Moreover, test oracle can be extended to a fully equipped monitor:
at the same time as analyzing the trace with the implementation model, it can mark the model

--- Page 19 ---
coverage and gather diagnostic information. The model coverage facts can be converted (online
or ofﬂine) into guiding hints for (slightly) later testing. The diagnostic information can helpdevelopers in identifying the possibly violated parts of speciﬁcation.
Figure 11 shows the information ﬂow and breakdown into functional blocks of our envi-
sioned online testing tool: the test speciﬁcation consists of the environment model MEnv and
the implementation model MImp composed in parallel, the online testing tool separated into
emulator (as environment simulator) and monitor (as test oracle) and extended with test selec-
torfor smart guiding based on coverage facts produced by monitor ; generated test traces (from
ofﬂine case generator ,model checker or from online testing diagnostic information ) are loaded
as environment models through trace converter .
MEnv || MImp test oracleMonitor
cov. into guidingSelector
branching pointsdeadend−states
traces, verdictsDiagnostic Data
Best tracesbreadth−first reach.Model CheckerAdapter
Coverage
factsoffline testerCase Generator
Implem.
under test
trace display and editingConcrete Simulator Converter
trace to TANCoverage
criteriaEmulator
env. simulator hintsGuiding
oi
online testinginput
output
TestSpec:i/o
Fig. 11. Data ﬂow in online testing: active processes are in bold and passive storages are in normal font.
6 Conclusions
We have presented the T-U PPAAL tool and approach to testing of embedded systems using
real-time online testing from non-deterministic timed automata speciﬁcations. Based on an ex-
periment with a non-trivial speciﬁcation we conclude that our notion of relativized input/output
conformance and our sound and complete randomized online testing algorithm appear correct
and feasible. We further conclude that our algorithm is implementable, and T-U PPAAL tool
implementation shows encouraging results both in terms of error detection capability and per-formance of the symbolic state-set computation algorithm. However, further work and real-life
applications are needed to evaluate the algorithm and the tool in detail.
Besides practical application, we plan to improve the tool in several directions. For instance,
to estimate model coverage of the trace and use it to guide the random choices made by the
algorithm and investigate their impact on the error detection capability. Also we plan to include
observation uncertainty into our algorithm (i.e., outputs and given stimuli classiﬁed in an interval
of time rather than a time instance), to improve clock synchronization between T-U
PPAAL and
the implementation, and a value passing mechanism to make tool easier to adopt.
Acknowledgments. We would like to thank STRESS project participants, in particular Jan Tretmans,
Ed Brinksma and Laura Brand´ an Briones for valuable discussions.

--- Page 20 ---
References
1. T. Henzinger and X. Nicollin and J. Sifakis and S. Yovine. Symbolic model checking for real-time
systems. Information and Computation , 111(2):193–244, June 1994.
2. R. Alur and D.L. Dill. A Theory of Timed Automata. Theoretical Computer Science , 126(2):183–235,
April 1994.
3. G. Behrmann, J. Bengtsson, A. David, K.G. Larsen, P. Pettersson, and W. Yi. Uppaal implementation
secrets. In Formal Techniques in Real-Time and Fault-Tolerant Systems: 7th International Symposium,
FTRTFT 2002 , pages 3–22, September 2002.
4. A. Belinfante, J. Feenstra, R.G. de Vries, J. Tretmans, N. Goga, L. Feijs, S. Mauw, and L. Heerink.
Formal test automation: A simple experiment. In 12thInt. Workshop on Testing of Communicating
Systems , pages 179–196, 1999.
5. Johan Blom, Anders Hessel, Bengt Jonsson, and Paul Pettersson. Specifying and generating test cases
using observer automata. In Formal Approaches to Testing of Software , Linz, Austria, September 21
2004. Lecture Notes in Computer Science.
6. V . Braberman, M. Felder, and M. Marr´ e. Testing Timing Behaviors of Real Time Software. In Quality
Week 1997. San Francisco, USA. , pages 143–155, April-May 1997 1997.
7. E. Brinksma, K.G. Larsen, B. Nielsen, and J. Tretmans. Systematic Testing of Realtime Embedded
Software Systems (STRESS), March 2002. Research proposal submitted and accepted by the Dutch
Research Council.
8. Laura Brand´ an Briones and Ed Brinksma. A test generation framework for quiescent real-time sys-
tems. In Formal Approaches to Testing of Software , Linz, Austria, September 21 2004. Lecture Notes
in Computer Science.
9. R. Cardell-Oliver. Conformance Testing of Real-Time Systems with Timed Automata. Formal Aspects
of Computing , 12(5):350–371, 2000.
10. R. Cleaveland and M. Hennessy. Testing Equivalence as a Bisimulation Equivalence. Formal Aspects
of Computing , 5:1–20, 1993.
11. A. En-Nouaary, R. Dssouli, F. Khendek, and A. Elqortobi. Timed Test Cases Generation Based on
State Characterization Technique. In 19th IEEE Real-Time Systems Symposium (RTSS’98) , pages
220–229, December 2–4 1998.
12. Lars Frantzen, Jan Tretmans, and Tim Willemse. Test generation based on symbolic speciﬁcations.
InFormal Approaches to Testing of Software , Linz, Austria, September 21 2004. Lecture Notes in
Computer Science.
13. A. Hessel, K.G. Larsen, B. Nielsen, P. Pettersson, and A. Skou. Time-Optimal Test Cases for Real-
Time Systems. In 3rd International Workshop on Formal approaches to Testing of Software (FATES
2003) , Montr´ eal, Qu´ ebec, Canada, October 2003.
14. T. Higashino, A. Nakata, K. Taniguchi, and A R. Cavalli. Generating test cases for a timed i/o automa-
ton model. In IFIP Int’l Work. Test. Communicat. Syst. (IWTCS) , pages 197–214, 1999.
15. H.S. Hong, I. Lee, O. Sokolsky, and H. Ural. A temporal logic based theory of test coverage and
generation. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Tools and Algorithms for the Con-
struction and Analysis of Systems , pages 327–341. Springer-Verlag, 2002.
16. J. Ouaknine and J. Worrell. Revisiting digitization, robustness, and decidability for timed automata. In
18th IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science (LICS 2003) Ottawa, Canada , pages 198–207.
IEEE Computer Society, june 2003.
17. T. J´ eron and P. Morel. Test generation derived from model-checking. In N. Halbwachs and D. Peled,
editors, CAV’99, Trento, Italy , volume 1633 of LNCS , pages 108–122. Springer-Verlag, July 1999.
18. A. Khoumsi, T. J´ eron, and H. Marchand. Test cases generation for nondeterministic real-time systems.
In3rd International Workshop on Formal Approaches to Testing of Software (FATES’03). LNCS 2931 ,
Montreal, Canada, 2003.

--- Page 21 ---
19. K.G. Larsen. A Context Dependent Equivalence Between Processes. Theoretical Computer Science ,
49:185–215, 1987.
20. K.G. Larsen, M. Mikucionis, and B. Nielsen. Online testing of real-time systems using UPPAAL .
InFormal Approaches to Testing of Software , Linz, Austria, September 21 2004. Lecture Notes in
Computer Science.
21. M. Krichen and S. Tripakis. Black-box Conformance Testing for Real-Time Systems. In Model
Checking Software: 11th International SPIN Workshop , volume LNCS 2989. Springer, april 2004.
22. D. Mandrioli, S. Morasca, and A. Morzenti. Generating Test Cases for Real-Time Systems from Logic
Speciﬁcations. ACM Transactions on Computer Systems , 13(4):365–398, 1995.
23. M. Mikucionis. T-U PPAAL web page. http://www.cs.aau.dk/˜marius/tuppaal/ .
24. M. Mikucionis, K.G. Larsen, and B. Nielsen. Online on-the-ﬂy testing of real-time systems. Technical
Report RS-03-49, Basic Research In Computer Science (BRICS), December 2003.
25. M. Mikucionis, B. Nielsen, and K.G. Larsen. Real-time system testing on-the-ﬂy. In the 15th Nordic
Workshop on Programming Theory , number 34 in B, pages 36–38, Turku, Finland, October 29–31
2003. ˚Abo Akademi, Department of Computer Science, Finland. Abstracts.
26. M. Mikucionis and E. Sasnauskaite. On-the-ﬂy testing using U PPAAL. Master’s thesis, Department
of Computer Science, Aalborg University, Denmark, June 2003.
27. B. Nielsen and A. Skou. Automated Test Generation from Timed Automata. In TACAS 2001 - Tools
and Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis of Systems , pages 343–357, April 2001.
28. J. Peleska, P. Amthor, S. Dick, O. Meyer, M. Siegel, and C. Zahlten. Testing Reactive Real-Time
Systems. In Material for the School – 5th International School and Symposium on Formal Techniques
in Real-Time and Fault-Tolerant Systems (FTRTFT’98) , 1998. Lyngby, Denmark.
29. S. Tripakis. Fault Diagnosis for Timed Automata. In Formal Techniques in Real-Time and Fault
Tolerant Systems (FTRTFT’02) , volume LNCS 2469. Springer, 2002.
30. J. Springintveld, F. Vaandrager, and P.R. D’Argenio. Testing Timed Automata. Theoretical Computer
Science , 254(1-2):225–257, March 2001.
31. T.A. Henzinger and Z. Manna and A. Pnueli. What good are digital clocks? In Werner Kuich, editor,
Automata, Languages and Programming, 19th International Colloquium, ICALP92, Vienna, Austria ,
volume 623 of LNCS , pages 545–558. Springer, july 1992.
32. J. Tretmans. Testing concurrent systems: A formal approach. In J.C.M Baeten and S. Mauw, edi-
tors, CONCUR’99 – 10thInt. Conference on Concurrency Theory , volume 1664 of Lecture Notes in
Computer Science , pages 46–65. Springer-Verlag, 1999.
33. J. Tretmans and A. Belinfante. Automatic testing with formal methods. In EuroSTAR’99: 7thEu-
ropean Int. Conference on Software Testing, Analysis & Review , Barcelona, Spain, November 8–12,
1999. EuroStar Conferences, Galway, Ireland.
34. V . Diekert, P. Gastin, A. Petit. Removing epsilon-Transitions in Timed Automata. In 14th Annual Sym-
posium on Theoretical Aspects of Computer Science, STACS 1997 , pages 583–594, L¨ ubeck, Germany,
February 1997. LNCS, V ol. 1200, Springer.
35. R. de Vries, J. Tretmans, A. Belinfante, J. Feenstra, L. Feijs, S. Mauw, N. Goga, L. Heerink, and A. de
Heer. Cˆ ote de resyste in P ROGRESS . In STW Technology Foundation, editor, P ROGRESS 2000 –
Workshop on Embedded Systems , pages 141–148, Utrecht, The Netherlands, October 2000.
36. R.G. de Vries and J. Tretmans. On-the-ﬂy conformance testing using S PIN.Software Tools for Tech-
nology Transfer , 2(4):382–393, March 2000.
37. Wang Yi, Paul Pettersson, and Mats Daniels. Automatic Veriﬁcation of Real-Time Communicating
Systems By Constraint-Solving. In Dieter Hogrefe and Stefan Leue, editors, Proc. of the 7 thInt. Conf.
on Formal Description Techniques , pages 223–238. North–Holland, 1994.
