--- Page 1 ---
Aalborg Universitet
Statistical Model Checking for Finite-Set Model Predictive Control Converters
A Tutorial on Modeling and Performance Verification
Novak, Mateja; Nyman, Ulrik; Dragicevic, Tomislav; Blaabjerg, Frede
Published in:
I E E E Industrial Electronics Magazine
DOI (link to publication from Publisher):
10.1109/MIE.2019.2916232
Publication date:
2019
Document Version
Accepted author manuscript, peer reviewed version
Link to publication from Aalborg University
Citation for published version (APA):
Novak, M., Nyman, U., Dragicevic, T., & Blaabjerg, F. (2019). Statistical Model Checking for Finite-Set Model
Predictive Control Converters: A Tutorial on Modeling and Performance Verification. I E E E Industrial
Electronics Magazine, 13(3), 6-15. Article 8845791. https://doi.org/10.1109/MIE.2019.2916232
General rights
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright owners
and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
            - Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the public portal for the purpose of private study or research.
            - You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit-making activity or commercial gain
            - You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the public portal -
Take down policy
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us at vbn@aub.aau.dk providing details, and we will remove access to
the work immediately and investigate your claim.
Downloaded from vbn.aau.dk on: April 01, 2026

--- Page 2 ---
IEEE INDUSTRIAL ELECTRONICS MAGAZINE 1
Application of Statistical Model Checking
Methods to Finite-Set-MPC Controlled
Converters: Modeling and Performance
Veriﬁcation
Abstract
Statistical model checking (SMC) is used as a method for checking the system behavior in all
possible scenarios and it has been successfully implemented in embedded automotive systems, sensor
networks, aeronautics and communication systems for solving the problems that were beyond the abilities
of the traditional formal techniques. Using this method the system is simulated for a ﬁnite number of
times and afterwards the samples are used for hypothesis testing. We will demonstrate how the area
of application can also be extended to power electronics systems, particular how this method can be
used to check the performance of Finite-Set controlled power electronic converters. The performance
of Finite-Set controlled power electronic converters is usually assessed using multiple simulations or
experiments. Because only an executable system model is needed to apply the method, SMC is most
similar to multiple simulations approach. However, it can also provide the reliability of the procedure
and modeling of the stochastic system components. For example: the load or grid conditions have
a stochastic behavior and in order to check the transient system behavior they can’t be modeled as
deterministic components. The veriﬁcation needs to provide the evidence that the control algorithm can
quickly adjust to the new conditions in the system, provide a fast response and stay within the limits
prescribed by the standards. Using SMC the probability of the system staying within these limits can be
assessed. A detailed modeling procedure of the converter system components and design considerations
are given in the paper. The results interpretation is explained using the UPPAAL SMC toolbox. To
evaluate the correctness of created model in UPPAAL SMC the behavior of the system during steady
state conditions is also compared to the equivalent Simulink model and the experimental results, before
the SMC is performed.
Index Terms
Controller performance, DC-AC power conversion, ﬁnite control set, predictive control, power
electronics, statistical model checking.

--- Page 3 ---
IEEE INDUSTRIAL ELECTRONICS MAGAZINE 2
I. I NTRODUCTION
Model checking is a very powerful technique that is used to debug complex system structures
like embedded controllers, network protocols or hardware components. Any system that has
states and transitions between states can be analyzed using a model checker. With a model
checker a series of events that would lead to an error state can quickly be identiﬁed. Therefore,
the controller code can be redesigned before the implementation and a possible damage can
be prevented. U PPAAL is one of the integrated tool environments used to model and analyze
the behavior of the systems. The tool is available for free for non-commercial applications in
academia [1], [2]. U PPAAL tools are all based on variants of Timed Automata (TA). With a TA,
a timed behavior of various systems can be modeled and analyzed. However, when traditional
numerical approaches are used, the size of the problem is exponentially increasing with the
number of inputs i.e we are facing the problem of state space explosion. In U PPAAL SMC
this was solved with introduction of the Statistical Model Checking (SMC) and Priced Timed
Automata (PTAs). SMC is well-known in the ﬁeld of sensor networks, communication protocols,
aeronautics, embedded automotive systems and biology systems [3]–[12]. Power electronics
converter systems are a new application area for SMC but nevertheless very promising, as also
in this area there are some problems that are not solvable using the well-known traditional
methods [13], [14].
In this tutorial we will demonstrate how SMC can be used to analyze the performance of
a Finite-Set MPC controlled converter. MPC is still in the need of ﬁnding the analytical tools
and methods to improve the design process, verify the performance and the stability [15]–[18].
Linear controllers can rely on well-known matured methods for optimal design, performance and
stability veriﬁcation and this is the reason why many power electronics engineers still prefer these
controllers over the MPC based control algorithms. Performance veriﬁcation methods must prove
that the control algorithm can handle the disturbances in the system and keep the deviations of the
controlled variables from the references at a minimum. In recent publications the performance
of the Finite-Set MPC was mostly assessed by running multiple simulations or experiments
[19]–[21]. The simulations can be performed in parallel and are in theory less time consuming
then experiments, however they are missing the reliability of the procedure. Errors could remain
undetected as there is no guarantee that a ﬁnite number of experiments can cover all possible
scenarios. On the other hand, if we look into the Finite-Set MPC stability assessment, most

--- Page 4 ---
IEEE INDUSTRIAL ELECTRONICS MAGAZINE 3
relevant progress was presented by the authors in [22], [23] where Lyapunov stability criteria
is used to asses the asymptotically stability under speciﬁc constraints. This method still needs
some further research in order to be applicable to all applications and classes of converters [17].
In our work we are focusing on the performance veriﬁcation and through the sections of this
paper we will analyze the case of a stand-alone voltage source converter during transient load
changes. This paper is a part of the most recent research in applying SMA approach to the power
electronics systems. The hardest task of the approach is the modeling procedure of the power
electronics systems so the system will be suitable for use in a SMC software. Because the timed
automata structures are not usually used in power electronics applications, it is important for
the reader to understand how he can transfer the behavior of a speciﬁc component like a power
electronics converter to a timed automaton behavior. Therefore, a lot of attention will be put on
the detailed analysis of the modeling procedure and design considerations.
The structure of the paper is as follows. In Section II we will give an introduction to SMC and
the tools used to perform the analysis. A simple timed automata structure which is used to model
the system components in the SMC software will be explained. Next section will illustrate how
using the timed automata structures, the power electronic system can be modeled in U PPAAL .
In Section V it is explained how performance veriﬁcation using the created U PPAAL model is
performed. In the end conclusions and future research aspects are given.
II. S TATISTICAL MODEL CHECKING
Within computer science, formal methods is a term generally used for analysis methods with
a solid mathematical underpinning. Formal methods can provide guarantees that a system has
certain properties. A group of formal methods that are often used to analyze software systems
is model checking. Model checking suffers from a problem known as state space explosion,
namely that the size of the state space that needs to be checked grows exponentially with the
size of the model that is used. In many cases this has prevented classical model checking from
being used on industrial sized systems.
Statistical model checking [24] is a technique that tries to solve this problem by applying
statistical instead of exact analysis of the models in question. Statistical model checking is also
known as Monte Carlo simulation and is especially well suited for probabilistic and stochastic
models [25]. Statistical model checking is used in aeronautics and embedded automotive systems,

--- Page 5 ---
IEEE INDUSTRIAL ELECTRONICS MAGAZINE 4
sensor networks, and communication systems to provide solutions to problems that are beyond
the abilities of classical formal techniques [4], [5], [26].
Statistical model checking consists of performing enough independent simulations of the
behavior of the model in order to gain a statistically valid result that predicts the behavior.
Statistical model checking does not provide 100% guarantees for the properties of the system.
On the other hand, the conﬁdence of the results can be increased arbitrarily. If a larger degree of
certainty is necessary, more experiments can be performed. The number of simulations increases
linearly with the certainty and sub-linearly in the size of the model. Statistical model checking
also naturally incorporates discrete and non-linear phenomena in the same model. The fact that
the certainty of the technique can be scaled also means that it can be used to explore new
concepts and approaches fast by setting a lower conﬁdence level.
III. SMC TOOLS
In this paper we use the tool U PPAAL SMC, but there are other tools which can perform
Statistical Model Checking. The paper Statistical Model Checking: An Overview [27] from 2010
provides a good introduction to the area. Landscape of probabilistic tools [25] provides an
overview of the different types of probabilistic models, but focuses on other numerical methods
of analyzing such models.
A relatively new tool, S TORM , from 2016 aims at both high performance and versatility
[28], [29]. It aims at being a toolbox of reusable modules such that new functionality can be
implemented quickly. The paper Comparative Analysis of Statistical Model Checking Tools [30]
provides a thorough comparison of ﬁve different SMC tools with a starting point in their appli-
cation to systems biology. The tools surveyed in this paper are PLASMA-Lab [31], PRISM [32],
MC2 [33], MRMC [34] and Ymer [35]. These tools support different probabilistic models. For
instance PRISM can analyze the following probabilistic models: discrete-time Markov chains
(DTMCs), continuous-time Markov chains (CTMCs), Markov decision processes (MDPs), proba-
bilistic automata (PAs) and probabilistic timed automata (PTAs). The modeling formalism of U P-
PAAL SMC, Stochastic Timed Automata, can express as much as both DTMC and CTMC [36].
The expressive power of the modeling language of U PPAAL SMC is sufﬁcient to describe
the types of models needed for this paper, but the main reason for choosing the U PPAAL SMC
tool suite is the direct collaboration with the research group behind the tool. This enables a

--- Page 6 ---
IEEE INDUSTRIAL ELECTRONICS MAGAZINE 5
deep understanding of how to use the tool and the potential future optimizations of the tool and
models.
A.UPPAAL SMC
The family of U PPAAL tools are all based on variants of Timed Automata [36]. Timed
Automata is a mathematical rigorously deﬁned formalism for specifying the timed behavior
of systems, which is described by example in the following section. A more recent development
in the analysis of Timed Automata models is the introduction of SMC. These methods allow a
precise modeling of dynamic aspects of models in the form of a Network of Stochastic Timed
Automata. For a formal deﬁnition of Networks of Stochastic Timed Automata we refer the reader
to [36]. U PPAAL SMC is an integrated modeling and veriﬁcation tool which can be used to create
models consisting of several Stochastic Timed Automata. It contains a graphical editor as well as
a simulator. It also contains a veriﬁcation part in which one can test statistical hypotheses about
the current model. Apart from the hypothesis testing it is also possible to obtain many different
types of graphs describing the behavior of the system. Such graphs are extremely important in
practice when constructing the system models.
More information about SMC and U PPAAL SMC can be found in [37].
B. Timed Automaton Model
Timed automata were introduced in early 1990s by Raajeev Alur and David Dill [38], and
were very quickly accepted as a very convenient formalism for modeling and analyzing real-time
systems. In Fig. 1 a simple TA model in U PPAAL SMC is presented. Three locations can be
identiﬁed: Init,State 1and State 2.Initis the initial and committed location of the TA, which
means the transition to the location State 1has the highest priority and the TA will immediately
make the transition. xis a special type of a variable called clock , whose domain consists of
non-negative real numbers. When an automaton is waiting in one of the locations and the time
is passing, then the value of its clocks are increasing. Each time unit models 1 sin the real
world. All locations are assigned with a value of the Output variable and an invariant x <= 10,
which deﬁnes the maximum time the TA can stay in this location. The transition edges between
the locations also have their guards x >= 5deﬁning the minimum time that has to pass before the
TA can make the transition to the next location. When the transition will occur is not predeﬁned,
it is random and all clock values between 5<=x<= 10 have an equal probability to trigger the

--- Page 7 ---
IEEE INDUSTRIAL ELECTRONICS MAGAZINE 6
Fig. 1: Simple Timed Automaton model in U PPAAL SMC.
transition i.e. we have an uniform distribution for all clock values. U PPAAL SMC also offers the
ability to use a custom probability function. If not deﬁned differently, the distribution is always
uniform. Because of the ability to randomly change the location, the simulation runs will have
a different clock value triggering the transition. In this way we can observe how the system
behaves under different conditions.
The processes in U PPAAL SMC can be synchronized through broadcast channels. The edge
that has the synchronization label e.g. Start !will emit the broadcast on channel Start if the guard
on the edge is satisﬁed. Afterwards all the edges with the receiving synchronization label Start ?
will synchronize with the emitting process.
IV. M ODELING THE SYSTEM IN UPPAAL SMC
The modeling approach will be presented on a stand-alone standard voltage source converter
for a UPS application. First the system model is presented to identify the components that
afterwards need to be modeled in U PPAAL SMC. Afterwards the components are explained in
more detail. The whole modeling approach in UPPAAL SMC is very modular and can easily
be adapted to different converter topologies or load types. Every model component can simply
be exported and imported to other system models as a template.
A. System model
In Fig. 2 the following system components can be identiﬁed:
2-level voltage source converter
LC output ﬁlter
Load

--- Page 8 ---
IEEE INDUSTRIAL ELECTRONICS MAGAZINE 7
Predictive 
model
Cost 
function (4)vc,abc(k), 
if,abc (k), 
io,abc(k)
8Sabc (k)CfCf
Lf
Lf
Lf
a
b
c
vc,abcioa
iob
iocifa
ifb
ifc
vc, abc*(k+1)
VDC
Lload
Lload
LloadRloadRload
Rloadvo,abc
vi,abc
αβ/abc
 min(g)8
CfRL load
LC filter2-level VSC
Fig. 2: Simpliﬁed scheme of the system model.
Measurement system
Control algorithm
As mentioned in the previous section; to model the system in U PPAAL SMC we need to describe
the behavior of this model using Timed Automata. To do that, we ﬁrst need to analyze what
drives each of the model components. Let’s start ﬁrst from the converter model. It is very easy to
imagine this component as a TA. The states of this TA are the switching states of the converter.
For the presented topology this means we have eight switching states, e.g. for a 3L-level Neutral
Point Clamped converter this will be 27. The next question that needs to be answered is what
triggers the location changes in this TA? This is of course the control algorithm and in this model
Finite-Set MPC algorithm is used. The core of the Finite-Set MPC algorithm is a discretized
system model which is used to predict the future behavior of the system [18], [39]. In this case
the model is deﬁned through differential equations of the ﬁlter current and the capacitor voltage:
if(t) =Cfdvc(t)
dt+io(t) (1)
vi(t) =Lfdif(t)
dt+vc(t) (2)
io(t) = 1
Rload
Lloaddio(t)
dt vc(t)
(3)
whereifandioare the inductor and load currents, vcandviare ﬁlter capacitor and

--- Page 9 ---
IEEE INDUSTRIAL ELECTRONICS MAGAZINE 8
inverter output voltages, LfandCfare ﬁlter inductance and capacitance. Euler forward method
is used to discretize (1) and (2) as presented in [40]. For every time sample new measurements of
thevc,ifandioare acquired by the measurement system. Using the discretized equations
predicted values are calculated for all 8 possible converter switching states. These values and the
reference values are then used in the cost function. The cost function usually has the form of the
square of Euclidean distance between the reference signal and the prediction of the controlled
variable. A good overview of the cost function design depending on the application is presented
in [15]. For this system, the cost function suggested for the UPS applications in [40] will be
used:
g= (v
c vP
c)2+ (v
c vP
c)2+dgd+swg2
sw (4)
gd= (iP
f io+Cf!v
c)2+ (iP
f io Cf!v
c)2(5)
gsw=X
x=a,b,cjSx(k) Sx(k 1)j(6)
wherev
candv
crepresent the real and imaginary parts of the reference voltage vector, vP
c
andvP
cthe real and imaginary parts of the predicted voltage vector, iP
fandiP
fthe real and
imaginary parts of the predicted ﬁlter current vector, ioandiothe real and imaginary parts of
the measured load current. Weighting factors dandswdeﬁne the secondary objectives. For
the design of the weighting factors an approach based on artiﬁcial neural networks can be used
as presented in [41]. Sx(k)is the new potential switching state and Sx(k 1)is the applied
switching state from the previous switching instant. From the eight converter output vectors the
one which produced the minimal cost function value is then selected and applied.
The load used in the system is an inductive load and will have two possible values of the
resistance i.e. the TA will have two locations: high load and low load. Parameter values, which
match the experimental UPS set-up are shown in Table I. In the next subsections components
of the U PPAAL model from Fig. 3 will be explained in detail.
B. Physical system
In Section III-B a simple TA model was introduced with a clock x, which was triggering
the location transitions. If we want to model the converter system it doesn’t make much sense
to use the time to trigger the transitions, especially if we know that in U PPAAL SMC we can

--- Page 10 ---
IEEE INDUSTRIAL ELECTRONICS MAGAZINE 9
TABLE I: System parameters.
Parameter Value
DC-link voltage ( Vdc) 700 V
Converter power rating ( P) 18 kV A
Reference voltage and frequency ( Vref,fref) 400 V , 50 Hz
Output ﬁlter inductance and capacitance ( Lf,Cf) 2.4mH, 25 F
Load (Rnom,Lnom) 48 
, 40 mH
Sampling time ( Ts) 25 s
Weighting factors ( d,sw) 0.4, 0.5
Sampler
measurements VinVc, If, IoSimulation 
OutputTick
Physical System
Controller
Fig. 3: Block scheme of the system model in U PPAAL .
deﬁne the behavior of the clocks trough differential equations. Then why not declare the system
voltages and currents to be the global clocks in our TA network using the differential equations?
Fig. 4a shows how this is done in U PPAAL SMC. It is easy to notice that these are the same
equations as in (1), (2) and (3). The equations are multiplied by the global factor (GF) = 10 6
so the system will have the same dynamics like an equivalent simulation model with sample
time ofTS= 1s.
C. Controller and Tick model
The Controller model can be observed in Fig. 4d and it is a combination of converter and
control algorithm component from Fig. 2. We can observe that the values of variables Vinalpha

--- Page 11 ---
IEEE INDUSTRIAL ELECTRONICS MAGAZINE 10
andVinbeta , which represent the imaginary and real part of the converter voltage, are changing
depending on the TA location ( v0-v7). The TA has three more locations which are committed:
Init,right and left. For the TA to transition from the ( v0-v7) to right a synchronization signal tick
needs to be received from the Tick model Fig. 4e. Tick model is a very simple TA with only one
location and it generates the synchronization signal tickevery 25s. When the TA reaches the
location right it will call two functions. The functions are written in C-like imperative language.
Function calc cost() calculates the cost function values for all converter output voltages like it
was explained in Section IV-A. The values are forwarded to the minControl which minimizes
the cost function and selects the next TA location.
D. Sampler model
The task of the Sampler model in Fig. 4c is to take measurements of the voltages and currents
needed for calculating the predictions in the calc cost() function of the Controller model. Every
25s the task is repeated except for the initial time step which is shorter. This modiﬁcation was
made to ﬁt the behavior of the TA model to the simulation model in Simulink. By comparing
the waveforms it was noticed that the Simulink model added an approximately 1 s delay in
the model.
E. Load model
As it can be seen in the Fig. 4b the Load model TA has one local clock variable yand three
locations: Init,LowLoad and HighLoad . The invariants y < 3000 andy > 2000 transition guards have
been assigned to the the locations. The transition trigger has a uniform distribution for the clock
values between 2000< y < 3000 therefore in each simulation run a different clock value will
trigger the change of the Rload value.
F . Simulation output
The last component of the model is Simulation output in Fig. 4f and it is used to calculate
the diffrence between the reference and measured voltage and the simple moving average of the
diffrence. The following are calculated in the functions calc diff() androlling average() :
di= (v
c vm
c)2+ (v
c vm
c)2(7)
SMA =SMAprev+diM
n diM n
n(8)

--- Page 12 ---
IEEE INDUSTRIAL ELECTRONICS MAGAZINE 11
(a) Physical system.
(b) Load.
(c) Sampler.
(d) Controller.
(e) Simulation output.
(f) Tick.
Fig. 4: System components in U PPAAL model.
wherev
candv
care the real and imaginary parts of reference voltage vector, vm
candvm
care
the values of measured output voltage, and n= 10 is the number of sample subsets. The TA
has one local clock variable zwhich is ensuring that the di andSMA are calculated every 1
s. Two transition edges with different guards can be noticed. Only the left edge is calculating
thedi andSMA from the z >=SAMPLE START , this modiﬁcation was made to exclude the
initial transient from the calculation.

--- Page 13 ---
IEEE INDUSTRIAL ELECTRONICS MAGAZINE 12
10 20 30 40
Time (ms)-400-2000200400Voltage (V)vavbvc
(a) Capacitor voltage in U PPAAL SMC model.
10 20 30 40
Time (ms)-400-2000200400Voltage (V)vavbvc
(b) Capacitor voltage in Simulink model.
(c) Capacitor voltage in experimental set-up.
0 0.5 1 1.5 2
Time (s) 10-32468Applied voltage vector nr.Simulink
Uppaal SMC
(d) Selected voltage vectors in Simulink and U PPAAL
model.
Fig. 5: Design veriﬁcation.
G. Wind power and PV applications
The application of the SMA approach can also be extended to other applications which feature
stochastic components. Energy production from the renewable energy sources like wind power
plants and photovoltaics (PV) are a typical example of this behavior. For example: the PV
plant can be an automaton with states that have different solar irradiation values. What in the
case of UPS application has not been implemented, but mentioned in the Section III-B is that
there is a possibility to also set the probabilities of the transitions. Therefore, we can put higher
probabilities for some irradiation values. In a similar way, an automaton for the wind power plant
can be designed, where different wind speed values can be assigned to the automaton states.
When we perform the statistical model checking approach with the automaton’s that have the
stochastic behavior, the SMC software will need to perform several simulation runs and in each
run we will have a different irradiation or wind proﬁle. Therefore, we would obtain information
about our system performance also during this different energy production situations.

--- Page 14 ---
IEEE INDUSTRIAL ELECTRONICS MAGAZINE 13
V. P ERFORMANCE VERIFICATION
UPPAAL SMC allows the user to visualize the values of variables and clocks in the simulation
runs and thus give insight to the user as which properties would be interesting to check using the
model checker. Using this feature we can easily check the behavior of the system like in other
available simulation software for power electronics. We used this feature to check the design
by comparing the simulation output in the steady state to the equivalent Simulink model and
also to the measurements obtained from the experimental set-up. For the complete guide on
how to use U PPAAL SMC the reader is refereed to [36]. The procedure of modeling the system
and performing the veriﬁcation has also been illustrated in the ﬂowchart presented in the Fig.6.
In needs to be noticed that SMC is not a replacement of the traditional simulation methods
performed in simulation tools like Simulink, moreover it is a speciﬁc tool that is used to check
the performance of the controllers in the stochastic environments. The modeling procedure in
Simulink is of course simpler as models of components are available in the Power Sim libraries,
while when the user ﬁrst starts using the SMC software he needs to model the components from
zero.
A. Design veriﬁcation
The syntax used in U PPAAL SMC to perform the simulation of the model is following:
simulate N [<=bound] fE1,...EkgwhereN2Nindicates the number of simulation
runs, bound is the time bound on the simulations and E1,...Ek are expressions that are mon-
itored during the simulation run and afterwards visualized. For our system the most interesting
expressions to monitor are following:
simulate [<=60000] fV_mes_alpha, V_mes_beta, V_ref_alpha(),
V_ref_beta()g
simulate [<=60000] fi_mes_load_alpha, i_mes_load_beta g
simulate [<=60000] fdiff, avgg
The ﬁrst expression was used to compare the U PPAAL model to the Simulink model and
experimental set-up. The results can be observed in Fig. 5 As it can be seen the U PPAAL model
features the same performance as the Simulink model and it is also matching the experimental
results. Now that the created model has been veriﬁed we can proceed to the query formulations.

--- Page 15 ---
IEEE INDUSTRIAL ELECTRONICS MAGAZINE 14
Define the parameters of the 
system and global clock variables
Error in syntax?
Check the reported error 
and modify the model
ANoYesA
Do the results 
represent the desired 
system behaviour?
Debug the model to  find the error
Analyze the resultsYesNoIdentify the discret e states of the TA
Define the transi tions between the 
states (set guards  and invariants) 
and synchronization channels for 
the TA
Run the syntax checkDefine the simula tion query in the 
Verifier and run  the simulation
Define the hypothesis query 
and set the confidence level. 
Start the verifi cation of the 
query
Fig. 6: Modeling and veriﬁcation procedure in U PPAAL SMC.
B. Query formulation
Using the Veriﬁer tool in U PPAAL SMC we can get an answer to three types of questions
[42]:
Probability Estimation - it will give a probability conﬁdence interval for which the property
in question is true (e.g 0.81-0.91)
Hypothesis Testing - it will give a 0 or 1 depending if the probability of the property is
lower or larger than the deﬁned threshold
Probability Comparison - it will give a 0 or 1 if asked question is false or true
The concept is the following: each time the system is simulated, it is encoded as a Bernoulli
random variable that is true if the property in the asked question is satisﬁed or false otherwise.

--- Page 16 ---
IEEE INDUSTRIAL ELECTRONICS MAGAZINE 15
Afterwards, a statistical algorithm will analyze the observations. For the ﬁrst question an esti-
mation algorithm that resembles the Monte Carlo simulation is used to give an answer and for
the second and third question sequential hypothesis testing is used. For our model it is most
interesting to use the ﬁrst question. However, before starting with the testing we must deﬁne
probability uncertainty . The lower the value, the higher is the reliability of the procedure
but on the other hand more simulation runs will be necessary. The number of necessary runs is
automatically calculated and updated with each simulation run by U PPAAL SMC. The probability
conﬁdence interval of the di staying below 5% can be estimated using the following query:
Pr[<= 44000]([] (t<SAMPLE_START kdiff<0.05 *325)
The same principle is used to check the probability of SMA staying below the deﬁned threshold.
FS-MPC performance relies on the correct system model so it would also be important to test
the robustness of the algorithm to parameter uncertainties i.e. overestimations and underestima-
tions of the model parameters like ﬁlter values.
C. Result interpretation
An example of query testing can be seen in Table II. The simulation runs were run with a zero
parameter uncertainty, with 30% overestimated ﬁlter values and with 30% underestimated ﬁlter
values. The probability uncertainty was set to 0.05. During the simulations the value of the load
was stochastically changing from Rload= 48 
to 100 
, the value of Lload= 40 mH remained
constant in this example. Thus, Rload= 48 
is considerer as a nominal load and Rload= 100 
corresponds to low loading conditions of the converter. The values in the last column of the table
represent the number of simulation runs that were performed. A low number of runs indicates a
high probability of the query being true or false. From the obtained results we can see that the
control algorithm has good tracking performance with overestimated ﬁlter values, however the
probability for the di andSMA to stay under the the 5% when underestimated values are used
is extremely low. Even for 12% it is only around 50%. From this observations we can conclude
how much the overestimated system values in the predictive model will negatively effect the
performance during the transient load change. The performance was also evaluated for lower
voltage reference frequencies. No signiﬁcant degradation of the reference tracking performance
was noticed for parameter uncertainty 0% and 30%. We can repeat these tests also for different
values of weighting factors to see how the performance will be effected. For a different topology

--- Page 17 ---
IEEE INDUSTRIAL ELECTRONICS MAGAZINE 16
TABLE II: Query probability results obtained from U PPAAL SMC toolbox.
QueryParameter
uncertaintyProbability Number of runs
di<5% 0 0.901 - 0.999 54
di<5% 30% 0.902- 1 36
di<5% -30% 0 - 0.097 36
di<12% -30% 0.347 - 0.447 386
SMA<5% 0 0.902 - 1 36
SMA<5% 30% 0.902 - 1 36
SMA<5% -30% 0 - 0.097 36
SMA<12% -30% 0.377 - 0.476 394
or application other performance metrics would be interesting to investigate e.g. the neutral point
balancing in NPC topologies.
VI. C ONCLUSIONS
In the paper, it was presented how statistical model checking can be used to test the perfor-
mance of Finite-Set MPC controlled power electronics converter in the U PPAAL SMC toolbox.
Due to the nature of the FS-MPC algorithm it is easy to visualize the whole system as a
network of timed automata, which are used in U PPAAL SMC to model the converter system.
The system modeling using the time automata is the most difﬁcult part of the approach but due
to very modular approach of modeling in U PPAAL , it is very easy to adapt the model to different
converter topologies or load types. The model can be used to test the system performance under
transients by modeling the components e.g. electric load, as stochastic automaton. By deﬁning
an expression that will track the difference between the reference and the measured values in a
system with a stochastic load automaton, the control algorithm response to many different system
conditions can easily be tested. The whole procedure of testing the hypothesis in U PPAAL SMC
is straightforward and automatic as the program uses built-in algorithms to calculate the number
of necessary simulations runs to calculate the probability of the hypothesis being true for a
user-deﬁned uncertainty.

--- Page 18 ---
IEEE INDUSTRIAL ELECTRONICS MAGAZINE 17
SMC can not provide a 100% guarantee for the properties of the system, as the higher the
conﬁdence is set the more simulation samples need to be collected. This is of course time
consuming as the number of simulations increases linearly with the level of the conﬁdence and
sub-linearly with the size of the model. Therefore, it is evident that multi-level topologies or
modular multi-cell converters, which have a high number of possible switching states, i.e a larger
system size will also have an increased simulation time. An interesting research challenge would
be to also model a grid-connected model of the converter with a stochastic grid automaton.
Microgrid systems are also a potential application area, where also the communication links
between the converters could be modeled. In general, every system that has states and transitions
between the states is suitable for the SMC approach. One must notice that the procedure in this
form cannot be used to verify the stability of the control algorithm, but with a further development
of the procedure this could also be accomplished.
REFERENCES
[1] F. Vaandrager, Chapter 1 A First Introduction to Uppaal . Quasimodo Handbook, 2014.
[2] Statistical model-checker - new SMC extension of UPPAAL. [Online]. Available: http://people.cs.aau.dk/adavid/smc/
[3] P. Zuliani, A. Platzer, and E. M. Clarke, “Bayesian statistical model checking with application to Simulink/Stateﬂow
veriﬁcation,” Formal Methods in System Design , vol. 43, no. 2, pp. 338–367, 2013.
[4] A. Boudjadar, A. David, J. Kim, K. Larsen, M. Mikucionis, U. Nyman, and A. Skou, “Statistical and exact schedulability
analysis of hierarchical scheduling systems,” Science of Computer Programming , vol. 127, pp. 103–130, 5 2016.
[5] K. G. Larsen, M. Miku ˇcionis, M. Mu ˜niz, J. Srba, and J. H. Taankvist, Online and Compositional Learning of Controllers
with Application to Floor Heating . Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2016, pp. 244–259.
[6] A. Basu, S. Bensalem, M. Bozga, B. Delahaye, and A. Legay, “Statistical abstraction and model-checking of large
heterogeneous systems,” International Journal on Software Tools for Technology Transfer , vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 53–72,
Feb 2012.
[7] E. Clarke, A. Donz ´e, and A. Legay, “Statistical model checking of mixed-analog circuits with an application to a third
order   modulator,” in Hardware and Software: Veriﬁcation and Testing , H. Chockler and A. J. Hu, Eds. Berlin,
Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2009, pp. 149–163.
[8] E. M. Clarke and P. Zuliani, “Statistical model checking for cyber-physical systems,” in Automated Technology for
Veriﬁcation and Analysis , T. Bultan and P.-A. Hsiung, Eds. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2011, pp.
1–12.
[9] J. Martins, A. Platzer, and J. Leite, “Statistical model checking for distributed probabilistic-control hybrid automata with
smart grid applications,” in Formal Methods and Software Engineering , S. Qin and Z. Qiu, Eds. Berlin, Heidelberg:
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2011, pp. 131–146.
[10] Q. Cappart, C. Limbr ´ee, P. Schaus, J. Quilbeuf, L. Traonouez, and A. Legay, “Veriﬁcation of interlocking systems using
statistical model checking,” in 2017 IEEE 18th International Symposium on High Assurance Systems Engineering (HASE) ,
Jan 2017, pp. 61–68.

--- Page 19 ---
IEEE INDUSTRIAL ELECTRONICS MAGAZINE 18
[11] J. Strnadel, “Predictability analysis of interruptible systems by statistical model checking,” IEEE Design Test , vol. 35,
no. 2, pp. 57–63, April 2018.
[12] T. Mancini, F. Mari, I. Melatti, I. Salvo, E. Tronci, J. K. Gruber, B. Hayes, M. Prodanovic, and L. Elmegaard,
“Parallel statistical model checking for safety veriﬁcation in smart grids,” in 2018 IEEE International Conference on
Communications, Control, and Computing Technologies for Smart Grids (SmartGridComm) , Oct 2018, pp. 1–6.
[13] M. Novak, U. M. Nyman, T. Dragicevic, and F. Blaabjerg, “Analytical design and performance validation of ﬁnite set
MPC regulated power converters,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron. , vol. 66, no. 3, pp. 2004–2014, March 2019.
[14] ——, “Statistical performance veriﬁcation of FCS-MPC applied to three level neutral point clamped converter,” in 2018
20th European Conference on Power Electronics and Applications (EPE’18 ECCE Europe) , Sep. 2018, pp. 1–10.
[15] S. Kouro, M. A. Perez, J. Rodriguez, A. M. Llor, and H. A. Young, “Model predictive control: MPC’s role in the evolution
of power electronics,” IEEE Ind. Electron. Mag. , vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 8–21, Dec 2015.
[16] S. Vazquez, J. I. Leon, L. G. Franquelo, J. Rodriguez, H. A. Young, A. Marquez, and P. Zanchetta, “Model predictive
control: A review of its applications in power electronics,” IEEE Ind. Electron. Mag. , vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 16–31, March
2014.
[17] S. Vazquez, J. Rodriguez, M. Rivera, L. G. Franquelo, and M. Norambuena, “Model predictive control for power converters
and drives: Advances and trends,” IEEE Tran. Ind. Electron. , vol. 64, no. 2, pp. 935–947, Feb 2017.
[18] V . Yaramasu and B. Wu, Model Predictive Control of Wind Energy Conversion Systems , ser. IEEE Press Series on Power
Engineering. Wiley, 2017.
[19] R. N. Fard, H. Nademi, and L. Norum, “Analysis of a modular multilevel inverter under the predicted current control
based on ﬁnite-control-set strategy,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Elect. Power Energy Convers. Syst , Oct 2013, pp. 1–6.
[20] J. Rodriguez, J. Pontt, C. A. Silva, P. Correa, P. Lezana, P. Cortes, and U. Ammann, “Predictive current control of a voltage
source inverter,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron. , vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 495–503, Feb 2007.
[21] H. A. Young, M. A. Perez, J. Rodriguez, and H. Abu-Rub, “Assessing ﬁnite-control-set model predictive control: A
comparison with a linear current controller in two-level voltage source inverters,” IEEE Ind. Electron. Mag. , vol. 8, no. 1,
pp. 44–52, March 2014.
[22] R. P. Aguilera and D. E. Quevedo, “On stability of ﬁnite control set MPC strategy for multicell converters,” in Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Ind. Technol. , March 2010, pp. 1277–1282.
[23] R. P. Aguilera and D. E. Quevedo, “On stability and performance of ﬁnite control set MPC for power converters,” in Proc.
Workshop PRECEDE , Oct 2011, pp. 55–62.
[24] K. G. Larsen and A. Legay, “Statistical model checking: Past, present, and future,” in Leveraging Applications of Formal
Methods, Veriﬁcation and Validation: Foundational Techniques - 7th International Symposium, ISoLA 2016, Imperial,
Corfu, Greece, October 10-14, 2016, Proceedings, Part I , 2016, pp. 3–15.
[25] J. Katoen, “The probabilistic model checking landscape,” in Proceedings of the 31st Annual ACM/IEEE Symposium on
Logic in Computer Science, LICS ’16, New York, NY, USA, July 5-8, 2016 , 2016, pp. 31–45.
[26] A. David, K. G. Larsen, A. Legay, and M. Miku ˇcionis, “Schedulability of herschel revisited using statistical model
checking,” Int. J. Softw. Tools Technol. Transf. , vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 187–199, April 2015.
[27] A. Legay, B. Delahaye, and S. Bensalem, “Statistical model checking: An overview,” in Runtime Veriﬁcation - First
International Conference, RV 2010, St. Julians, Malta, November 1-4, 2010. Proceedings , 2010, pp. 122–135.
[28] C. Dehnert, S. Junges, J. Katoen, and M. V olk, “The probabilistic model checker storm (extended abstract),” CoRR , vol.
abs/1610.08713, 2016.
[29] ——, “A storm is coming: A modern probabilistic model checker,” in Computer Aided Veriﬁcation - 29th International
Conference, CAV 2017, Heidelberg, Germany, July 24-28, 2017, Proceedings, Part II , 2017, pp. 592–600.

--- Page 20 ---
IEEE INDUSTRIAL ELECTRONICS MAGAZINE 19
[30] M. E. Bakir, M. Gheorghe, S. Konur, and M. Stannett, “Comparative analysis of statistical model checking tools,” in
Membrane Computing - 17th International Conference, CMC 2016, Milan, Italy, July 25-29, 2016, Revised Selected
Papers , 2016, pp. 119–135.
[31] A. Legay, S. Sedwards, and L. Traonouez, “Plasma lab: A modular statistical model checking platform,” in Leveraging
Applications of Formal Methods, Veriﬁcation and Validation: Foundational Techniques - 7th International Symposium,
ISoLA 2016, Imperial, Corfu, Greece, October 10-14, 2016, Proceedings, Part I , 2016, pp. 77–93.
[32] M. Kwiatkowska, G. Norman, and D. Parker, “PRISM 4.0: Veriﬁcation of probabilistic real-time systems,” in Proc. 23rd
International Conference on Computer Aided Veriﬁcation (CAV’11) , ser. LNCS, G. Gopalakrishnan and S. Qadeer, Eds.,
vol. 6806. Springer, 2011, pp. 585–591.
[33] R. Donaldson and D. Gilbert, “A monte carlo model checker for probabilistic LTL with numerical constraints,” University
of Glasgow, Department of Computing Science, Tech. Rep., 2008.
[34] J. Katoen, I. S. Zapreev, E. M. Hahn, H. Hermanns, and D. N. Jansen, “The ins and outs of the probabilistic model checker
MRMC,” Perform. Eval. , vol. 68, no. 2, pp. 90–104, 2011.
[35] H. L. S. Younes, “Ymer: A statistical model checker,” in Computer Aided Veriﬁcation, 17th International Conference, CAV
2005, Edinburgh, Scotland, UK, July 6-10, 2005, Proceedings , 2005, pp. 429–433.
[36] A. David, K. G. Larsen, A. Legay, M. Miku ˘cionis, and D. B. Poulsen, “Uppaal SMC tutorial,” Int. J. Softw. Tools Technol.
Transf. , vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 397–415, Aug. 2015.
[37] K. G. Larsen and A. Legay, On the Power of Statistical Model Checking . Springer International Publishing, 2016, pp.
843–862.
[38] R. Alur and D. L. Dill, “A theory of timed automata,” Theoretical Computer Science , vol. 126, pp. 183–235, 1994.
[39] J. Rodriguez and P. Cortes, Predictive Control of Power Converters and Electrical Drives , ser. Wiley - IEEE. Wiley,
2012.
[40] T. Dragicevic, “Model predictive control of power converters for robust and fast operation of AC microgrids,” IEEE Trans.
Power Electron. , vol. 33, no. 7, pp. 6304–6317, July 2018.
[41] T. Dragicevic and M. Novak, “Weighting factor design in model predictive control of power electronic converters: An
artiﬁcial neural network approach,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron. , no. Early Access, pp. 1–12, 2018.
[42] P. Bulychev, A. David, K. Larsen, M. Miku ˇcionis, D. Poulsen, A. Legay, and Z. Wang, “Uppaal-smc: Statistical model
checking for priced timed automata,” vol. 85. Open Publishing Association, 2012, pp. 1–16.
