--- Page 1 ---
Recent Innovations in Mechatronics (RIiM) Vol. 3. (2016) . No. 1 -2. 
 DOI: 10.17667/riim.2016.1 -2/9. 
 
 Simulation and Formal Verification for Improving 
Safety of PLC Programs  
 
Joel Galvão  
MEtRICs Research Center, University of Minho  
Campus of Azurém, 4800 -058 
Guimarães , Portugal  
 José Machado  
Mechanical Engineering Department,  
MEtRICs Research Center, Un iversity of Minho  
Campus of Azurém, 4800 -058 
Guimarães, Portugal  
jmachado@dem.uminho.pt
 
 
Abstract—The use of analysis techniques for improving 
quality of software for industrial controllers is widely used. 
Mainly Simulation and Formal Verification can be  used as 
complementary techniques improving dependability of 
mechatronic systems behavior. In this paper there are used 
Simulation and Formal Verification for guaranteeing safe 
software for Programmable Logic Controllers, mainly related 
with using Function  blocks of IEC 61131 -3 standard. For 
studying, simulating and verifying behavior of those blocks are 
used timed automata, as modeling formalism, and UPPAAL, as 
tool for simulation and Formal Verification purposes.  
Keywords —IEC 61131 -3, Simulation, Formal V erification, 
Dependable Mechatronic Systems  
I.  INTRODUCTION  
 
There are several techniques to analyses this type of 
systems, but Simula tion by MiL (Model -in-the-Loop)  and 
Formal Verification by Model Checking [1] two  possible 
methods to achieve the aim se cure command specif ication [2]. 
Same researchers believe that Simulation is considerably 
better because is possible to study if the developed c ode 
effectively perform the task needed, and if necessary realize 
same corrections according to the needs. Although was same 
disadvantages [3], such as, just a part of the domain of 
possible behaviours  of the controller is tested.  
One the other hand, the formal verification by Model 
Checking techniques make possible to test  if the developed 
system respond to the project specifications in all the domain 
of possible behaviours  of the controller, and the controller 
never reach a deadlock state, and is has been said that model 
checking is the only know method to ensure that the c ode is 
without any error  [4]. Neverth eless, was the need to use logic 
that same consider difficult to utilize and understand [5].  
The two techniques (Simulation by MiL and Formal 
Verification by Model Checking) the granularity of the models 
is very important . This fact leads to the objective of thi s 
research, that focuses on developing models for the behavior 
of the function blocks defined by the standard IEC 61 131 -3 [6],  taking into account a methodology that combines the 
advantages of Simul ation by MiL and Formal Verification by 
Model Checking using the same models, to allow a more 
careful safety analysis of the command specification  of PLC 
(Programmable Logic Controllers) .  
Considering simulation, one of the pioneers in this area is 
the wor k proposed by Baresi in 1997  [7]. There are same 
commercial software’s  like Arena and AutoMod, but this 
applications consider little about the logic behind the control 
therefor they cannot be effectively used to test command 
specifications  [8]. The paper presented by reference [9], that 
demonstrates a technique to simulate and visual verify, that 
begins wi th the code written in Ladder Diagram, one of the 
IEC 61 131 -3 languages, using finite state automata [10]. 
There are severa l works [7] [11] that use the formalism 
Discrete Event System Specification [12], this works try to 
reduce the time need to simulate a system. In [7] they present 
an inverse methodology that uses data from time -stamped 
signal history and a PLC input/output signal table extracted 
from the existing production system to create the simu lation 
models. In the other hand the article [11] demonst rate the 
advantages of using templates to generate de models.  
In the point of view of Formal  Verification by Model 
Checking , this method was first applied to control systems by 
Moon in 1992 [13]. This technique was them utilized by a 
great deal of authors, but the formalisms used to specify the  
system behavior, the method the  properties are written and the 
applications used are different [14][15] [16] [17] [18][19] 
The work group of reference [20] present investigation 
using NuSMV [21]. The properties are specified in 
computation tree logic [22] or Linear Temporal Logic [23] , 
and the  code is written in Structured Text , other of the IIEC 
61 131 -3 languages. The work focus on the modulation of 
time in a realistic manner, to accomplish that they developed 
models for the function block TON (Time ON delay) defined 
by the IEC 61 313 -3 standard [6].  
Other technique is proposed by [24], again using model 
checking bas ed in models created in BIP (Behavior, 

--- Page 2 ---
Recent Innovations in Mechatronics (RIiM) Vol. 3. (2016) . No. 1 -2. 
 DOI: 10.17667/riim.2016.1 -2/9. 
 
 Interactions, Priorities) [25]. In this article a re proposed 
models for the Program Organization Unit define by the IEC 
61 131 -3 [6] standard, o nce more with especial attention to the 
function block TON. To verify properties is used the D -Finder 
[26], that allow  detecting deadlock and other type of 
behaviours . This techniques do not consider time constraints, 
that turn the analyses limited [27]. 
The investigators in [28] propose a methodology that uses 
program code written in sequential function charts , another of 
the IEC 61 131 -3 languages, that is than converted to Timed 
Automata [29] and from the project specifications are 
formulated affirmations to verify in the models utilizing TCTL 
(Timed Computation Tree Logic) [30] (Fig. 1) .  All the 
process for the modulation  to the verification are realized on 
the application UPPAAL [31]. They propose a model for the 
function block TON, because they consider the modulation of 
the controller behaviour  has to  be as close as possible to what 
happens in the equipments . On the ot her hand reference [32] 
propose a technique to convert cod e writt en in Function 
Blocks Diagram to Timed Automata were they consider 
models for the Program Organization Units more particularly 
functions and function blocks.  
In this paper is considered a methodology to make safety 
analyses of command specification of industrial c ontrollers, 
more precisely PLC that tries to combine de advantages of 
simulation and formal verification, using to describe the 
behaviours  of mechatronic system the formalism timed 
automata in the application UPPAAL, as displayed in Fig. 1.  
 
 
Fig. 1.  Analyses methodology applied in this paper  
For this approach, it is considered the specification 
developed in SFC (Sequential Function Chart). Also, the 
methodology for creating the global model of the system in 
Timed Automata, for simulation  and form al verification 
purposes is proposed.  
In order to achieve the goals proposed for this work, this 
paper is organised as follows: section 2 proposes a case study, 
illustrating the approach and, also presents the formal 
controller’s specification taking into  account the intended 
behaviour for the system; section 3 deals with some work 
hypothesis, mainly concerning the translation of the 
specification t o timed automata, in order to achieve the task of simulation and formal verification , using the UPPAAL 
softwa re; and, finally, there are presented some conclusions 
and future work, in section 4.  
II. CASE STUDY  
A. Specification of the controller  
In this work, the automatic system used as case study is a 
car barrier, to be used in parking lot, schematically represented 
in Fig. 2. This automatic system is actuated by one motor with 
two directions of movement: one controls the movement with 
direction “up” (M_UP) and another controls the movement 
with direction “down” (M_D). Besides that, the system has a 
set of sensors: one  detects the presence of one car at a time 
(s1) and two other sensors detect the barrier position, “s_up” 
on the up position and “s_d” on the down 
position
 
Fig. 2.  Schematic representation of the car barrier, with respective sensors 
and a ctuators.  
The input are : the sensor “si” responsible  for detects 
presence of car ; the sensor “s_up” that detects the barrier in 
the up position up; and the sensor s_down that has the task to 
detect the down position of the barrier.  
In the other hand, the system was to output that  are the 
orders to open the barrier (M_UP), and to close it (M_D).  
The controller behavior are: when appears a car, the barrier 
must move up and when disappears the car, the barrier must 
move down. If, in some moment, a new car appears the barrier 
must go up and so on. This intended beha vior is described on 
the Fig. 2  formalized by a SFC.  
Consequently, when is no car detected in sensor the barrier 
must be closed (corresponding to down position) that 
corresponds to the initial position considered for the sy stem. 
This way, all the Boolean conditions associated to all the 
transitions of this model correspond to rising or falling edges 
of the mentioned sensors.  
It is intended that this specification be implemented in a 
PLC, which program will be written conside ring Ladder 
language and Functions blocks propo sed in IEC 61131 -3 [6] 
Because this work is devoted to the presentation and 
verification of the behavior correspondent to rising and falling 

--- Page 3 ---
Recent Innovations in Mechatronics (RIiM) Vol. 3. (2016) . No. 1 -2. 
 DOI: 10.17667/riim.2016.1 -2/9. 
 
 edges, this subject will be treated with focused special 
attention.  
 
Fig. 3.  Sequential Function Charts of the comportment described before.  
B. Translation of the controller specification to Ladder and 
Function blocks  
The translation of the presented specification, to PLC 
progr amming language defined in  [6], considers two distinct 
parts: one concerns the translation of the dynamics of the 
model according methodology proposed in [2]. Concerning 
the behavior of the rising and falling edges there are 
considered the respective comportment defined on the 
standard. In this case, the behavior intended is as follows: 
there are two edge detection types, one used for transition of 
the logic value 0 to 1 (rising edge), and other that does the 
opposite recording (falling edge).  
To model this, the rising edge behavior is described in 
Fig.4.  
       LOCK      FUNCTION_B END_CLK    :=    MEMMEM NOT AND CLK     :=    QEND_VAR0= : BOOL    :    MEMVAR_RETAINEND_VARBOOL    :    QVAR_OUTPUTEND_VARBOOL    : CLK    VAR_INPUTR_TRIG       LOCK      FUNCTION_B
 
Fig. 4.   Rising edg e behavior  [6] . 
The code demonstrates that if input signal (“CLK”), that 
represents the variable that is intended to be recorded, the state changes, there is an internal variable (“MEM” ) that keeps the 
value of “CLK” in every scan cycle. That information is not 
wasted because is recycled in the output (Q) calculation in the 
next PLC scan cycle.  When “Q” has the logic value 1 means 
that the “CLK” has made the rising edge changeover  [6].  
Nevertheless, sometimes the recording need is different. 
Some cases the need is to record the moment where a signal 
changes from Boolean value 1 to 0. This corresponds to the 
situation corresponding to the falling edge, which behavior is 
described and presented in Fig. 5 .  
LOCK FUNCTION_B END_CLK NOT    :=    MEMMEM NOT AND CLK  NOT     :=    QEND_VAR1= : BOOL    :    MEMVAR_RETAINEND_VARBOOL    :    QVAR_OUTPUTEND_VARBOOL    : CLK    VAR_INPUTF_TRIG       LOCK      FUNCTION_B
 
  
Fig. 5.  Falling  edge behavior [6]. 
In this case the code is made for saving the moment when 
variable that we want to study changes from de logic value 1 
to 0.  As in the rising edge there is one input (“CLK”), one 
memory variable (MEM), but this time records the negation of 
CLK every PLC scan cycle. When CLK and MEM are zero, Q 
will be one. This h as meaning that the analyzed variable 
changed from one to zero.  
Concerning the specification presen ted in Fig. 3 , there are 
considered both rising and falling edges. This way, those 
Boolean values will be c alculated as demonstrated above . 
III. SIMULATION AND FORMAL VERIFICATION O F THE 
SPECIFICATION  
In order to perform the simulation and formal verification it 
was followed the approach proposed in for the translation of 
SFC to Timed Automata (TA) [33], for obtaining the timed 
automata model.   
Also, it has  been considered the modeling of the 
comportment of the controller. For this, a modular method has 
been followed for obtaining the global model to be simulated 
and formally verified in UPPAAL.  
The simulation techniques can be classified by SiL 
(Software -in-the-Loop), MiL, HiL (Hardware -in-the-Loop), 
and LT (laboratory testing).  
 

--- Page 4 ---
Recent Innovations in Mechatronics (RIiM) Vol. 3. (2016) . No. 1 -2. 
 DOI: 10.17667/riim.2016.1 -2/9. 
 
 
 
Fig. 6.  Simulation tecniques  
All these simulation techniques have the particularity of not 
test all the space behavior of the controller, making it 
impossible to assert its effectivenes s to one hundred percent.  
In this investigation , is considered a simulation technique 
using models (MIL), either the program or to the physical part 
of mechatronic closed -loop system. This technique is 
generally used in early phases of development of new p rocess 
equipment. No need for special equipment, just are cheaper 
than before. When developed in an appropriate environment, 
and be able to simulate, it is also feasible to verification by 
model checking, which ensures analysis of all the controller 
behavi or space.  
The models attempt to interact with each other in the same 
way as mechatronic systems interact in reality. In order to 
achieve this purpose, a charge model is required to manage the 
order in which they are executed and how they interact. First, 
there are two major groups of models, representing the 
behavior of the PLC and a group which react as in the process .  
The interaction between the two parts of the model is made 
through variables. the process variables every PLC cycle are 
assigned to th e internal variables of the controller , and this 
data will run its internal code, which will calculate the outputs. 
This information is again transmitted to the process controller 
through the allocation of variables to their corresponding 
values of the process . 
It must be highlighted that the main problem for performing 
simulation and formal verification is not the creation of the 
modules that compose the global model in TA, but the 
synchronization of the evolution of the modules. This is 
because it must be con sidered the internal PLC scan and the 
changing of the logical values of the variables must be 
guaranteed according the correct functioning of the PLC. For 
this purpose it was created a model for the management of all 
other modules, in order to guarantee th e intended correct 
verification. The modelling of all system, in one only module, 
is not achievable  and cannot be proposed as a methodology for 
solving problems of this kind.  
In order to illustrate the model proposed for the rising and 
falling edges is pr esented, in figure 5 the TA model of the 
rising edge and falling edge of the sensor s1.  
 
 
Fig. 1. Rising edge and falling edge models, of the sensor s1, developed in 
TA, to be formally verified with UPPAAL .  
 
These modules (one for each edge) correspond to the 
behaviors presented in figures 3 and 4, respectively [25].The 
values that are assigned to the variables are directly obtained 
from what is described in those figures, b ut another variable 
(synchronization message “FB_E”) is considered in the model.  
In fact, the synchronization, that is possible to see in the 
model of figure 5, is necessary due to the synchronization of 
the evolution of all models considered in the global  model.  
Figure 6 illustrates the existing relation between some 
modules considered for the global model of the system.  
 
Fig. 2.Schematic synchronization between modules of the global TA 
model, used in UPPAAL, for formal verificatio n purposes.  
 
In fact, this relation between the modules makes possible 
that the values of variables are obtained in the equivalent 
moments that they correspond to the dynamics of the program 
execution in a PLC.  
Figure 7 illustrates how it has been develope d with parts of 
each module considered in figure 6.   
 

--- Page 5 ---
Recent Innovations in Mechatronics (RIiM) Vol. 3. (2016) . No. 1 -2. 
 DOI: 10.17667/riim.2016.1 -2/9. 
 
 
 
Fig. 3. Illustration of synchronization between modules of the global TA 
model, used in UPPAAL, for formal verification purposes.  
 
Let’s explain how the model has been developed  in order to 
accomplish the desired behavior for the Function blocks 
considered (the rising and falling edges).  
At beginning, when the model starts its evolution, the initial 
location of the module 1 (manager of all modules, figure 7) 
starts evolution and  sends a synchronization message to 
module 2.  
Module 2 models the behavior of the controller (figure 7) 
and the received message from manager module allows staring 
the respective evolution. It has been considered a monotask 
and sequential controller with, at least, three steps in the scan 
cycle: inputs reading, program execution and outputs 
updating.  
After the step inputs reading, on the model 2, be performed 
this module sends a message (START_PE) to model 3 that 
will be responsible for the starting of the  program evolution 
model.  
The beginning of the evolution of the module corresponding 
to the program of the PLC has several steps, but the first one 
considered is the step concerning the calculation of the values 
corresponding to the modules of the rising a nd falling edges 
(module 4, figure 7). This evolution will occur in this precise 
moment and never more during the model evolution, unless 
that a new cycle of the PLC happens again.  
When the evolution of the program ends, this is sent a 
message to the modul e corresponding to the PLC behavior, in 
order to be updated the outputs. After this, the evolution of the 
model is done by allowing evolution of the modules 
corresponding to the physical plant models.  
IV. CONCLUSION  
When developing a controller specification,  the changing 
of logical value of discrete behavior variables is one of most 
common needs of modeling, namely the rising edge and 
faLling edge of a Boolean variable. The implementation of this behavior, in industrial controllers, more precisely in 
programm able logic controllers is by using IEC 61131 -3 
function blocks.  
This means that the simulation and formal verification of 
the specification of the described behaviors is one of the most 
important tasks, in order to obtain safe and reliable 
controllers’ sof tware to be implemented in physical 
controlling devices, such as programmable logic controllers or 
others, commonly used in industry.  
With this global modeling approach, it is possible to 
consider the behavior of controllers’ variables in a very 
realistic way, obtaining a global model to be simulated and 
verified. This global model considers, also, the behavior of the 
plant, allowing to prove more behavior properties of the 
system. The use of UPPAAL an timed automata formalism, 
making possible to take the m odeling of time into account, is 
crucial when models of the plant are considered because 
physical components behave in a non -deterministic way and 
always it is needed to consider their evolution in time.   
Future works in this domain will consider controll ed 
distributed systems and details on modelling those systems, 
mainly because of more or less complexity of the respective 
controllers.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT  
The authors are grateful to MEtRICs Research Center 
Support for realization of this project.  
REFERENCES  
[1] E. Clarke, A. Biere, R. Raimi, and Y. Zhu, “Bounded model 
checking using satisfiability solving,” Form. Methods Syst. Des., 
vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 7 –34, 2001.  
[2] J. M. R. Galvão, “Conversão sistemática do co mportamento 
definido nos blocos funcionais da norma IEC 61 131 -3 para 
autómatos finitos temporizados,” University of Minho, 2015.  
[3] J. J. T. Kleijn, M. A. Reniers, and J. E. Rooda, “Analysis of an 
industrial system,” Form. Methods Syst. Des., vol. 22, no . 3, pp. 
249–282, 2003.  
[4] Y. Zhang, Y. Dong, H. Hong, and F. Zhang, “Code Formal 
Verification of Operation System,” Int. J. …, vol. 2, no. December, 
pp. 10 –18, 2010.  
[5] J. Campos and J. Machado, “A Specification Patterns System for 
Discrete Event System s Analysis,” Int. J. Adv. Robot. Syst., vol. 10, 
p. 1, 2013.  
[6] International Electrotechnical Commission, “IEC International 
Standard IEC 61131 -3,” Program. Control., vol. Part 3, 2003.  
[7] S. C. Park, M. Ko, and M. Chang, “A reverse engineering approach  
to generate a virtual plant model for PLC simulation,” Int. J. Adv. 
Manuf. Technol., vol. 69, no. 9 –12, pp. 2459 –2469, 2013.  
[8] L. Baresi, S. Carmeli, A. Monti, and M. Pezzè, “PLC programming 
languages: A formal approach,” Proc. Autom., vol. 98, 1998.  
[9] C. M. Park, S. M. Bajimaya, S. C. Park, G. N. Wang, J. G. Kwak, 
K. H. Han, and M. Chang, “Development of virtual simulator for 
visual validation of PLC program,” in Computational Intelligence 
for Modelling, Control and Automation, 2006 and International 
Conference on Intelligent Agents, Web Technologies and Internet 

--- Page 6 ---
Recent Innovations in Mechatronics (RIiM) Vol. 3. (2016) . No. 1 -2. 
 DOI: 10.17667/riim.2016.1 -2/9. 
 
 Commerce, International Conference on, 2006, p. 32.  
[10] A. Cleeremans, D. Servan -Schreiber, and J. L. McClelland, “Finite 
state automata and simple recurrent networks,” Neural Comput., 
vol. 1 , no. 3, pp. 372 –381, 1989.  
[11] M.-S. Ko, D. Chang, G. -N. Wang, and S. C. Park, “The Template 
Model Approach For PLC Simulation In An Automotive Industry.,” 
in ECMS, 2012, pp. 306 –312. 
[12] B. P. Zeigler, “DEVS representation of dynamical systems: Event -
based intelligent control,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 77, no. 1, pp. 72 –80, 
1989.  
[13] I. Moon, G. J. Powers, J. R. Burch, and E. M. Clarke, “Automatic 
verification of sequential control systems using temporal logic,” 
AIChE J., vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 67 –75, 1992.  
[14] H. Guéguen and J. Zaytoon, “On the formal verification of hybrid 
systems,” Control Eng. Pract., vol. 12, no. 10, pp. 1253 –1267, 2004.  
[15] J. M. Machado, “Influence de la prise en compte d’un modèle de 
processus en vérification formelle des Systèmes à Evén ements 
Discrets,” Universidade do Minho, 2006.  
[16] N. Sharygina, J. Browne, F. Xie, R. Kurshan, and V. Levin, 
“Lessons learned from model checking a NASA robot controller,” 
Form. Methods Syst. Des., vol. 25, no. 2 –3, pp. 241 –270, 2004.  
[17] E. M. Hahn, A.  Hartmanns, H. Hermanns, and J. -P. Katoen, “A 
compositional modelling and analysis framework for stochastic 
hybrid systems,” Form. Methods Syst. Des., vol. 43, no. 2, pp. 191 –
232, 2013.  
[18] R. Passerone, J. R. Burch, and A. L. Sangiovanni -Vincentelli, 
“Refinement preserving approximations for the design and 
verification of heterogeneous systems,” Form. Methods Syst. Des., 
vol. 31, no. 1, pp. 1 –33, 2007.  
[19] S. Nadjm -Tehrani and J. -E. Strömberg, “Formal verification of 
dynamic properties in an aerospace ap plication,” Form. Methods 
Syst. Des., vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 135 –169, 1999.  
[20] B. F. Adiego, D. Darvas, E. B. Vinuela, J. -C. Tournier, V. M. G. 
Suárez, and J. O. Blech, “Modelling and Formal Verification of 
Timing Aspects in Large PLC Programs,” in Proc. of  IFAC World 
Congress, 2014.  
[21] A. Cimatti, E. Clarke, F. Giunchiglia, and M. Roveri, “NuSMV: A 
new symbolic model verifier,” in Computer Aided Verification, 
1999, pp. 495 –499. [22] T. Hafer and W. Thomas, “Computation tree logic CTL* and path 
quantifiers  in the monadic theory of the binary tree,” in Automata, 
Languages and Programming, Springer, 1987, pp. 269 –279. 
[23] P. Wolper, “Temporal logic can be more expressive,” Inf. Control, 
vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 72 –99, 1983.  
[24] R. Wang, Y. Guan, L. Liming, X. Li , and J. Zhang, “Component -
based formal modeling of PLC systems,” J. Appl. Math., vol. 2013, 
2013.  
[25] A. Basu, M. Bozga, and J. Sifakis, “Modeling heterogeneous real -
time components in BIP,” in Software Engineering and Formal 
Methods, 2006. SEFM 2006. Fo urth IEEE International Conference 
on, 2006, pp. 3 –12. 
[26] S. Bensalem, M. Bozga, T. -H. Nguyen, and J. Sifakis, “D -finder: A 
tool for compositional deadlock detection and verification,” in 
Computer Aided Verification, 2009, pp. 614 –619. 
[27] M. Zhou, H. W an, R. Wang, X. Song, C. Su, M. Gu, and J. Sun, 
“Formal component -based modeling and synthesis for PLC 
systems,” Comput. Ind., vol. 64, no. 8, pp. 1022 –1034, 2013.  
[28] M. Perin and J. -M. Faure, “Building meaningful timed models of 
closed -loop DES for veri fication purposes,” Control Eng. Pract., 
vol. 21, no. 11, pp. 1620 –1639, 2013.  
[29] R. ; Alur and D. Dill, “Automata for modeling real -time systems,” 
Proc. seventeenth Int. Colloq. Autom. Lang. Program., pp. 322 –335, 
1990.  
[30] R. Alur, C. Courcoubetis, an d D. Dill, “Model -checking in dense 
real-time,” Inf. Comput., vol. 104, no. 1, pp. 2 –34, 1993.  
[31] K. G. Larsen, P. Pettersson, and W. Yi, “Uppaal in a Nutshell,” Int. 
J. Softw. Tools Technol. Transf., vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 134 –152, 1997.  
[32] E. P. Enoiu, D . Sundmark, and P. Pettersson, “Model -based test 
suite generation for function block diagrams using the uppaal model 
checker,” in Software Testing, Verification and Validation 
Workshops (ICSTW), 2013 IEEE Sixth International Conference 
on, 2013, pp. 158 –167. 
[33] M. Uzam, “A general technique for the PLC -Based implementation 
of RW supervisors with time delay functions,” Int. J. Adv. Manuf. 
Technol., vol.  62, no. 5 –8, pp. 687 –704, 2012  
 
