--- Page 1 ---
A Formal Veriﬁcation Technique for
Architecture-based Embedded Systems in
EAST-ADL
Eun-Young Kang
The Maersk Mc-Kinney Moller Institute
The University of Southern Denmark,
Odense, Denmark
eyk@mmmi.sdu.dk
June 4, 2021
Abstract
Development of quality assured software-intensive systems, such as automo-
tive embedded systems, is an increasing challenge as the complexity of these sys-
tems signiﬁcantly increases. EAST-ADL is an architecture description language
developed to specify automotive embedded system architectures at multiple ab-
straction levels in the development of safety-critical automotive products. In this
paper, we propose an architecture-based veriﬁcation technique which enhances the
model-based development process supported by EAST-ADL by adapting model-
checking to EAST-ADL speciﬁcations. We employ UPPAAL as a veriﬁcation tool
to ensure that predicted function behaviors of the models in EAST-ADL satisfy
functional and real-time requirements. The criteria for this architecture-based ver-
iﬁcation is presented and the transformation rules which comply with this criteria
are derived. This enables us to extract the relevant information from EAST-ADL
speciﬁcations and to generate analyzable UPPAAL models. The formal semantics
of EAST-ADL is deﬁned which is essential to automate the veriﬁcation of EAST-
ADL speciﬁcations. Our approach is demonstrated by verifying the safety of the
steering truck system units.
1 Introduction
EAST-ADL is an architecture description language for the development of automotive
embedded systems [1]. Advanced automotive functions [2, 3] are increasingly depen-
dent on software and electronics. These automotive embedded systems are becoming
progressively complex and critical for the entire vehicle. Among such factors which
effect the complexity are an increasing number of components and interactions be-
tween them as well as inter-disciplinary communication. Model-based development
(MBD) – i.e., the use of computerized models [4] supports activities or tools perform-
ing activities such as architecture speciﬁcation, analysis, V&V , testing and synthesis
1arXiv:1903.06241v1  [cs.SE]  14 Mar 2019

--- Page 2 ---
– is a means to manage this complexity and develop embedded systems in a way that
increases safety and quality.
The EAST-ADL modeling approach addresses this issue and provides the means
to integrate engineering information from documents, spreadsheets and legacy tools
into one systematic structure, an EAST-ADL system model. Its methodology [5] is
an emerging MBD solution for automotive embedded systems development, provid-
ing support for architecture speciﬁcation and constraints at multiple abstraction lev-
els. EAST-ADL expresses the structure and interconnection of the system. System
behavior is deﬁned based on the deﬁnition of a set of elementary functional entities
and their triggers and interfaces. However, the behavioral semantics inside each ele-
mentary functional entity is not speciﬁed, which limits the automatic translation from
EAST-ADL models to other formal models for efﬁcient veriﬁcation. Instead, the exe-
cution of each function is described with external informal notations [6] and a legacy
tool such as Simulink [7], which is deﬁcient in the analysis of timing requirements with
high-level assurance.
In order to alleviate the aforementioned restriction, we aim to bring in modeling
formalisms to the behavioral deﬁnitions of EAST-ADL that enhances the speciﬁca-
tion and analysis support for system models in EAST-ADL, especially early V&V of
behavioral speciﬁcations, taking into account time- and behavioral constraints. We pro-
pose an architecture-based veriﬁcation technique, which is based on formal constructs
enabling automation of the veriﬁcation activities by adopting model checking to an
architectural perspective: We ﬁrst introduce an EAST-ADL based veriﬁcation criteria
which describes – 1. the objects of veriﬁcation, i.e., constructs of EAST-ADL selected
for evaluation, and – 2. the conditions these objects have to meet. Furthermore, the
formal semantics of EAST-ADL is deﬁned and it is critical to automate veriﬁcation of
EAST-ADL speciﬁcations. Secondly, we present semantics mapping rules which com-
ply with this criteria in order to transform the selected constructs of EAST-ADL into
UPPAAL Timed Automata (TA) models [8, 9]. Finally, we demonstrate the applicabil-
ity of model checking in automotive applications.
This work is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces technology and back-
ground, EAST-ADL and UPPAAL toolkit as used in our approach. Section 3 presents
our approach and methodology to improve formal analysis and veriﬁcation capabil-
ity of EAST-ADL. In section 4, our method is demonstrated in verifying the safety of
the steering system units design. In section 5, related work is discussed. Section 6
concludes the paper and plans future work.
2 Preliminaries
2.1 EAST-ADL
EAST-ADL (Electronics, Architecture and Software Technology – Architecture De-
scription Language) is an ADL dedicated to automotive electronic systems resulting
from several European projects [10, 1]. The language provides support for architec-
tural speciﬁcations at different abstraction levels.
The highest abstraction level, Vehicle(Feature) level , characterizes a vehicle by
means of its features and requirements. At Analysis level , functionality is realized
based on the features and requirements. These features and requirements are reﬁned
2

--- Page 3 ---
by the decision of logical design with the deﬁnition of logical abstract functions of fea-
tures and their interactions, and requirements. The model at this level is used for the
analysis of control requirements, timing constraints, data consistency between inter-
faces, hazard identiﬁcation, etc. Design level contains concrete functional deﬁnitions
according to the realized logical design. In particular, functional deﬁnitions of appli-
cation software, functional abstraction of hardware and middleware are presented, as
well as hardware architecture being captured and function-to-hardware allocation be-
ing deﬁned. At Implementation level , the component architecture is represented using
the AUTOSAR standard [11] or similar speciﬁcations.
EAST-ADL has extensions for environment modeling, requirements speciﬁcation,
timing, dependability and V & V at every abstraction level. This modular approach
separates the deﬁnition of functional and non-functional aspects such as behavior and
related constraints for such behaviors as timing, and safety. The behavior annex [6]
contains extensions to EAST-ADL for a more ﬁne-grained speciﬁcation of key behavior
attributes and is aligned with the language but not yet validated, nor included in the base
speciﬁcation.
In this paper we refer to this behavioral annex (BA) to construct an analyzable
UPPAAL TA model. The contents of BA such as timing- and behavior constraints,
are utilized to constrain behavioral deﬁnitions in the UPPAAL TA model. Moreover,
those constraints as well as textual requirements are formalized in linear time logics
and are used as UPPAAL queries, which can be veriﬁed over the generated TA model
by UPPAAL model checker. Details will be explained in Section 3.
2.2 UPPAAL
UPPAAL [8] is a model checking tool for modeling, validation and veriﬁcation of real-
time systems. UPPAAL is used to model a system as a network of Timed Automata
(TA)[9] – this tool allows construction of large models by composing TA in parallel
and permits communications between TAs using share discrete and clock variables and
synchronize (rendezvous-style) on complementary input and output actions, as well as
broadcast actions – and to verify requirements of the model by the UPPAAL query
language expressed in a subset of Computational Tree Logic (CTL) [12]. The property
speciﬁcation language supports safety, liveness, deadlock, and response properties that
can be solved by reachability analysis.
UPPAAL is comprised of three main parts: an editor, a simulator, and a veriﬁer
for modeling, early fault detection (by examination without exhaustive checking) and
veriﬁcation (covering exhaustive dynamic behavior) respectively in a graphical envi-
ronment. UPPAAL uses the concept of templates for reusability and prototyping of
system components. Each template can be instantiated multiple times to represent sim-
ilar TA with varying parameters.
Additional features offered by UPPAAL in comparison to other model-checking
tools are bounded integer variables, committed and urgent conditions. Committed lo-
cations must be left immediately by the next transition taken in the system. Urgent
locations must be left without letting time pass, but allows interleaving by other au-
tomata. For details of UPPAAL TA, we refer the reader to [8].
Another feature of UPPAAL is the use of a subset of C-code for its declarations.
This is beneﬁcial in the sense that C is one of the most commonly used languages for
3

--- Page 4 ---
Figure 1: Methodology Roadmap
real-time systems. Furthermore, it is possible to use C syntax for EAST-ADL expres-
sions. L.Feng et al. [13] transformed C syntax in EAST-ADL to PROMELA to enable
model checking in SPIN. This is not required in the case of UPPAAL if the same subset
of C is used for both EAST-ADL and UPPAAL.
3 Approach and Methodology
To achieve our aforementioned goal in section 1, we propose a formal approach which
facilitates the veriﬁcation of system behaviors in EAST-ADL by using UPPAAL model-
checker independently of any hardware constraints and topology mapping. It focuses
mainly on the higher level of functional behavior of applications at Analysis level in
terms of its Feature level with three distinct phases – veriﬁcation criteria, M2M trans-
formation, and veriﬁcation (model checking). We will discuss those phases in more
detail in following sections.
3.1 Veriﬁcation Criteria
An EAST-ADL-based veriﬁcation criteria is introduced and applied to the step from
Modeling Framework toAnalysis Framework in our methodology roadmap Fig.1. In-
deed, the formal semantics of EAST-ADL is deﬁned and it is essential to facilitate the
automation of V&V technique.
The veriﬁcation criteria describes the objects of veriﬁcation, i.e., constructs of
EAST-ADL speciﬁcations selected for evaluation, and the conditions these objects have
to meet. The possible objects are restricted to four different types of constructs: Func-
tions ,Ports andConnectors ,Artifacts , and Behavioral Annex .
Functions: EAST-ADL refers to components as features, functions orcomponents , de-
pending on which conceptual abstraction level is considered. As we focus on Analysis
level,AnalysisFunctions (AF) are selected as abstraction of computational units, i.e.
SteeringColumnCalculator, TorqueSensor, etc. They are illustrated as function entities
in Fig.2. Each AF has its own logical execution, which is speciﬁed in UPPAAL TA and
used for veriﬁcation in this paper.
4

--- Page 5 ---
<<analysisFunctionType >> 
FunctionalAnalysisArchitecture  
 <<analysisFunctionPrototype >> 
+Swheel : SteeringWheel  [1] 
 
 
 
 + turn: Torque [1] 
  <<analysisFunctionPrototype >> 
+ Tsensor : TorqueSensor  [1] 
 
 
+ torque: Torque [1]  
  <<analysisFunctionPrototype >> 
+ SCC: SteeringColumnCalculator  [1] 
 
        
 + cpout : ColumnPosition  [1] + turn: Torque [1]  
+ torque: Torque [1]  
  <<analysisFunctionPrototype >> 
+ Pinion: Pinion [1]  
 
        
  
+ cpout : ColumnPosition  [1] 
+ rforce : RackForce  [1] 
+ rpout : RackPosition  [1] 
  <<analysisFunctionPrototype >> 
+ Rack: Rack [1]  
 
        
 
  <<analysisFunctionPrototype >> 
+ Motor: Actuator [1]  
 
  + voltage: Voltage [1]      
  
+ rpout :  RackPosition  [1] + rforce : RackForce  [1] + voltage: Voltage [1]  <<FunctionConnector >> 
<<FunctionConnector >> 
<<FunctionConnector >> Figure 2: Steering Truck System modeled in EAST-ADL
Ports and connectors: There are two types of function interaction either a Function-
FlowPort interaction whereby a function performs a computation on provided data, or
aClientServerPort interaction whereby the execution of a service is called upon by an-
other function. The FunctionFlowPort are directional interaction points for exchange
of data between AFs and speciﬁed by associated data-types, and they are connected to
other ports via connectors. Both interactions are validated by checking if the execu-
tion of TA and its synchronization with other TAs are not blocked. Since EAST-ADL
connectors are dependent on the ports of AFs they connect, the modeling and verify-
ing connectors should describe which AF ports are connected together, and ensure that
data- and control ﬂows interactions between AFs through the ports are correct respec-
tively.
Artifacts: Each AF consists of three different kinds of artifacts: structure, behavior
and timing packages. They are shown as red, blue, and green respectively in Fig.3
where the FunctionTrigger deﬁnes TriggerPolicy as either time or event-behavior to
specify timing constraints. According to the TriggerPolicy , the AF is invoked either by
time-triggered in which time alone causes execution to start, or event-triggered, which
is caused by data arrival or calls on the input ports. For each AF, its artifacts are used
to construct corresponding TA and declare how the execution of TA is dispatched.
Behavioral Annex (BA): BA contains behavioral constraints which are given in three
categories: Parameter Constraints ,State Machine Constraints , and Computation Con-
straints (See Fig.4 with dependencies). Based on aforementioned artifacts, we further
detail each computation and execution behavior of TA by capturing related Parameter- ,
State Machine- , and Computation Constraints from BA.
In reference to Parameter Constraints , we specify – 1. quantities of constraints
to be processed by the computation and execution behavior of TA model, and – 2.
5

--- Page 6 ---
Figure 3: Steering Column Calculator artifacts
conditions under which each of these quantities is used. The conditions of Parameter
Constraints such as pre-, post, and invariant conditions in the computational modes
in EAST-ADL as well as the relations of parameters (e.g., input and output mapping,
event to output mapping) are used as (i.e. translated into) the corresponding condi-
tions in TA model. The locations and transitions of TA model are constructed taking
into account State Machine Constraints . The logical transformation of data in a Func-
tionalBehavior is represented in TA by referring to Computation Constraints or the
conditions of Parameter Constraints
According to the objects of veriﬁcation above, the execution of FunctionalBehavior
within an EAST-ADL system can be considered a combination of multiple end-to-end
computation and execution chains across its AFs under the triggering deﬁnitions, and
the behavioral- and timing constraints given in artifacts and BA respectively. Thus,
evaluating the FunctionalBehavior in EAST-ADL is to ensure the two following con-
ditions:
1. For each AF, its corresponding TA execution such as ﬂow- or data interaction via
synchronization with its environments (other TAs) is not blocked, i.e., Deadlock-
free condition.
2. When the interaction or synchronization is carried out, data transformation is
performed as an expected computation activity on two sets of parameters. The
conditions of those parameters such as pre-, post-, and invariant conditions must
hold before the transformation starts its execution, after the execution of the
transformation, and must remain unchanged by the execution of the transforma-
tion respectively.
To perform a behavioral semantics mapping from the informal semantics of EAST-
6

--- Page 7 ---
Figure 4: Schematic View of Behavioral Constraints Annex
ADL architectural model to the formal semantics of UPPAAL TA model, we formally
deﬁne behavioral semantics of EAST-ADL below. This step is critical to automate the
veriﬁcation technique using UPPAAL model checker. UPPAAL tool composes each
local TA of AF in parallel to a composed TA (network TA).
Essentially, EAST-ADL model is a tuple hN;CEi, where Nis a set of ADLFunc-
tionalPrototypes AFs, and CENNis the set of connectors between AFs. Output
variables of one AF may be connected to input variables of another AF. The behavior
Binside an AF, noted ~BAF, is modeled as an UPPAAL TA =hL;l0;VC;VD;E;Ii,
where Lis a set of locations, l02Lis the initial location, VCandVDis a set of clock
and data variables respectively. Iassigns an invariant to each of the locations. Eis
a set of edges, represented as lg;a;u ! l0, where lis a source location, l0is a destination
location, gis a guard, ais an action, uis an update.
The execution of each AF behavior is determined in terms of triggering values
(conditions) given in BA or artifacts. When the triggering condition is active , the
AF is triggered via its input trigger port, and its input data ports are mapped to data
variables. VDin TA are updated with those variables by read-input-from-ports action,
noted READ( Pin), (respectively write-output-to-ports , noted WRITE( Pout)), which are
atomic and urgent (in the sense that time is not allowed to pass when AF reads or
writes). AF is initially idleafter the read action it switches to its executing locations
until its internal computation is done. After the write action, which forwards data in
variables via connections from the output ports, the AF becomes idleagain and the
trigger condition is updated to inactive . The behavior of AF is formally deﬁned as
follows:
Deﬁnition 1 The behavior of AnalysisFunction AF is a tuple B=hL;l0;lf;VD[P;VC;E[
fer;ewgiwhere
l0is the initial location (also considered the idle location).
7

--- Page 8 ---
lfis the ﬁnal executable location such that the edges in Eleading out from lf
lead to the l0.
Pis the set of ports of the component described as Pin[Pout[Ptrig, where Pinis
a set of input ports, Poutis a set of output ports, PtrigPinis the set of trigger
input ports.
er=l0g;r;u !l0, ifgis triggered, ris the ”read-input-from-ports” action, READ( Pin),
anduupdates VDwith input values (PinnPtrig).
ew=lfg;w;u !l0, ifgis true, wis the ”write-outputs-on-ports” action, WRITE( Pout),
anduresets Ptrigto ”inactive”.
The TA of a composition C, TA( C), is deﬁned as a network of local TA. For AFiand
its corresponding component Ci2C, the write action in TA( Ci) is extended to update
the input ports (noted Pin:j) of a target component Cj2Caccording to interconnections
from the out ports of Ci(noted Pout :i). An interconnection connects a source port p2
Pout :ito a target port p02Pin:jwhenever variables in PinofCare enabled in a way that
ifp0is a trigger port then p0is activated, otherwise p0=p. The edges eof TA( Ci) are
explained with extended write actions as follows.
Deﬁnition 2 The behavior Binside AFi,~BAFi, is TA( Ci)=hL,l0,lf,VD,VC;
fXWRIT E i(e)je2Eg;Iisuch that
XWRIT E i(lg;a;u ! l0),(lg;w;u ! l0;WRIT E (Pout :i)), if a=wandgis triggered
(holds).
Note that ; is deﬁned as sequential execution
XWRIT E i(lg;a;u !l0),lg;a;u !l0, for a,w
The automata TA(C) is then the network of each TA( Ci) for Ci2C.
An environment is modeled as TAEnvin a similar way. The resulting composition is
thus deﬁned as the network TA(C)TAEnv, where any edge in TAEnvupdating ports
PinofC, is extended with an update WRIT E (Pout :Env). This is similar to the adaption
of the XWRIT E action that is used to build TA(Ci)in Deﬁnition 2.
3.2 M2M Transformation
This model-to-model transformation step, called M2M, is to transform EAST-ADL
speciﬁcations to UPPAAL models under the veriﬁcation criteria. This step is illustrated
as a M2M direction in Analysis Framework in Fig.1. Automated formal veriﬁcation is
not feasible directly on EAST-ADL speciﬁcation since EAST-ADL lacks formal and
implemented semantics. In order to perform automated formal veriﬁcation, we ﬁrst
formally mapped the execution semantics of EAST-ADL to UPPAAL TAs (Ref. Def 1
and 2 in Section 3.1).
In this section, we present transformation rules which helps to extract executable
UPPAAL TAs from EAST-ADL speciﬁcations. The derived UPPAAL models comply
with artifact packages, BA and functional requirements of EAST-ADL model under
the veriﬁcation criteria. A few assumptions are made in order to simplify the transfor-
mation procedure:
8

--- Page 9 ---
We focus on FunctionalAnalysisArchitecture (FAA) at the analysis level of EAST-
ADL where each AF is associated with AnalysisPorts . Except for FAA, no func-
tion type is allowed to have instances for other function types.
Unlike the original EAST-ADL speciﬁcation, ports’ events are related not only
to triggering but also to synchronization. This implies that sending and receiving
data from a port is also considered an event although it is not used to trigger a
particular function. This assumption is required for the veriﬁcation of end-to-end
timing property using reaction time constraints.
The communication channels between different processes in UPPAAL is of broad-
cast type. This complies with EAST-ADL speciﬁcations where each elementary
AF follows run-to-completion execution with non-blocking semantics and ports
are over-writable buffers.
In terms of these assumptions, we ﬁrst present a general transformation scheme which
can be described as follows.
M2M General Transformation Scheme: For each EAST-ADL system (FAA), an
UPPAAL system consisting of a set of processes is created. For each elementary AF,
an UPPAAL process is deﬁned whereby a local clock is declared. This local clock is
used to specify the execution time of AF.
Each connector between AF ports is transformed to an UPPAAL broadcast channel.
Global and local variables of processes are deﬁned regarding Parameter Constraints in
BA. The value-passing action between two AFs is performed using global variables
via broadcasting channels between the corresponding UPPAAL processes. Control- or
data ﬂow behaviors of AFs follow the computation activities on two sets of quantities in
terms of the Computation - and StateMachine constraint, i.e., pre-, port-, and invariant
parameter conditions in BA.
Secondly, and more importantly, we present three transformation rules, Time-Triggering
rule,Event-Triggering rule , and End-to-End reaction time rule . Each proposed trans-
formation rule is speciﬁed in UPPAAL TA and a schematic graphical-structure view of
the corresponding EAST-ADL is illustrated below.
Time-Triggering rule: This rule transforms the periodic behaviors of AF. From the
given artifacts and BA of EAST-ADL model, if related FunctionTriggerPolicy is TIME
and its TriggerPeriod deﬁnes the periodic triggering time (Period :=n), i.e., this AF
is invoked every ntime, then the EAST-ADL model which is illustrated as the upper
view in Fig.5 is transformed to the corresponding TA which is depicted as the lower
view in Fig.6.
An event-triggered function may be invoked during the time-triggering period due
to data arrival or call from or to other AFs. If this happens, then an invariant clkm(m
isExecutionTime of the event) is added to Runlocation. An invariant clkPeriod m
inFinish location speciﬁes the expiry of the ﬁxed-periodic triggering time after the
ExecutionTime of event-triggered functions. For each transition, the local clock is
reset. For each port associated with its connector, a related broadcast channel is deﬁned
as the port name TimeTriggerIn ? and TimeTriggerOut ! representing time-triggering
9

--- Page 10 ---
input- and output ports or EventTriggerIn ? and DesiredEventTrigger ! representing
event-triggering input- and output ports respectively.
A global integer variable ConnectT and a local integer variable ReceiveTrigg are
declared. ConnectT is assigned the value of 1 initially. When a time-triggering signal
is received through TimeTriggerIn ?, the local variable ReceiveTrigg is assigned the
value of ConnectT . When the signal is sent out through TimeTriggerOut !, the global
variable ConnectT is assigned the value of ReceiveTrigg , and then the local variable
ReceiveTrigg is reset to 0.
Similarly, the value of ReceiveEventData is passed from the current TA in Fig.5 to
the variable ReceiveData of TA in Fig.6 using the global variable ConnectE through the
broadcast channel DesiredEventTrigger . Location Runin Fig.5 is committed to ensure
that no other TAs can assign their local variables with the value of ReceiveEventData
before the TA in Fig.6 sets ReceiveData :=ConnectE . Once the periodic triggering
time is expired, i.e., clkPeriod m, then Time TriggerOut ! is broadcast. There-
fore, this rule can facilitate the synchronization of various clocks in a design and avoid
unpredictable delays.
Period := n, where n ϵ  N 
Clock variable :=  clk 
ExecutionTime   of event := m  
 <<AF>>  TimeTriggerIn  
EventTriggerIn  TimeTriggerOut  
DesiredEventTrigger  
DesiredEventTrigger ! 
Figure 5: Time-triggered rule
Event-Triggering rule: From the given artifacts and BA of EAST-ADL model, for
any AF if related FunctionTriggerPolicy is EVENT and its TriggerPeriod deﬁnes the
execution time of the invoked event (ExecutionTime :=etime ), then the EAST-ADL
model which is illustrated as the upper view in Fig.6 is transformed to the correspond-
ing TA, which is depicted as the lower view. The deﬁned execution time ( etime ) is
added as an invariant to Run location to specify the expiry of the ExecutionTime of
event-triggering function. For each transition, the local clock is reset. For each port,
a relevant broadcast channel is deﬁned as the port name DdesiredEventTrigger ? and
EventTriggerOut ! representing event-triggering input- and output ports respectively.
Value passing from current TA to the others is represented similar to the aforemen-
10

--- Page 11 ---
tioned one in the Time-triggering rule above.
The executable event ﬂows from Run location to Initlocation can be reﬁned into
corresponding behavioral automaton where RunandInitlocations being the initial lo-
cation and the ﬁnal location respectively. The reﬁnement is made straightforward by
adding more Running locations, transitions, and associated variables as well as broad-
casting channels between Run andInitlocations. They represent more interactions
between the current AF and other AFs. The timing properties of the basic and reﬁned
model should be identical, because the newly introduced locations represent the former
original location, and the union of the new locations clock invariants (union of individ-
ual execution time) should fulﬁll the former invariant execution time ( clketime ).
  Clock variable := clk 
  ExecutionTime  := etime   
   <<AF>>  DesiredEventTrigger  EventTriggerOut  
DesiredEventTrigger ? 
Figure 6: Event-triggered rule
End-To-End reaction time rule: This rule transforms the End-To-End reaction time
behavior between two AFs into TAs. The reaction time constraint which is given in
BA is ﬁrst represented as the bounded response time property formula of the form
AG(f1)Tf2), meaning that if a request (f1) becomes true at a certain time point, a
response (f2) must be guaranteed to be true within a time bound (T) .
In order to verify this time constraint property, we take a similar approach from
our early experiment in [14], which shows how to check bounded liveness properties
with a certain syntactical manipulation on the system model. An observer TA (see
righthand view in Fig.7), which restricts the bounded response time ( MAX T IME ) is
constructed. This observer TA contains a clock constraint ( obstimeMAX T IME )
and an error location, which violates the bounded response time condition.
One synchronization channel event 1? is added to the transition from InittoRunin
order to deal with a request event of AF1. Another synchronization channel event 2?
is added to the transition from Run toInitin order to handle a response event of AF2.
Afterwards, the observer is syntactically composed with the actual AFs (TAs), say AF1
11

--- Page 12 ---
(TA1) and AF2 (TA2), then we checked if its error location can never be reached from
any location of AF1 (TA1) and AF2 (TA2).
Figure 7: End-To-End reaction time rule
3.3 Veriﬁcation: Model Checking
The execution of each FunctionBehavior in EAST-ADL is transformed to UPPAAL TA
which holds the veriﬁcation criteria and its composition is considered as the network
TA. The formal semantics of EAST-ADL has been investigated, where UPPAAL TA
is used. The entire system (network TA) is considered in terms of a timed transition
system, then this entire system is veriﬁed by UPPAAL model-checker. Quality require-
ments (e.g, timing, safety, deadlock freedom) in terms of functional requirements (e.g,
behavioral constraints, timing constraints), see Fig.1-Requirement aspect, are formal-
ized in linear time logics based on the UPPAAL logic, which can be veriﬁed over the
transformed TA model by UPPAAL model checker. This step is shown as Veriﬁcation
Framework in Fig.1.
In particular, the quality requirements are derived from a given system’s textual
descriptions. One may verify certain delay, reaction and synchronization constraints
(i.e, overall behavioral constraints of a system) according to the quality requirements.
For example, a plausible reaction constraint is 250 ms. In contrast, functional require-
ments describe particular constraints of a function such as timing constraints and trig-
ger elements linked to an AF entity, i.e., triggering policy and parameter constraints in
artifacts and BA.
UPPAAL model checker veriﬁes those two types of requirements as safety proper-
ties in a way that (1). if a property is satisﬁed by the target model, then a functional
requirement linked to an AF is updated to a satisfy relation and generic constraints of
the AF are stored as valid invariants in the V&V structure (VVOutcome linked to the
explained requirement, VVCase, etc) of the EAST-ADL model. (2). If a property is vi-
olated (depicted as Not Satisﬁed arrows in Fig.1) then UPPAAL model checker returns
some counterexamples that can help analysts to reﬁne the behavioral constraints of the
system model or modify generic constraints in BA, and identify correct constraints for
the AF that it concerns. Thus, the models in EAST-ADL are updated with the timing
assumptions analysts make as well as the analysis results.
12

--- Page 13 ---
4 Experiment
Our approach applied and demonstrated on a case study, the Steering System Units
(SSU), from our industrial partner VOLVO. It is ﬁrst modeled using Papyrus UML [15]
for EAST-ADL in the ATESST2 project [1]. The SSU Papyrus UML model consists of
six AFs and the interfaces of the AFs are expressed in terms of ports and connections as
depicted in Fig.2. Each of these AFs can be further decomposed into smaller or more
detail DesignFunctions orComponents depending on the level of abstraction in EAST-
ADL. The functionalities (AFs) of SSU used within the current work are as follows:
Steering Wheel is manipulated by the driver and reads such driver input;
Torque Sensor senses the steering wheel position and sends a desired torque to
the steering column calculator;
Steering Column Calculator calculates the torque and positions required for
the pinion and sends the calculated values to the pinion;
Pinion senses a rotational motion in terms of the calculated values from the
steering column calculator and sends a desired torque force as well as a desired
rack command to the rack;
Rack converts a rotational motion into a linear motion based on the received
values and commands from the pinion;
Actuator performs the actual steering of each wheel.
The SSU Papyrus UML model at Analysis level in EAST-ADL is transformed to an
UPPAAL model under the veriﬁcation criteria: For AFs, FunctionBehaviors are se-
mantically translated into a network of TAs in terms of their corresponding artifacts
and BA. The functional and quality requirements of the system were given as either
informal description in ATESST2 project case study reports or as timing- or behav-
ioral constraints requirement entities linked to AFs from BA. Due to space limitation,
here we present only the UPPAAL TAs of Steering Wheel ,Torque Sensor andSteering
Column Calculator shown in Fig.8, Fig.9 and Fig.10 respectively.
The requirements formalized in UPPAAL logics over the network of TAs are veri-
ﬁed by model-checking with some assumptions regarding timing: there is a data ﬂow
from a steering wheel to a motor actuator. The functions are periodic and mutually
unsynchronized. A perfect clock is assumed in the sense that it generates periodic
triggering in order to activate (run) the AFs with a periodicity of one time unit. Each
function has its execution time which is modeled with an execution delay location in its
TA. Based on those assumptions, properties of safety, deadlock freedom and liveness
are veriﬁed successfully.
We veriﬁed 25 properties of the system. The evaluation conditions mentioned in
Section 3 is referenced to formalize the properties. A list of selected properties is given
below and their veriﬁcation results are established as valid:
13

--- Page 14 ---
Figure 8: Steering Wheel UPPAAL TA
Figure 9: Torque Sensor UPPAAL TA
Figure 10: Steering Column Control UPPAAL TA
14

--- Page 15 ---
nDe f inition o f each AnalysisFunction
C1=Steering Wheel
C2=Torque Sensor
C3=Steering Column calculator (SCC)
C4=Pinion
C5=Rack
C6=Actuatorn
Deadlock freedom :A[ ]1not deadlock
Leads-to property based on the internal variables of AFs: Every time Steering
Column Calculator (SCC) is invoked by Steering Wheel or Torque Sensor, it
will eventually calculate column positions for Pinion according to the steering
position and torque force.
C3:Idle !(C3:RCal_C3:LCal_C3:NCal_C3:MCal )
Leads-to property based on the interactive values via ports: If Steering Wheel
sends out its position value then the value should be received by SCC.
(C1:RTurn^C1:wp==1) !(C3:RCal^C3:cp==1)
State correspondence check : One internal location of an AF corresponds to what
is happening in the locations of other environment AFs. While Steering Wheel
is turning right, neither the left-column-calculating mode of SCC nor the left-
rotation mode of Pinion is executing.
A[ ]C1:RTurn)(:C3:LCal^:C4:LRot)
Execution time property : Each AF should execute within its given local execu-
tion time, 0clk2.
A[ ]C6:Run)(0C6:clk2)
Bounded liveness property : When Steering Wheel is activated, Actuator reacts
timely under its given time bound (MAX TIME) as a failsafe against serious
accident.
A[ ]C1:RTurn)(:ObsTA :error^C6:Run)
In other words, if Steering Wheel is invoked, it should not reach the error location
of the observer TA, which violates the MAX TIME bounded condition, while
Actuator is executing.
1A[ ] P: ”Pholds for any reachable conﬁguration” is written A[ ]in UPPAAL format
15

--- Page 16 ---
Search order is breadth ﬁrst and uses conservative space optimization. The state space
representation uses difference bound matrices (DBM). Verifying properties takes an
average of around 2 seconds per veriﬁed property on an Intel T9600 2.80 GHz pro-
cessor. The UPPAAL model checker needs to explore a maximum of 38166 states.
The maximum is reached when verifying properties where the model checker needs to
explore the whole sate space (such as the non-existence of a deadlock situation).
5 Related Work
For safety-driven system development in the automotive domain, feature- and archi-
tecture based analysis is prescribed by ISO standard as the state-of-the-art approach to
functional safety. However, at an early stage it is difﬁcult to see function dependen-
cies that would result in updated function requirements. Therefore, A. Sandberg et al.
[16] provide one approach that performs iterative analysis to manage changes in the
safety architecture at analysis level and still meet function speciﬁc safety goals derived
at vehicle level. In comparison to our work, their main concern is to deﬁne the se-
mantics for requirement selection in order to ensure correct inclusion of requirements
for a function deﬁnition. There is no formal modeling and veriﬁcation approach to the
behavioral deﬁnition of EAST-ADL.
L. Feng et al. [13] propose a reference behavior modeling approach which employs
UML activity diagram, C code and SPIN to study the execution logic of the components
and their communication protocol in EAST-ADL. Thus the requirements on the system
design can be veriﬁed by model checking. In contrast to our work, there is no notion for
the timing constraints in the behavior model. Indeed, formal analysis on the real-time
properties of the behavior model is not considered at all.
The TIMMO project [10] introduces TADL (Timing Augmented Description Lan-
guage). The language and its methodology [17] is aligned with EAST-ADL and AU-
TOSAR [11] for timing analysis aspects. In contrast to the TIMMO effort focused
on its timing extension, our work focuses on the behavioral aspects complying with
the timing extension. Therefore, our work contributes towards the development of the
EAST-ADL behavioral extension.
Our earlier work [14] veriﬁes EAST-ADL models using UPPAAL-PORT1. The
work uses mainly structural information of EAST-ADL and its requirement, where
models are manually translated into SA VE-CCM [18], which is the required input for-
mat for UPPAAL-PORT. In contrast to that work [14], we consider recent additions to
EAST-ADL, including both the timing and behavior extensions by analyzing applica-
tion internal behaviors speciﬁed in behavioral annex as well as using artifact packages.
Furthermore, we eliminate the need for intermediate formalisms like SA VE-CCM and
target direct transformation of EAST-ADL speciﬁcations to UPPAAL TAs.
Another widely used ADL within both industry and the research community for ar-
chitectural modeling and analysis of time-critical software intensive embedded systems
is Architecture Analysis and Design Language (AADL) [19]. S. Bj ¨ornander et al. [20]
propose an approach to formal and implemented semantics of AADL, where the Timed
Abstract State Machine (TASM) [21] language is used as the formal underpinning. We
take a similar approach by transforming EAST-ADL constructs to Timed Automata,
1http://www.uppaal.org/port
16

--- Page 17 ---
especially UPPAAL TA, in order to allow tool-supported automated simulation and
veriﬁcation of EAST-ADL speciﬁcation by using UPPAAL model checker. The result
of our work contribute towards the development of EAST-ADL behavior extension [6]
and further reﬁnement of the existing behavior extension.
6 Conclusion and Future Work
In this paper, we have studied the use of formal modeling and veriﬁcation techniques
at an early stage in the development of safety-critical automotive products which are
originally described in the EAST-ADL architectural language. We have proposed an
architecture-based veriﬁcation technique which brings formal modeling formalisms to
the behavioral deﬁnitions of EAST-ADL to capture the execution ﬂows inside each
functional entity and their complex interactions and verify them by using the UPPAAL
model checker.
This architecture-based modeling, analysis and veriﬁcation methodology is suitable
for a higher abstraction level, the current work focuses on the EAST-ADL analysis
level, but can be extended to the design level. This will require only a change the type
of functions and prototypes in the modeling process.
This paper has furthermore presented the criteria of EAST-ADL based veriﬁcation
technique. This criteria describes – 1. the selected constructs of EAST-ADL such as
artifacts, structural Papyrus models, and BA as well as requirements which are utilized
for the purpose of generating UPPAAL TA models or UPPAAL queries, and – 2. the
conditions these objects have to meet.
Moreover, the formal syntax and semantics of EAST-ADL are deﬁned, and this
is essential for automated veriﬁcation of EAST-ADL speciﬁcations, i.e., the formal
deﬁnition enables the EAST-ADL model to be automatically transformed to models of
other established tools for V&V support. Indeed semantics mapping rules are presented
between EAST-ADL speciﬁcations and UPPAAL TAs under the veriﬁcation criteria.
These rules enable us to generate analyzable UPPAAL models from the EAST-ADL
speciﬁcations.
These contributions improve behavior modeling, veriﬁcation and analysis capa-
bility of EAST-ADL. To demonstrate the applicability of our approach, the steering
system units case study has been translated from the EAST-ADL Papyrus model into
the UPPAAL model. By employing the UPPAAL model checker, the veriﬁcation of
expected safety and liveness properties for this system are fully automated.
In future works, we plan to – 1. include more elaborate veriﬁcation of non-functional
properties, and more reﬁned conﬁgurations of the generated model. For example, min-
imizing the use of certain resources, such as CPU, energy, memory, etc, while preserv-
ing functional correctness, timing requirements and other resource constraints. The
results presented here are promising steps towards these goals, – 2. investigate schedu-
lability analysis of timed-component models (source models from EAST-ADL) using
UPPAAL in order to guarantee that the applied scheduling principle ensures that the
timing deadlines are met. The planned enhancement includes consideration of func-
tional design prototypes of EAST-ADL models in Papyrus UML at the design level as
the source instead of using functional analysis prototypes at the analysis level as pre-
sented in this paper, and – 3. extend this work to verify the reﬁnement process over
different abstraction levels, i.e., to check if the basic features captured at the vehicle
17

--- Page 18 ---
level are correctly reﬁned (realized) in related functions at the analysis level as well as
at the design level where the functionalities depicted at the analysis level are further
decomposed or restructured.
References
[1] “Advancing Trafﬁc Efﬁciency and Safety through Software Technology Phase 2
(European project),” 2010. http://www.atesst.org.
[2] A. Sangiovanni-Vincentelli and M. Di Natale, “Embedded system design for au-
tomotive applications,” Computer , vol. 40, no. 10, pp. 42–51, 2007.
[3] K. Grimm, “Software technology in an automotive company - major challenges,”
Software Engineering, International Conference on , vol. 0, p. 498, 2003.
[4] M. T ¨orngren, D. Chen, D. Malvius, and J. Axelsson., Automotive Embedded Sys-
tems Handbook: Model based development of automotive embedded systems .
Taylor and Francis CRC Press, 2009.
[5] “The ATTEST2 consortium, Methodology guidelines when using EAST-ADL
Project Deliverable 5.1.1,” 2010.
[6] “The ATTEST2 consortium, Update suggestions for behavior support, Project
Deliverable 3.1, Appendix 3.4,” 2010.
[7] “Simulation and Model-Based Design.” http://www.mathworks.nl/products/simulink/index.html.
[8] G. Berhmann, A. David, K. G. Larsen, P. Pettersson, and W. Yi, “Developing
uppaal over 15 years,” Software - Practice and Experience , December 2010.
[9] R. Alur and D. L. Dill, “A theory of timed automata,” Theoretical Computer Sci-
ence, vol. 126, no. 2, pp. 183–235, 1994.
[10] “TIMing MOdel,” 2010. http://www.timmo-2-use.org/timmo/index.htm.
[11] “AUTomotive Open System Architecture,” 2010. http://www.autosar.org.
[12] J.-P. Katoen, Principles of Model Checking . MIT Press, 2008.
[13] L. Feng, D. Chen, H. L ¨onn, and M. T ¨orngren, “Verifying system behaviors in
EAST-ADL2 with the SPIN model checker,” in IEEE International Conference
on Mechatronics and Automation , (Xi’an China), August 2011.
[14] E.-Y . Kang, P.-Y . Schobbens, and P. Pettersson, “Verifying functional behaviors
of automotive products in EAST-ADL2 using UPPAAL-PORT,” in 30th Inter-
national Conference on Computer Safety, Reliability and Security , pp. 243–256,
Springer LNCS, vol 6894, September 2011.
[15] “Open Source Tool for Graphical UML2 Modeling,” 2010.
http://www.papyrusuml.org.
18

--- Page 19 ---
[16] A. Sandberg, D. Chen, H. L ¨onn, R. Johansson, L. Feng, M. T ¨orngren,
S. Torchiaro, R. Tavakoli-Kolagari, and A. Abele, “Model-based safety engineer-
ing of interdependent functions in automotive vehicles using EAST-ADL2,” in
Proceedings of the 29th international conference on Computer safety, reliability,
and security , (Berlin, Heidelberg), pp. 332–346, Springer-Verlag, 2010.
[17] “Tmmo open workshop, methodology version 2, project deliverable d5,” 2009.
[18] J. Carlson, J. Hkansson, and P. Pettersson, “SaveCCM: An analysable compo-
nent model for real-time systems,” in Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on For-
mal Aspects of Components Software (FACS 2005) (Z. Liu and L. Barbosa, eds.),
vol. 160 of Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Science , pp. 127–140, El-
sevier, 2006.
[19] P. Feiler, D. Gluch, and J. Hudak, “The Architecture Analysis and Design Lan-
guage (AADL): An Introduction,” Tech. Rep. SEI-2006-TN-011, Society of Au-
tomotive Engineers, CMU, 2006.
[20] S. Bj ¨ornander, L. Grunske, and K. Lundqvist, “Timed simulation of extended
AADL-based architecture speciﬁcations with timed abstract state machines,” in
Proceedings of the 5th international conference on the quality of software archi-
tectures , pp. 101–115, Springer-Verlag, 2009.
[21] M. Ouimet and K. Lundqvist, “The Timed Abstract State Machine Language:
Abstract State Machines for Real-Time System Engineering,” Journal of Univer-
sal Computer Science , vol. 14, pp. 207–233, June 2008. http://www.jucs.
org/jucs_14_12/the_timed_abstract_state .
19
