--- Page 1 ---
UPPAAL in Practice: Quantitative Verication
of a RapidIO Network?
Jiansheng Xing1;2, Bart D. Theelen2, Rom Langerak1, Jaco van de Pol1,
Jan Tretmans2, and J.P.M. Voeten2;3
1University of Twente, Faculty of EEMCS
P.O. Box 217, Formal Methods and Tools
7500 AE Enschede, The Netherlands
{xingj,r.langerak,j.c.vandepol}@cs.utwente.nl
2Embedded Systems Institute
P.O. Box 513
5600 MB Eindhoven, The Netherlands
{bart.theelen,jan.tretmans}@esi.nl
3Eindhoven University of Technology, Faculty of Electrical Engineering
Information and Communication Systems group
5600 MB Eindhoven, The Netherlands
{j.p.m.voeten}@tue.nl
Abstract. Packet switched networks are widely used for interconnect-
ing distributed computing platforms. RapidIO (Rapid Input/Output)
is an industry standard for packet switched networks to interconnect
multiple processor boards. Key performance metrics for these platforms
include average-case and worst-case packet transfer latencies. We focus
on verifying such quantitative properties for a RapidIO based multi-
processor platform that executes a motion control application. A perfor-
mance model is available in the Parallel Object-Oriented Specication
Language (POOSL) that allows for simulation based estimation results.
It is however required to determine the exact worst-case latency as the
application is time-critical. A model checking approach has been pro-
posed in our previous work which transforms the POOSL model into an
UPPAAL model. However, such an approach only works for a fairly small
system. We extend the transformation approach with various heuristics
to reduce the underlying state space, thereby providing an eective ap-
proximation approach that scales to industrial problems of a reasonable
complexity.
Keywords: UPPAAL; POOSL; transformation; quantitative verica-
tion; heuristic
1 Introduction
A packet switched network is a digital communication network that groups all
transmitted data into suitably-sized blocks, called packets. The network over
?This work has been supported by the EU FP7 under grant number ICT-214755:
Quasimodo.

--- Page 2 ---
2 UPPAAL in Practice: Quantitative Verication of a RapidIO Network
which packets are transmitted is a shared network which routes each packet
independently from others and allocates transmission resources as needed. The
principal goals of packet switching are to optimize utilization of available link
capacity, minimize response times and increase the robustness of communication.
When traversing network adapters, switches and other network nodes, packets
are buered, resulting in variable delay and throughput, depending on the trac
load in the network.
RapidIO is an industry standard [9] for packet-switched networks to connect
chips on a circuit board, and also circuit boards to each other using a backplane.
It has found widespread adoption in the following applications: wireless base sta-
tion, video, medical imaging, etc. Key performance metrics for these applications
include average-case and worst-case packet transfer latencies.
In this paper, we consider a motion control system that includes a packet
switched network conforming to the RapidIO standard. The motion control sys-
tem is characterized by feedback/feedforward control strategies and periodic
execution. It is constrained by strict timing requirements that all packets must
arrive at their destinations before the period ends. The considered motion control
algorithms are distributed over a multi-processor platform. Various processors
in this platform are inter-connected by a RapidIO network. The main challenge
for system designers is how to map the motion control algorithms on the multi-
processor platform such that the timing constraints are met. Packet transfer
latencies as worst-case latencies and average-case latencies are essential criteria
for nding a feasible mapping.
A simulation based approach is available that relies on the Parallel Object-
Oriented Specication Language (POOSL) for investigating the performance
of the motion control system. First, a POOSL model is constructed for a given
mapping and then end-to-end packet transfer latencies are analyzed. These steps
are repeated for alternative mappings, until a feasible mapping has been found,
whose end-to-end latencies satisfy the timing constraints. POOSL analysis gives
both average-case and worst-case latencies. The obtained latencies are estima-
tion results since the POOSL analysis is based on simulation. However, as the
motion control application is time-critical, worst-case latencies are strict timing
constraints. Exact worst-case latencies are therefore demanded.
In this paper, we focus on verifying worst-case packet transfer latencies for
a realistic motion control system. In earlier work [11], we have shown that
transforming a POOSL model into an UPPAAL model is feasible. Based on
the obtained UPPAAL model, we also showed that quantitative verication for
worst-case latencies is only feasible for a fairly small system. We extend such
an approach to enable analyzing an industrial-sized problem in this paper. First
the POOSL model of a realistic motion control system is illustrated and trans-
formed into an UPPAAL model according to the transformation patterns in [11].
Second scalability experiments show that the UPPAAL model is not capable for
handling realistic (high volume) tracs. Then we propose some heuristics for
the UPPAAL approach. Experiments show that the UPPAAL approach with
heuristics can nd worse scenarios (worse latencies) than the POOSL approach

--- Page 3 ---
UPPAAL in Practice: Quantitative Verication of a RapidIO Network 3
and thus is an eective approximation method which complements the POOSL
approach for performance analysis.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the POOSL
model for a realistic motion control system. The transformation from the POOSL
model into an UPPAAL model is discussed in Section 3. We present the scal-
ability of the UPPAAL model and then propose some heuristics for worst-case
latency analysis in Section 4. Finally, conclusions are drawn in Section 5.
2 POOSL Model of a Realistic Motion Control System
POOSL was originally dened in [7] as an object-oriented extension of CCS
[6]. Meanwhile, POOSL has been extended with time in [4] and probabilities
in [3] to become a very expressive formal modeling language accompanied with
simulation, analysis and synthesis techniques that scale to large industrial design
problems [10].
Three types of objects are supported in POOSL: data, process, and cluster.
Data models the passive components of a system representing information that is
generated, communicated, processed and consumed by active components. The
elementary active components are modeled by processes while groups of active
components are modeled by clusters in a hierarchical fashion.
Figure 1 depicts the top-level POOSL model for a realistic motion control
system. The left part is for channel (refers to a specic type of packet with
specied size, source, and destination) generation. The right part represents the
underlying RapidIO network of the motion control system. These two parts
are connected by message si. The left part is implemented as a process class
RIOChannelTracGenerator . More details of this process class are shown in
gure 2.
The right part of gure 1 is implemented as a cluster class RIOResource . We
note that message siis multiplexed into 5 messages slot1,...,slot5 which connect
RIOChannelTracGenerator with dierent subparts of cluster RIOResource .
More details of RIOResource are shown in gure 3. RIOResource is mainly
constituted by 5 subparts CB1,CB2,CB3,CB4 , and CB5. Each subpart is an
instance of the cluster class RIOCarrierBlade .
RIOCarrierBlade represents a pair of packet switches and their connected
endpoints. Each switch connects with 4 endpoints directly. The details of RIO-
CarrierBlade are shown in gure 4. B1EP1,B2EP1,..., etc., each represents an
endpoint which is implemented as a process class RIOEndPoint . More details of
this process class are shown in gure 5.
In gure 4, SW1 and SW2 represent two packet switches. A packet switch
is implemented as a process class RIOSwitch . More details of this process class
are shown in gure 6.
The system works as follows: rst the channel (each channel refers to a specic
kind of packet, which will be divided into several equal-sized packets during
generation, see next section for details) generation part (left part of gure 1)
generates channels (actually packets); the generated packets are actually put into

--- Page 4 ---
4 UPPAAL in Practice: Quantitative Verication of a RapidIO Network
Fig. 1. POOSL model for a realistic motion control system
Fig. 2. Process Class RIOChannelTracGenerator
corresponding endpoints. Each endpoint represents a processor that is actually
sending and/or receiving packets. The generated packets then are sent from the
endpoints and routed among the whole RapidIO network until they are received
by their corresponding target endpoints. We notice that the whole underlying
RapidIO network includes 5 subparts; each subpart contains 2 packet switches
and 8 endpoints.

--- Page 5 ---
UPPAAL in Practice: Quantitative Verication of a RapidIO Network 5
Fig. 3. Cluster Class RIOResource
Fig. 4. Cluster Class RIOCarrierBlade
3 Transformation from POOSL to UPPAAL
UPPAAL is a tool for modeling, validation and verication of real-time systems.
It is based on the theory of timed automata (TA) [1] and its modeling language
oers additional features such as bounded integer variables and urgency [2]. The
query language of UPPAAL, used to specify properties to be checked, is a subset
of CTL (computation tree logic) [8, 5].
A timed automaton is a nite-state machine extended with clock variables.
It uses a dense-time model where a clock variable evaluates to a real number. All

--- Page 6 ---
6 UPPAAL in Practice: Quantitative Verication of a RapidIO Network
Fig. 5. Process Class RIOEndPoint
Fig. 6. Process Class RIOSwitch
the clocks progress synchronously. A system is modeled as a network of several
such timed automata in parallel. The state of a system is dened by the locations
of all automata, the clock constraints, and the values of the discrete variables.
Every automaton may re an edge (sometimes called a transition) separately or

--- Page 7 ---
UPPAAL in Practice: Quantitative Verication of a RapidIO Network 7
synchronize with another automaton, leading to a new state. We refer the reader
to [2] for a more thorough description of the timed automata used in UPPAAL.
Several general transformation patterns from POOSL to UPPAAL have been
characterized in [11]. In this section, we will mainly follow such patterns for the
transformation. However, we note that more abstractions and techniques (such
as timed automation template) have been used to simplify the transformation
as well as the model.
3.1 Data part transformation
The POOSL model in gure 1 includes various data classes. RIOPacket ,RI-
OChannel ,RIOQueue ,RoutingCache andRIOScheduler are the most important
ones. We only explain the transformation for RIOChannel as it is a newly intro-
duced data class. The transformation for other data classes has been introduced
in [11] and is omitted here.
RIOChannel RIOChannel is a data structure that refers to a specic kind
of packet which has a specied size, source, and destination. Realistic trac
scenarios can be easily expressed by grouping dierent kinds of channels. This
data class is transformed into an UPPAAL struct channel . Data methods for
accessing its member variables come for free in the UPPAAL model. Other data
methods such as nrOfPacketsPerBurst (a channel is divided into several pre-
dened equal-sized packets, nrOfPacketsPerBurst refers to the number of such
packets) are also easily transformed into the UPPAAL model.
3.2 Process part transformation
Three main improvements have been made for the process part transformation.
First, timed automaton templates are used to abstract typical activities such that
similar activities can be modeled by instantiating a timed automaton template
with dierent parameters. Second, transfer activity is abstracted into a non-
time-consuming activity, which greatly simplies the model. Third, the endings
of concurrent timed automata are synchronized as they consume the same time
(all packets have the same size), which also simplies the model.
From the POOSL model point of view, each switch contains at most 24
concurrent activities: 8 input activities (one for each input port that is actually
used), 8 transfer and 8 output activities (one for each output port that is actually
used). Each endpoint includes a sending and a receiving activity, depending on
whether the endpoint is actually used to send/receive packets into/from the
network. Besides, a trac generation activity, a trac sending activity and a
trac monitor activity exist in the process class RIOChannelTracGenerator .
As there are 10 switches and 40 endpoints in the POOSL model, the maximum
number of concurrent activities is 323 (24*10+40*2+3) for the POOSL model.
However, we will follow a new point of view to characterize such activities in
the UPPAAL model. Three types of concurrent activities have been character-
ized:

--- Page 8 ---
8 UPPAAL in Practice: Quantitative Verication of a RapidIO Network
1. Packet transfer from endpoint to switch which combines the sending activity
of an endpoint and the input activity of a switch; 2. Packet transfer from switch
to switch which combines the output activity of a switch and the input activity
of a switch; 3. Packet transfer from switch to endpoint which combines the out-
put activity of a switch and the receiving activity of an endpoint. Each endpoint
has its own trac sending activity. Trac generation activity and transfer ac-
tivity within a switch are abstracted into non-time-consuming activities. Trac
monitor activity is abstracted into the worst-case latency verication problem
of the obtained UPPAAL model.
Channel trac generation activity The POOSL model splits generation
of channel trac from actually sending them. Method generateBurst (POOSL
code is shown at the bottom part of gure 2) includes most of the details for
such activity. First, the POOSL model reads channel trac information from
a le channels.txt and creates sending queues for each involved endpoint. Then
channel trac will be generated in a uniformly random order according to the
channel trac information and stored in corresponding sending queues. Later,
the sending queues will be used by corresponding endpoints for actually sending
packets.
Such activity is transformed into an UPPAAL function handleRIOChannel
where only a specic ordering (refers to the sequence of channels in sending
queues) is considered (the ordering is embedded in the UPPAAL code). Sending
queues are implemented as arrays, additional functions are also provided such
that a FIFO accessing policy is enforced. The timed automaton which includes
this activity is shown in gure 7.
Fig. 7. Channel Trac Generation
If more orderings for channel trac generation are considered, trac gener-
ation for each channel is implemented as a timed automaton template shown in
gure 8. When the UPPAAL model starts, all such timed automata will re the
edge from the initial location and execute the update channelGen(i) to generate
the trac for the channel indexed by i. The nondeterminism among these timed
automata models the uniformly random generation of channel trac in POOSL
model.
Packet Transfer from Endpoint to Switch We illustrate transforming the
sending of packets by an endpoint and the input handling of packets received
by a switch, which connects the output of an endpoint to an input port of a
switch with a message. For example, message P2connects the output of endpoint

--- Page 9 ---
UPPAAL in Practice: Quantitative Verication of a RapidIO Network 9
Fig. 8. Channel Generation
B1EP1 to the input port p2of switch SW2 as in gure 4. The sending of packets
for a RIOEndPoint is specied by method handleServiceRequest shown in gure
5. The input handler for a RIOSwitch is specied by method HandleInputPort()
shown in gure 6.
Fig. 9. Packet Transfer from Endpoint to Switch
Such activity is transformed into a timed automaton template shown in gure
9. Three parameters are provided to specify the endpoint, the switch and its
input port. When broadcast synchronization signal parSync arrives, and the
condition sendQueueNotEmpty(n1) == true &&acceptSend(n1,s1,i1) == true
is satised, the timed automaton will move to the second location. The condition
checks if endpoint n1is not empty and the input queue i1of switch s1can
accept the current packet of endpoint n1. The timed automaton will stay in the
second location for the time it takes to transmit the packet over the link. In our
approach, the time consumed here is abstracted into the synchronization timed
automaton (see gure 10) as all concurrent activities consume the same time
(all packets actually transferred are equal-sized as mentioned earlier). The timed
automaton will move the current packet of endpoint n1to the input queue i1of
switch s1by function node2switch(n1,s1,i1) when it receives the signal reqSync
and then return to its initial location.
The other two kinds of concurrent activities can be transformed in a similar
way. We omit the details due to space limitation.
Transfer activity The transfer activity refers to the actual scheduling of pack-
ets from input queues to a specic output port (namely output arbitration).
This behavior is executed for each output port of a RIOSwitch and is specied
by method scheduleForOutput in the POOSL model.

--- Page 10 ---
10 UPPAAL in Practice: Quantitative Verication of a RapidIO Network
According to the conguration of the POOSL model, the transfer activity
starts when the head of a packet has arrived in the input queue. Then the head
is immediately forwarded to the output queue before the packet has completely
arrived in the output queue. The reason is: the switch fabric rate is always larger
than the link rate and therefore the packet is forwarded in \cut-through "mode.
As transfer activity seamlessly connects an input queue to an output queue as if
time is not consumed for this activity, we abstract it into a non-time-consuming
activity which is implemented as an update as shown in gure 10.
Fig. 10. Synchronization
Synchronization To enforce that only selected timed automata are red con-
currently and are synchronized with other timed automata, we use the following
timed automaton shown in gure 10. When the condition x<nextPacketNumber
&&start == true is satised, a broadcast synchronization signal parSync will be
raised. Then the timed automaton will move to the second location. xdenotes
the number of received packets and nextPacketNumber denotes the number of
generated packets. The condition checks if there still exist packets that have not
been received and all channel trac generations have nished. The timed au-
tomaton stays at the second location for a constant length of time (as discussed
above). Then it raises a reqSync signal to end all concurrent activities and then
return to its initial location. It will handle the transfer activity packetTransfer
if the condition packetTransferPossible() == true is satised during the return.
Or else, it will return to the initial location directly.
Worst-case Latency Verication The trac monitor activity is transformed
into the worst-case latency verication problem in the UPPAAL model. As we
only consider the scenarios that all channels are generated in a burst, the worst-
case latency is dened as the time when the whole burst has been handled (all
packets have been received). We constructed the timed automaton in gure 11
to verify the worst-case latency. When condition x== nextPacketNumber &&
x>0 is satised, the timed automaton will move to location S1. A self-loop is
added here to distinguish the deadlock from end of operation. The condition

--- Page 11 ---
UPPAAL in Practice: Quantitative Verication of a RapidIO Network 11
checks if all packets have been received. The endSync signal is dened as an
urgent channel to enforce that the transition will be taken immediately when
the condition is satised. The global clock globalT perfectly describes the worst-
case latency for the burst. Assume Wis the worst-case latency, we just need to
check if the property A[] globalT Wis satised. If this property is not satised,
we can increase Wstep by step until this property is satised. In other words,
the smallest upper bound for the worst-case latency can be found iteratively.
Fig. 11. Worst-case Latency Monitor
System Declaration Based on the building blocks obtained above, we can
instantiate timed automata templates into concrete timed automata according
to the system conguration. In the UPPAAL model, a concrete timed automa-
ton will be instantiated for each concurrent activity. Each endpoint is assigned
an id according to the le RIOIds.txt , whereas the id for a switch is actually
implemented as an index of an array (the total 10 switches are grouped into an
array). For example, n14s1i5 = Node2Switch(14,1,5) denotes the instantiation
of a concurrent activity referring to the packet transfer from endpoint 14 to
switch 1 at input port 5. In total about 80 concurrent activities are instantiated
in the UPPAAL model. Compared with more than 300 concurrent activities in
the POOSL model, the UPPAAL approach is considerably simplied.
4 Heuristics
In this section, we rst present the scalability of the UPPAAL model. Then we
propose some heuristics to reduce the underlying state space such that realistic
application scenarios can be analyzed.
4.1 Scalability of the UPPAAL model
Dierent orderings for channel trac generation result in dierent sending orders
for the packets in endpoints which are also referred to as trac scenarios. The
diculty of the state space exploration for the RapidIO network worst-case
latency analysis comes from this combinatorial problem. Experiments have been
run to show the scalability of the UPPAAL model and the results are listed in
table 1. The second row refers to number of packets included in the corresponding
channels. The channel information is selected from the le channels.txt . Ifn

--- Page 12 ---
12 UPPAAL in Practice: Quantitative Verication of a RapidIO Network
channel generation timed automata are declared in the model and the worst-case
latency can be veried, we say that the UPPAAL model support n!orderings
(verication time is not constrained here, JVM memory is set to the maximum
value (1500M) supported in our windows vista system).
Table 1. Scalability of the UPPAAL model
Number of Channels 10 20 30 40
Number of Packets (129) (300) (372) (459)
Supported orderings 6! 4! 4! 3!
Whole orderings 10! 20! 30! 40!
From table 1, the following conclusions can be drawn: 1. With the increase
of the number of channels (as well as packets), state space explosion occurs. 2.
The UPPAAL model can only support investigating a small part of the state
space for high volume tracs. Further, the heavier the trac, the smaller part
of the state space it investigates. Table 1 actually shows why the verication for
worst-case latency is so dicult.
4.2 Heuristics
From the above analysis for the scalability of the UPPAAL model, we see that ex-
act verication is not possible for high volume tracs. We then turn to heuristic
methods and anticipate that worse packet transfer latencies can be found (than
the POOSL approach). In this section, we will introduce some heuristics for state
space reduction of the UPPAAL model such that high volume trac scenarios
can be analyzed.
Before we go into the details of the heuristics, we assume that: 1. The routing
information and the output arbitration are fair. 2. Channel trac is uniformly
distributed in the endpoints and switches involved. 3. Trac is never overloaded
such that only a few collisions occur.
Heuristics H1 Each endpoint has its own sending queue. The sending of an
endpoint is independent from others unless collisions occur. As collisions are few
compared with the whole trac load according to the assumption, the sending
of each endpoint can be seen as independent most of the time. The orderings
among dierent endpoints are not relevant for the worst-case latency and will
not be considered. We can thus focus on the orderings within each endpoint.
Besides, when two or more channels within an endpoint have the same type, the
orderings among these channels are also irrelevant and will not be considered (as
they are symmetric). We combine these two heuristics and refer it as H1. Table
2 shows the result obtained by applying heuristic H1. Compared with table 1,
we can see that: the state space obtained by using the heuristic H1 is still too
large to be analyzed.

--- Page 13 ---
UPPAAL in Practice: Quantitative Verication of a RapidIO Network 13
Table 2. Heuristic H1
Number of Channels 10 20 30 40
Number of Packets (129) (300) (372) (459)
Reduced orderings with H1 5! 5!5!4!2! 8!6!5!5!2!2! 9!6!6!5!5!3!2!
Heuristic H2 Among all the activities operated in the RapidIO network, col-
lisions only occur when two or more input queues compete for one output port
(queue) within a switch. Based on the above assumptions, the following obser-
vations hold. 1. The longest sending queue (endpoint) is most probably to be
the last one nished. 2. The more collisions within a sending queue, the worse
scenario it is. A heuristic easily follows: generating more collisions for the longest
sending queue. However, it would be too complicated to implement as the de-
tailed routing information must be investigated.
We then come up with another idea: generating more collisions for all end-
points (the whole system). It is obvious that: the more switches a packet goes
through, the more likely collisions occur for this packet. We can thus put such
packets in the front end of all endpoints to generate more collisions. The number
of switches a channel goes through is reected in the latency listed in table 3
(packet size is assumed to be 100 bytes). These latencies are obtained by simu-
lation (both POOSL and UPPAAL simulator can do) for each channel (packet)
type. It is obvious that: the larger the latency, the more switches it goes through.
In table 3, the rst row and rst column both denote the id of endpoints. For
example, the element 5 in the second row and fth column means the latency
from source endpoint 2 to destination endpoint is 5. Due to the space limitation,
only part of the possible packet types is listed (there are 40 endpoints in the
system).
Table 3. Latency for Channel (Packet) Types)
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
2 0 2 2 5 5 5 4 4
3 2 0 2 5 5 5 4 4
4 2 3 0 5 5 5 4 4
5 5 5 5 0 2 2 3 3
6 5 5 5 2 0 2 3 3
7 5 5 5 2 2 0 3 3
8 4 4 4 3 3 3 0 2
9 4 4 4 3 3 3 3 0
We have developed a java application program to sort all channels in each
endpoint such that channels are put in sending queues in descending order (the
larger latency of the channel type is, the more forward this channel is in the

--- Page 14 ---
14 UPPAAL in Practice: Quantitative Verication of a RapidIO Network
sending queue of the endpoint) according to the table. As we have mentioned
earlier, only a few orderings can be considered. We thus only investigate several
dierent orderings for front channels in the largest sending queue.
Experiment Results Experiments have been run with the use of the above
heuristics H1 and H2 in the UPPAAL model. POOSL results are also provided
for comparison. The rst row in table 4 refers to the number of channels. The
results are the worst-case packet transfer latency obtained by two approaches.
Table 4. Experiment Results: UPPAAL Heuristic vs. POOSL
Number of Channels 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160
POOSL Result 128 227 298 350 504 501 504 515
UPPAAL Heuristic Result 129 220 322 371 538 539 539 522
Both heuristics H1 and H2 are applied in the experiment. From table 4,
we can see that: for low volume trac scenarios, the UPPAAL approach us-
ing heuristics cannot guarantee to nd worse latencies. This phenomenon comes
from the fact that: POOSL's simulation engine is very eective and can explore
a large part of the state space for low volume trac scenarios. Whereas, even
for low volume trac scenarios UPPAAL can only explore a small part of the
state space (see table 1). However, for high volume trac scenarios, with the
progress of state space explosion, the superiority of the high-speed engine for
POOSL disappears. The UPPAAL approach using heuristics can always nd
worse scenarios than with the POOSL approach. The UPPAAL approach us-
ing heuristics is an ecient approach to complement the POOSL approach for
nding approximate worst-case latencies.
5 Conclusions and Future Work
The exact worst-case packet transfer latency is an important metric for motion
control applications that run on multiple processors interconnected by a Ra-
pidIO network. We have proposed a model checking approach using UPPAAL
for this problem [11]. However, such an approach only applies to small scale
models. In this paper, we extend such an approach and apply it to a realistic
application scenario. First, we transform the POOSL model of a realistic motion
control system into an UPPAAL model. Then we show that the application of
the UPPAAL approach for exact worst-case packet transfer latency verication
is limited to low volume tracs. We propose to use heuristics for high volume
tracs. Although only approximate results can be obtained, the heuristics is still
valuable as worse scenarios can be found than POOSL approach. Experiments
show that the UPPAAL approach with heuristics is eective to complement the
POOSL approach for nding approximate worst-case latencies.

--- Page 15 ---
UPPAAL in Practice: Quantitative Verication of a RapidIO Network 15
In this paper, we only apply the heuristics to the UPPAAL approach. It is
somewhat unfair for the comparison of the two approaches. We will apply the
heuristics to POOSL approach and compare their performance in a fairly fash-
ion. Besides, the RapidIO network (includes 323 concurrent activities) discussed
in our paper is only a small part of the POOSL model of the total system, which
includes an estimated 2500 processes that all include between 1 and about 10
concurrent activities. Further abstraction techniques are still needed to scale
up to such real industrial sized problems. Future work also includes transform-
ing POOSL into UPPAAL at a more semantical level by means of additional
transformation patterns[11].
References
1. Alur, R., Dill, D.: Automata for modeling real-time systems. In: Proceedings of the
seventeenth international colloquium on Automata, languages and programming.
pp. 322{335. Springer-Verlag New York, Inc., New York, NY, USA (1990)
2. Behrmann, G., David, R., Larsen, K.G.: A Tutorial on UPPAAL. In: LNCS, Formal
Methods for the Design of Real-Time Systems (revised lectures). pp. 200{236.
Springer (2004)
3. van Bokhoven, L.: Constructive Tool Design for Formal Languages: From Semantics
to Executing Models. Ph.D. thesis, Eindhoven University of Technology (2002)
4. Geilen, M.: Formal Techniques for Verication of Complex Real-Time Systems.
Ph.D. thesis, Eindhoven University of Technology (2002)
5. Logothetis, G., Schneider, K.: Symbolic model checking of real-time systems. In-
ternational Syposium on Temporal Representation and Reasoning 0, 0214 (2001)
6. Milner, R.: Communication and Concurrency. Prentice Hall (1989)
7. van der Putten, P., Voeten, J.: Specication of Reactive Hardware/Software Sys-
tems. Ph.D. thesis, Eindhoven University of Technology (1997)
8. Queille, J.P., Sifakis, J.: Specication and verication of concurrent systems in
Cesar. In: Proceedings of the 5th Colloquium on International Symposium on Pro-
gramming. pp. 337{351. Springer-Verlag, London, UK (1982)
9. Shippen, G.: A technical overview of RapidIO. http://www.eetasia.com/ART_
8800487921_499491_NP_7644b706.HTM (Nov 2007)
10. Theelen, B.D., Florescu, O., Geilen, M., Huang, J., van der Putten, P., Voeten,
J.: Software/hardware engineering with the Parallel Object-Oriented Specication
Language. In: MEMOCODE '07: Proceedings of the 5th IEEE/ACM International
Conference on Formal Methods and Models for Codesign. pp. 139{148. IEEE Com-
puter Society, Washington, DC, USA (2007)
11. Xing, J., Theelen, B.D., Langerak, R., van de Pol, J., Tretmans, J., Voeten, J.: From
POOSL to UPPAAL: Transformation and quantitative analysis. In: Proceedings
of the International Conference on Application of Concurrency to System Design.
pp. 47{56. IEEE Computer Society, Los Alamitos, CA, USA (2010)
