--- Page 1 ---
 
 
 
Model Checker Aided Design of a Controller for a Wafer Scanner
Hendriks, M.; Nieuwelaar, N.J.M. van den; Vaandrager, F.W.
2006, Article / Letter to editor (International Journal on Software Tools for Technology Transfer, 8, 6,
(2006), pp. 633-647)
Doi link to publisher: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10009-006-0025-7
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Version of the following full text: Author’s version preprint
Downloaded from: https://hdl.handle.net/2066/35654
Download date: 2026-04-01
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Note:
To cite this publication please use the final published version (if applicable).

--- Page 2 ---
M odel Checker A ided D esign of a Controller for  
a W afer Scanner*
M artijn H endriks1, B arend van den Nieuwelaar2**, and Frits V aandrager1
1  Nijmegen Institute for Computing and Information Sciences, 
Radboud University Nijmegen, The Netherlands 
{m artijnh,fvaan}@ cs.ru.nl,
2  Department of Mechanical Engineering 
Eindhoven University of Technology, The Netherlands 
N.J.M .v.d.Nieuwelaar@ tue.nl
A b stra c t. For a case-study of a wafer scanner from the semiconduc­
tor industry it is shown how model checking techniques can be used to 
compute (i) a simple yet optimal deadlock avoidance policy, and (ii) an 
infinite schedule that optimizes throughput. Deadlock avoidance is stud­
ied based on a simple finite state model using S m v, and for throughput 
analysis a more detailed timed automaton model has been constructed 
and analyzed using the UPPAAL tool. The S m v  and UPPAAL models are 
formally related through the notion of a stuttering bisimulation. The 
results were obtained within two weeks, which confirms once more that 
model checking techniques may help to improve the design process of 
realistic, industrial systems. Methodologically, the case study is interest­
ing since two models (and in fact also two model checkers) were used 
to obtain results that could not have been obtained using only a single 
model (tool).
1 Introdu ction
Scheduling and resource allocation problem s occur in m any different domains, 
for instance (1) scheduling of production lines in factories to optim ize costs and 
delays, (2) scheduling of com puter program s in (real-time) operating system s to 
m eet deadline constraints, (3) scheduling of micro instructions inside a proces­
sor w ith a bounded num ber of registers and processing units, (4) scheduling of 
trains (or airplanes) over lim ited quantities of railway tracks and crossroads, and 
(5) mission planning for autonom ous robots on spacecrafts. Typically, in each of 
these dom ain problems are solved using different approaches and m athem atical 
tools. The EU 1ST project A m etist (see h t t p : / / a m e t i s t . c s . u t w e n t e . n l / ) en­
visages a unifying framework for tim e-dependent behavior and dynam ic resource 
allocation th a t crosses the boundaries of application domains.
*  Supported by the European Community Project IST-2001-35304 (Ametist).
** Part-time software architect at ASML, Veldhoven, The Netherlands.


--- Page 3 ---
In the A m etist approach, com ponents of a system  are modeled as dynamical  
systems  w ith a state space and a well-defined dynam ics. All th a t can happen 
in a system  is expressed in term s of behaviors  th a t can be generated by the 
dynam ical systems; these constitute the sem antics of the problem. Verification, 
optim ization, synthesis and other design activities explore and modify system  
structure so th a t the resulting behaviors are correct, optim al, etc. Preferably, 
the lim itations of currently known com putational solutions should not influence 
m odeling too much: only after the sem antics of a problem  is properly under­
stood, abstractions and specialization due to  com putational considerations can 
intervene. In such situations, the soundness of abstractions should ideally also 
be proved, either via deductive verification or model checking.
The mission of A m etist is to extend this approach, which underlies the suc­
cessful dom ain of form al verification,  to resource allocation, scheduling and other 
tim e-related problems. The m athem atical carrier for the A m etist m ethodology 
is the timed autom aton  model [2,3], a m odeling framework for discrete event 
dynam ical system s th a t can handle quantitative tim ing delays between events. 
Some tools for model checking  tim ed autom ata already exist, e.g., K r o n o s  [22] 
and UPPAAL [13]. Model checking is a m ethod for formally verifying dynam ical 
systems. Specifications about the system  are expressed as tem poral logic for­
mulas, and efficient symbolic algorithm s are used to traverse the model and to 
check (fully autom atically) if the specification holds or not. We aim at further 
improving model checking tools for tim ed autom ata, investigating the applica­
bility of these tools, and establishing links to tools developed in specific dom ains 
whenever appropriate.
In this paper, as an illustration of the A m etist methodology, we use model 
checking techniques to solve the deadlock avoidance and throughput optim iza­
tion problem s for a realistic case of a wafer scanner from the sem iconductor 
industry.
A m ajor concern in the design of controllers for m any resource allocation 
system s (RASs) is deadlock,  a perm anently blocking condition. There are three 
general ways of handling deadlock: (i) deadlock prevention, (ii) deadlock detec­
tion and resolution, and (iii) deadlock avoidance. Deadlock prevention restricts 
the system  in such a way th a t deadlock is a priori impossible. As a consequence, 
perform ance m ay be unnecessarily low. Deadlock detection and resolution, on 
the other hand, is not restrictive at all and detects and resolves a deadlock at 
run-tim e. This, however, m ay be very expensive. Deadlock avoidance achieves 
a m iddle ground; it dynam ically chooses the control actions to avoid the oc­
currence of deadlock. In this paper, we show how a least restrictive deadlock 
avoidance policy (DAP) for the wafer scanner can be easily com puted using 
Smv, a model checker for finite autom ata. This DAP can be represented by a 
very short predicate over the states of the wafer scanner, which can be used by 
the controller for the wafer scanner.
In addition, we use the tim ed autom aton tool UPPAAL to define a refined 
model th a t adds tim ing constraints to address the issue of throughput optim iza­
tion. We relate the UPPAAL model to the Smv model via the concept of stuttering


--- Page 4 ---
bisimulation  introduced by Browne, Clarke and G rum berg [5]. Since stuttering 
bisim ulation preserves validity of CTL formulas (w ithout nexttim e operator), 
all properties (and in particular the DAP) th a t we established for the untim ed 
model using Smv, carry over to the UPPAAL model. It is not possible to com pute 
the least restrictive DAP directly for the UPPAAL model since (a) UPPAAL does 
not support full CTL, and (b) the state space of the UPPAAL model is so big 
th a t it cannot be fully explored. Using heuristics, however, we are able to use the 
UPPAAL model checker to to find an infinite schedule th a t optimizes throughput.
Contribution.  We obtained our results w ithin two weeks, and we believe th a t 
our m ethod can be applied by engineers w ith a background in com puter science 
after training of only a few days. This confirms th a t model checking m ay help 
to improve the design process of realistic, industrial systems. O ur DAP com­
p utation approach is referred to in a p atent application of ASML, which shows 
its significance for industry. M ethodologically, the case study is interesting since 
two models (and in fact also two model checkers) were used in com bination to 
obtain results th a t could not have been obtained using only a single model (tool). 
O ur approach illustrates once more th a t building models th a t are ju st abstract 
enough for addressing a specific question, often provides a way to deal w ith the 
state space explosion problem . The Smv and UPPAAL models are formally re­
lated through the notion of a stutterin g  bisim ulation. We are not aware of other 
work th a t addresses both deadlock avoidance and throughput optim ization in 
(what essentially is) a single framework.
Related work.  O ther papers in which model checking tools are used to solve 
scheduling problem s include a case study in which a control schedule for a sm art 
card personalization system  is synthesized using the Smv model checker [10], 
and a case study in which the UPPAAL model checker is used to find feasible 
schedules for a steel plant [9]. The present work is a follow-up on [4], which 
considers the same example as the present paper and uses suboptim al deadlock 
avoidance heuristics to generate schedules th a t are not guaranteed to be optim al. 
The present work, however, gives a least restrictive (and thus optim al) DAP and 
a schedule th a t optim izes stationary throughput in the absence of errors.
Much research has been devoted to deadlock avoidance in RASs, see for in­
stance [18,19]. Discouraged by the NP-com pleteness of optim al deadlock avoid­
ance for m any RAS classes, see for instance [14], this kind of work generally 
focuses either on com putation of suboptim al bu t polynom ial DAPs or on opti­
mal policies for very specific sub classes. M uch of this work uses the P etri net 
formalism [17] for the modeling and analysis of RASs.
In [11] a deadlock free controller is constructed by an iterative process. The 
parallel com position of the controller and the plant is checked against deadlock 
by Sm v. If a deadlock state is found, then the controller is adjusted to exclude 
the counterexam ple and the verification is run again. Otherwise, the controller 
is deadlock free. Finally, the work presented in [21] deals w ith verification of 
several DAPs using Sm v.
Outline.  F irst, Section 2 inform ally presents the case study. Section 3 then 
presents the Smv model and shows two ways of obtaining an optim al DAP us­


--- Page 5 ---
ing Sm v. In Section 4, a Uppa a l  model of the wafer scanner is proposed and 
infinite schedules which optim ize throughput are com puted. Finally, Section 5 
draws some conclusions and gives directions for future work. A full version of 
this article, which includes all the proofs, is available as [12]. The complete 
Smv and Uppa a l  models used in our case study are available at the URL 
h t t p : / / w w w .c s .r u .n l / i t a / p u b l i c a t i o n s / p a p e r s / m a r t i j n h / .
2 T he E U V  M achine
Locks Internal robots ChucksLithographic machines, called wafer scanners , are used w ithin the semiconduc­
tor industry to project chip designs on slices of silicon which are called wafers. 
A key perform ance characteristic of wafer scanners is throughput, i.e., the num ­
ber of wafers th a t can be processed per tim e unit. For a typical recipe1  it is 
desirable th a t the exposure operation (which uses the lens which is the m ost ex­
pensive p art of the machine) is critical in optim al schedules. In order to maximize 
throughput, a controller should have a strategy th a t optim izes throughput in the 
absence of errors. Furtherm ore, we require th a t the controller is deadlock-free, 
since deadlock resolution is expensive.
Figure 1  schem atically depicts a possible design of an Extreme Ultra V iolet  
machine  (EUV m achine), which is a particular type of wafer scanner th a t is 
currently being developed by ASML. The inside of an EUV m achine is kept 
vacuum  as EUV light is absorbed by air. The wafer flow is presented in Figure 1. 
First, the external track robot (which 
is not shown) puts a wafer in one of 
the four locks. This lock is depressur­
ized, and then the wafer is picked up 
by one of the two internal robots. Each 
internal robot has two arm s th a t can 
each hold a wafer and th a t are oppo­
site to each other. The internal robot 
turns and puts the wafer on the closest 
chuck, which is in the so-called “mea­
sure position” . The wafer is m easured 
and a chuck swap is perform ed. The 
chuck w ith the m easured wafer now is 
in the “expose position” and the wafer 
is exposed. A fter another chuck swap, 
the exposed wafer is picked up by one 
of the internal robots which tu rn s and 
puts it in a depressurized lock. Af­
ter the lock has been pressurized, the 
track robot removes the exposed wafer
from the machine. Each wafer thus has a fixed recipe for its route: lock - internal 
robot - chuck - internal robot - lock. There is a choice which locks, internal robotsFig. 1: W afer paths w ithin the EUV m a­
chine.
1  The timing parameters of the production depend on the chips to be produced.


--- Page 6 ---
and chucks are used by a wafer. An obvious question th a t arises is why we not 
let the unexposed wafers flow through the upper two locks and let the exposed 
wafers exit through the lower two locks. In th a t case there are no crossing m ate­
rial paths which m eans th a t there is no deadlock possible by construction. The 
answer is twofold. F irst, if locks are unidirectional then filling the m achine from 
the initial, empty, state takes unnecessarily long. Second, if locks are unidirec­
tional then the depressurization operation m ight become critical instead of the 
exposure, since depressurization takes more th an  twice as long as exposure in a 
typical wafer recipe. As noted above, this is undesirable. In Section 4, we will 
prove th a t indeed the exposure subsystem  is critical in the design of Figure 1, 
and th a t restricting the wafer flow to prevent deadlock a priori lowers b oth the 
throughput and the utilization of the exposure subsystem .
A typical exam ple of a deadlock situation in the EUV m achine would be a 
state in which all four robot arm s hold unprocessed wafers, and b oth chucks 
hold processed wafers. A controller for the EUV machine should ensure th a t 
no such deadlock situation can ever be reached. The problem  of finding such a 
control strategy is commonly referred to as the deadlock avoidance problem. The 
EUV m achine is a disjunctive RAS according to the taxonom y of [15]. Instead 
of the traditional P etri net or graph based approaches to  solving the deadlock 
avoidance problem, we will show in the next section how it can be tackled using 
the Smv model checker.
3 A  Least R estrictive D eadlock A voidan ce P olicy
In this section, after a (very) brief introduction into Sm v, we present our Smv 
model of the EUV machine, discuss how one can formalize the notion of deadlock 
as a tem poral logic formula, and present the deadlock avoidance policy th a t we 
synthesized using Sm v. The reader is referred to [7] and [16] for an extensive 
introduction into model checking and Sm v.
3.1 S M V
In the approach supported by the Smv model checker, a system  is modeled as 
a finite transition system,  i.e. as a tuple (S, sinit, ^ )  where S  is a finite set of 
states, sinit is the initial state, and ^  C S  x S  is the transition relation. We 
w rite s ^  s'  instead of (s, s')  G ^ . A state is defined as a valuation of a num ber 
of state variables.  The value of state variable v in state s is denoted by s(v). 
Furtherm ore, s[v :=  c] denotes the state th a t is obtained by updating the value 
of v in state s to  c. A path  of a transition system  is a sequence sos1s2  •  •  •  such 
th a t for all i, s* ^  si+1. A state is reachable  if it occurs on some p ath  th a t starts 
in sinit.
In Smv, specifications are described in Computation Tree Logic (CTL),  a 
branching tim e tem poral logic. Below some examples of CTL formulas are given, 
which should be sufficient to understand the present paper. The basic building 
blocks of CTL are atomic formula , which denote functions from the set of states


--- Page 7 ---
to {true, false}.  For instance, if v is a state variable, then v =  2 is an atom ic 
formula, which denotes the function from states to {true, false}  th a t m aps a 
state s to true iff s(v) =  2. In this case, we say state s satisfies  formula v =  2, 
notation s =  (v =  2). Every atom ic formula is a state formula.  S tate formulas 
can be combined w ith Boolean connectives and path operators.  We show three 
p ath  operators th a t are relevant for this paper. F irst, if ^  is a state formula, then 
A G (^ ) also is a state formula. A state s satisfies A G (^ ), denoted by s =  A G (^ ), 
if for all paths s0s 1s2  . .. w ith s =  s0, and for all i >  0, s* =  ^. Second, if ^  is a 
state formula, then E F (^ ) is also a state formula. We define s =  E F (^ ) if there 
exists a p ath  s0s 1s2  . .. such th a t s =  s0  and s* =  ^, for some i >  0. Finally, if 
^  is a state formula, then E G (^ ) also is a state formula. We define s =  E G (^ ) 
if there exists a p ath  s0s 1s2  ... w ith s =  s0  such th a t for all i >  0, s* =  ^.
3.2 A n  S M V  M o d e l o f th e  E U V  M a c h in e
The EUV machine can be modeled conveniently and concisely in Sm v. In fact, 
the full code is displayed in Figure 2.
module main ()
—  state variables
array 0..3 of {e,r,g};
array 0..1 of array 0..1 of {e,r,g};
array 0..1 of {e,r,g};
—  initialization  
for (i=0; i<4; i=i+1)
init(l[i]):=e;  
for (i=0; i<2; i=i+1)  
for (j=0; j<2; j=j+1)  
init(rb[i][j]):=e;  
for (i=0; i<2; i=i+1)  
init(c[i]):=e;
—  system dynamics  
for (i=0; i<4; i=i+1)
tl[i]: process entry_exit(l[i]);
for (i=0; i<4; i=i+1)  
for (j=0; j<2; j=j+1)
lr[i][j]: process move(l[i] ,rb[(i<2?0:1)][j]);
for (i=0; i<2; i=i+1)  
for (j=0; j<2; j=j+1)  
for (k=0; k<2; k=k+1)
rc[i][j][k]: process move(rb[i][j],c[k]);module entry_exit (p)
{
if (p=e)
next(p):=r;  
else if (p=g)  
next(p):=e;
}
module move (lft,rgt)
{
if (lft=r && rgt=e)
{
next(lft):=e;
next(rgt):=r;
}
else if (lft=e && rgt = g)  
{
next(lft):=g;  
next(rgt):=e;
}
}
module expose (p)
{
if (p=r)
next(p):=g;
}
for (i=0; i<2; i=i+1)
exp[i]: process expose(c[i]);
Fig. 2: Smv model of EUV machine.


--- Page 8 ---
For each of the 10 positions in the m achine our model contains a state vari­
able: an array l  of size 4 for the locks, a 2-dimensional array rb  of size 2 x 2 
for the robots, and an array c of size 2 for the chucks. These state variables can 
either take value e (em pty ), which m eans th a t the position is empty, value r  
(red), which m eans th a t the position is occupied by an unexposed wafer, or g 
(green ), which means th a t the position is occupied by an exposed wafer. Initially, 
the machine is com pletely em pty and all state variables have value e.
To model the system  dynam ics, i.e., the movement and exposure of wafers, 
we introduce 22 asynchronous processes, which are executed in an interleaving 
fashion:
—  For each of the 4 locks i  we have process tl [ i ] , which m ay either pu t an 
unexposed wafer in lock i  if it is empty, or move an exposed wafer from 
the lock to the track robot. In the definition of process t l [ i ]  we use an 
auxiliary function e n try _ e x it th a t describes the state change th a t results 
from running this process.
—  For each of the 16 pairs of positions i, j such th a t i  is on the left of j and 
a wafer can move directly from i  to j (or back), we introduce a process 
th a t takes care of moving unexposed wafers from i  to  j , and exposed wafers 
from j back to i. In the definition of these processes we use a function 
m o v e (lft, r g t)  th a t describes the state change th a t results from moving a 
wafer from l f t  to r g t  or vice versa.
—  For each of the 2 chucks i  we introduce a process exp[i] th a t models exposure 
of the wafer. An auxiliary function expose describes the state change th a t 
results from exposing the wafer at position p: the value of the corresponding 
state variable changes color from r  (red) to  g (green).
In the Smv model we abstract from the turning of internal robots. So a wafer 
can be picked up by b oth arm s of an internal robot (possibly, the robot first has 
to tu rn ). Similarly, the Smv model abstracts from chuck swaps and the measure 
operation. In Section 4, we present a more detailed model of the EUV machine 
in which we do not abstract from these aspects.
As it turns out, our Smv model has 57116 reachable states, which is close 
to the to tal num ber of states which equals 310 =  59049. An exam ple of an 
unreachable state is one in which the m achine is com pletely filled w ith exposed 
wafers. Transition system s of this size can very easily be handled by Smv and 
the com puter hardw are th a t is available today. In fact, Smv routinely handles 
system s w ith 1020 states and beyond, so we expect th a t our approach can also 
be applied to considerably larger designs.
3.3 D e fin in g  D e a d lo c k  a n d  S a fe ty  in  S M V
Standard textbooks on operating systems, e.g. [20], state four conditions for 
deadlock in system s th a t consist of processes  th a t com pete for resources.  The 
first three conditions concern the model itself and are necessary, and the fourth 
condition concerns the states of the model and is necessary and sufficient when


--- Page 9 ---
the first three are met: (i) m utual exclusion: only one process m ay use a resource 
at a tim e, (ii) hold and wait: a process m ay hold allocated resources while await­
ing assignm ent of others, (iii) no preem ption: no resource can be forcibly removed 
from a process th a t is holding it, and (iv) circular wait: a closed chain of pro­
cesses exists such th a t each process holds at least one resource needed by the 
next resource in the chain.
In the EUV machine, the wafers are modeled as the processes and they 
com pete for the positions in the machine th a t constitute the resources. The 
model of the EU V  machine satisfies the first three conditions for deadlock. The 
fourth condition, which thus is necessary and sufficient for deadlock, can be 
formalized w ith help from a needs  function, th a t specifies for each wafer the 
set of positions it m ay move to. Let P  denote the set of positions in the EUV 
machine. For p G  P  and c G  {r, g}, we define needs(p,c)  C P  to be the set of 
positions (different from p) to  which a wafer w ith color c at position p m ay move 
next. In particular, if p is a chuck, then needs(p,  r) =  needs(p,  g) =  R, where R is 
the set of positions of the internal robots. If s is a state and p a position then we 
use needss  (p) as an abbreviation for needs(p,  s(p)). The circular wait property 
can now be defined as follows.
D e fin itio n  1 ( C irc u la r w a it). A state  s has a  circular wait in Q C P  iff
s(q) =  e A 0 =  needss (q) C Q =  0 for all  q G  Q.
It is not possible to directly form ulate the circular wait property in term s of 
CTL, so some encoding is required. The basic idea is th a t the m achine has a 
circular wait in a subset Q of positions iff the wafers in Q will never be able to 
move again. Observe th a t if in our model a transition s ^  s' moves a wafer from 
place p to place p', then p is em pty in s '. Thus, the property th a t some wafer 
cannot move anymore can be formalized in CTL as follows.
D e fin itio n  2 ( J a m ) . A position  p is jam m ed in state  s iff s =  A G (p  =  e). A 
state  s is jam m ed iff some position is jam m ed in s.
Proposition 1  below asserts the equivalence of the circular wait and jam m ed 
properties, thereby providing us w ith a way to express deadlocks in CTL. It has 
only been proven for our model of the EUV machine, bu t from the proofs it 
should be clear th a t these results can be generalized to a whole class of resource 
allocation problems.
P r o p o s itio n  1. A state has a circular wait in some  Q iff it is jammed.
In the rem ainder of this paper, we will say th a t a state is deadlocked  if it 
has circular wait, i.e., if it is jam m ed. The question th a t we need to answer 
is w hether and how we can prevent the system  of entering a deadlocked state. 
In D ijkstra’s paper on the banker’s algorithm  [8], the first published deadlock 
avoidance algorithm , a state is defined to be safe if “all processes can be run 
to com pletion” . In our case, the wafers are the processes and “a wafer is run to 
com pletion” if it exits the machine. Thus, D ijkstra’s definition can be translated 
to CTL as follows.


--- Page 10 ---
Note th a t in general safe and not being deadlocked are different things. If a state 
s is not deadlocked then s =  / \ peP  E F (p  =  e), i.e., each individual position 
can be em ptied, b u t it need not be the case th a t all positions can be em ptied 
simultaneously. If a state is deadlocked it is unsafe, bu t if it is unsafe it need not 
be deadlocked. However, in m any cases and (according to Smv) in particular for 
our model of the EUV machine, the following property does hold2:
A G  (safe ^  (E G  -deadlock)). (1)
This formula suggests a simple least restrictive DAP: ju st keep the system  in a 
safe state. This policy can be realized for the EUV machine. Every non-initial 
safe state has at least one safe successor (different from itself), otherwise it would 
not be not possible to retu rn  to the initial state. In addition, we verified using 
Smv th a t all successors of the initial state are again safe.
3.4 A  L e a s t R e s tr ic tiv e  D A P
In order to actually build a controller th a t always keeps the system  in a safe state, 
it would clearly be very helpful to  have a simple, yet exact characterization of 
the set of safe states. We see two ways to obtain such a characterization.
1. W hen checking w hether the initial state is safe, Smv com putes a binary  
decision diagram  (BDD, see [6]) which provides a com pact representation of 
the set of safe states. W ith the available Smv releases it is not possible to get 
the BDD out. However, since there is an open-source distribution available 
solving this problem  should ju st be a m atter of program m ing.
2. The set of safe states can be m anually characterized by the following iterative 
procedure:
S  :=  true
w h ile  (sinit =  A G (safe S))
S  :=  S  A ( - C )
where C  is the characterization of the last state of the counter example th a t 
is generated by Sm v.
The first approach enables a least restrictive DAP w ith linear tim e complex­
ity, since checking w hether a state is included in a BDD takes O (n) operations, 
where n  is the num ber of booleans from which the BDD is composed (20 in case 
of the EUV machine). The size of the BDD, however, can in the worst case be
2  In fact, in the EUV machine a state is safe if and only if it has no deadlock. It is
easy to come up w ith variations of the machine w ith states th a t are not safe and not 
deadlocked, for example a design in which the internal robots only have one arm. In 
such cases, in order to make formula (1) hold, we need to require weak fairness for 
all processes in the Smv model to exclude runs in which no progress is made due to 
infinite stuttering of some components.D efin itio n  3 (S afe sta te s ). A state  s is safe iff s =  E F  (p =  e)J .


--- Page 11 ---
exponential in the num ber of booleans. A second drawback is th a t it can be dif­
ficult to derive individual unsafe an d /o r deadlock situations from a BDD, which 
m ay be required during the design phase of the system. The second approach 
can quickly become practically infeasible since all unsafe states are explicitly 
enum erated. If it is carried out manually, however, then it m ight be possible to 
abstract from irrelevant state inform ation and to visualize the various unsafe 
situations in the system . Of course, this requires some effort and creativity from 
the analyst. The second approach has been used to characterize the safe states 
of the EUV machine. W ith five iterations, we found four unsafe situations, de­
picted in Figure 3, which happen to characterize all deadlocks. A right-pointing
Fig. 3: The four unsafe scenarios (modulo symmetry) in the EUV machine.
arrow represents an unexposed wafer, a left-pointing arrow represents an ex­
posed wafer, and a black square represents an unexposed or exposed wafer. The 
predicate S  th a t exactly characterizes the set of safe states is the negation of 
the situations shown in Figure 3, and can be described in the input language of 
Smv w ith 695 characters.
Note th a t Smv can also be used to obtain a simple under-approxim ation 
of the set of safe states (when, e.g., the BDD is too large to use and the iter­
ative process is too tim e consuming). If C  is a candidate for a simple under­
approxim ation, then this can be verified w ith the CTL property A G (C  ^  safe). 
Again, counter-exam ples can be used to correct C  while retaining low complex­
ity. Note, however, th a t it now becomes is necessary to ensure th a t the initial 
state is reachable from any state in C  (this is tru e by definition for the set of all 
safe states).
4 T hroughp ut A nalysis
A first objective for a controller of the EU V  m achine is to avoid deadlocks. In 
the previous section, using our Smv model, we synthesized a least restrictive 
control policy th a t achieves this. A second key objective for a controller of the 
machine of course is to maximize throughput. O ur Smv model is not sufficiently 
detailed to address this issue since, for instance, relevant inform ation about the 
delays in the locks and the speed of the robots has not been included. Also,


--- Page 12 ---
the Smv model abstracts from the delays due to turning of the internal robots, 
m easuring of wafers, and swapping of the chucks. Therefore, in this section, we 
present a more refined timed automata model  ([2,3]), which contains sufficient 
inform ation to  address the throughput issue.
In order to define and analyze our model, we used the U p p a a l model check­
ing tool. U p p a a l supports m odeling of system s in term s of networks of tim ed 
autom ata which are extended by blocking synchronization and bounded inte­
ger variables. Similarly to Smv, the sem antics of a U p p a a l model is defined by 
a transition system . In addition to the discrete part, the states also contain a 
real-valued clock valuation. For these models, the U p p a a l model checker can 
decide a subset of Timed Computation Tree Logic  (TCTL, see [1]). For a detailed 
account of U p p a a l we refer to [13] and to  h ttp ://w w w .u p p a a l.c o m .
After presenting the Uppa a l  model of the EU V  machine in Section 4.1, we 
discuss the relationship between the Uppa a l  and Smv models in Section 4.2. 
Then, in Section 4.3, we use Uppa a l  to derive a schedule for the EUV machine 
th a t optim izes throughput.
4.1 U P P A A L  M o d e l
The U p p a a l model of the EU V  machine contains the same state variables as 
the Smv model for the positions in the machine: arrays l, rb  and c, which 
m ay take the same values e, r  and g to indicate th a t a position is respectively 
empty, filled w ith an unexposed wafer, or w ith an exposed wafer. In addition, 
the U p p a a l model has a num ber of Boolean state variables to ensure “physical 
integrity” . For instance, an internal robot can only access a lock if it is vacuum. 
This requirem ent is modeled using the Boolean lb  [id] for lock num ber id . The 
model consists of 12 autom ata, of which 11 model physical com ponents of the 
machine: the track robot, the four locks, the four robot arm s (two for each 
of the robots), and the two chucks. These autom ata move wafers around with 
certain delays and according to the m aterial paths as specified in Section 2. An 
additional autom aton, the observer,  is used for throughput optim ization.
To illustrate the modeling in U p p a a l, we present the tem plate for one arm  
of an internal robot, see Figure 4. This tem plate has four param eters: a constant 
id th a t identifies the internal robot to which the arm  belongs, two constants 10 
and 1 1 th a t identify the locks to which the robot arm  has access, and a channel 
turn . W hen a robot arm  is at the locks, then it can get a wafer from a lock 
(L02R  and L12R),  or it can pu t a wafer in a lock (R2L0  and R 2L 1 ). Of course, 
it can only perform  these actions if the lock is vacuum, and if the wafer flow is 
as specified in Section 2. Similarly, when a robot arm  is at the chucks then it 
can load/unload a wafer to /fro m  the chuck th a t is at the measure  location. The 
cb variables are used to ensure th a t only one robot arm  has access to  the chuck 
at a tim e and th a t the chuck cannot execute a transition while the robot arm  is 
loading/unloading a wafer.
Figure 5 shows the observer process which, as we will explain in more detail 
in Section 4.3, is used to ensure progress in the model. This process measures 
the tim e until the first wafer exits the system  (this is called an unload event) in


--- Page 13 ---
Fig. 4: Template for a robot arm.
location LO, and the tim e between two consecutive unload events in location L I 
using its local clock x.
LO LI
©unload? I  unload?
x:=0-OC] 5=
Fig. 5: Process for the observer.
4.2 Bisimulation between SMV and UPPAAL models
Clearly, there is a relationship between the Smv model and the UPPAAL model. 
The Smv model is an abstraction from the UPPAAL model, which has the prop­
erty th a t every transition in the UPPAAL model can be sim ulated in the Smv 
model, and vice versa. Formally, the relationship between the two models can 
be expressed as a stuttering bisimulation  relation in the sense of [5]. Stuttering 
bisim ulations are defined in term s of Kripke structure , an extension of transition 
system s in which to each state a set of atom ic propositions is associated th a t 
hold in th a t state.
Definition 4 (Kripke Structures). Let AP be a set of  atom ic proposition 
symbols. A Kripke structure is a structure  (S', s init,  — /), where  (S', s init,  — ► )  is a 
transition system  and function I :  S' — * ■  2AP associates to each state a set of  
atomic proposition symbols.
In this paper, we let AP be the set of equations of the form p = v,  where p 
is a position in the EUV machine and v G  { e ,r,g } . For the transition system s 
induced by the Sm v and UPPAAL models, the labeling is obvious: we label a 
state s w ith p = v  iff this equation holds in s. For the Sm v model the labeling


--- Page 14 ---
function is injective: different states have different labels. For the UPPAAL model 
this is clearly not the case.
A stutterin g  bisim ulation relates states from two Kripke structures. Initial 
states are related, and related states are labeled w ith the same proposition sym­
bols. If two states are related and from one state a transition is possible, then it 
should be possible to sim ulate this transition from the related state, after first 
doing zero or more stuttering transitions,  i.e., transitions th a t do not change the 
labeling.
D e fin itio n  5 ( S tu tte r in g  B is im u la tio n ). A stu tterin g  bisim ulation between  
Kripke structures (S, sin it, ^ ,  l) and (S ', s'in it, ^ ' , l) is a relation R  C S  x S ' s.t.
(S  in it, S'n it) € R ,
2. If (r, s) € R  then l(r)  =  l(s),
3. if (r, s) € R  and r ^  r ' then there exist, for some n  >  0, so, s i ,.. ., sn such  
that so  =  s and, for all i <  n, si  ^ '  si+ i, (r, si ) € R  and (r', sn) € R.
4. if (r, s) € R  and s ^  s' then there exist, for some n  >  0, ro, ri, ... ,r n such  
that ro  =  r and, for all i <  n, ri ^  ri+ i, (ri, s) € R  and (rn, s') € R.
P r o p o s itio n  2. Consider the projection function n from  states of the Kripke  
structure induced by the  UPPAAL model to states of the Kripke structure induced  
by the  SMV model. Function n only preserves the values of the arrays  l , rb  and 
c. Let R  be the relation consisting of pairs  (s ,n (s)), for s a reachable state from  
the UPPAAL model. Then R  is a stuttering bisimulation between the  UPPAAL and 
SMV Kripke structures.
The significance of the above result stem s from the fact th a t validity of CTL 
formulas w ithout nexttime  operator (i.e. all the formulas used in this paper) is 
preserved by stutterin g  bisim ulation equivalence (see [5]). Thus, all the results on 
deadlock avoidance established using Smv in Section 3 carry over to  the UPPAAL 
model. It is not possible to  obtain these results directly using the UPPAAL tool 
since (a) UPPAAL does not support full CTL, and (b) the state space of the 
UPPAAL model is so big th a t it cannot be fully explored.
4 .3  F in d in g  a n  O p tim a l S c h e d u le
As m entioned above, the observer  process of Figure 5 observes unload events. 
It starts in location LO and upon the first unload event it resets its local clock 
x and enters location L1. In location L1 the clock is reset whenever an unload 
event takes place. The observer is used to find an infinite schedule th a t takes 
at m ost H tim e units until the first unload event, and th a t has at m ost S tim e 
units between two unload events. Such a schedule is specified by the following 
TC TL property th a t can be checked by UPPAAL.
E G ((observer.LO  ^  observer.x <  H ) A (observer.L1  ^  observer.x  <  S)) (2)
If this property is satisfied, then UPPAAL can retu rn  an example execution 
th a t consists of a p ath  followed by a cycle. Such an execution thus gives an infinite


--- Page 15 ---
control schedule for the wafer scanner w ith a stationary  throughput of at least 
one wafer per S tim e units. U nfortunately, the size of the reachable state space 
prevents UPPAAL from finding such an execution directly. We therefore added 
heuristics to the model to prune the state space:
1. The DAP derived in the previous section has been used to avoid unsafe 
m aterial configurations of the machine.
2. Some transitions are useless (or suboptim al) in certain states, e.g., an internal 
robot can always turn, bu t this is useless if it does not hold wafers. The state 
space has been reduced by adding guards th a t prevent such useless behavior.
3. The optim al behavior of the locks in the initial phase (the filling of the m a­
chine) differs from their optim al behavior in the stationary phase. Therefore 
a heuristic has been added to enforce this difference: a lock can pressurize 
when it contains either an exposed wafer, or it is em pty and the machine is 
not yet filled w ith enough wafers to be in the stationary state.
4. Some transitions have been m ade urgent  (greedy): they m ust be taken as 
soon as they are enabled. For instance, if the DAP allows loading a wafer to 
a lock, then this m ust be done immediately.
Note th a t using urgent transitions w ithout the DAP m ay be an unwise idea, 
since this can result in m any deadlocks w ith the effect th a t an execution satis­
fying P roperty 2 does not exist anymore in the model. Also note th a t at least 
the last three heuristics m ay remove good schedules.
A lower bound on the tim e until the first unload event, minh, can easily be 
derived from the model. It is also easy to see th a t the m inim al separation tim e 
between exposed wafers th a t appear at the chuck th a t is in the m easure position 
(and can therefore be picked up by an internal robot) equals mins  =  E X PO SE +  
SWAP,  where the former is the tim e needed for the expose operation and the 
latter is the tim e needed for the chuck swap. Therefore, the theoretical m axim al 
stationary throughput of the m achine is at m ost one wafer per mins  tim e units. 
For the UPPAAL model w ith heuristics it is possible to find an execution th a t 
satisfies P roperty 2 for a value of H th a t is 5% larger th an  minh  and for S =  mins .  
Figure 6 shows this schedule th a t optim izes the stationary throughput of the 
EUV machine.
It took only little effort to change the UPPAAL model in order to  analyze two 
alternative m achine designs w .r.t. throughput. In the first design, the incoming 
wafers have been restricted to the upper two locks and the outgoing wafers to 
the lower two locks (to prevent deadlock a priori; see Section 2). We can easily 
find an optim al schedule w ith S = 1 .6 1  •  mins  th a t shows th a t not the expose 
operation bu t the locks have become critical. This confirms our suspicion th a t 
has been stated  in Section 2. The second alternative design consists of only two 
locks and one internal robot. We can easily find a schedule w ith S =  1.82 •  mins,  
bu t we cannot guarantee th a t this is an optim al schedule.


--- Page 16 ---
LENS
C0
C1
R00
R01
R10
R11
L0
L1
L2
L3C2R
DEPRES
EXPO
L2R
L2T
MEAS
PRES
R2C
R2L
SWAP
SWITCH
T2L
TURN
Fig. 6: A schedule that optimizes the stationary throughput of the EUV machine. The 
cyclic part of the schedule consists of the interval between points A and B. Note that 
the operation of the lens is only interrupted by the chuck swap (which is necessary).TrackRobot
A B
5 C onclusions
The SMV model checker has successfully been used to characterize the set of 
safe states of the EU V  machine. This characterization consists of a very short 
boolean expression over the places in the m achine and is useful for the design 
of an actual controller since deadlock can easily be avoided by exam ining the 
possible successor states of the current state. Since the characterization is exact, 
the controller im plem ents a least restrictive (optim al) deadlock avoidance policy. 
Furtherm ore, we used the Uppa a l  model checker to com pute infinite schedules 
for the EUV machine th a t optim ize stationary throughput. It took little effort to 
change the Uppa a l  model in order to analyze two alternative machine designs. 
In theory, our approach can be applied to a broad class of resource allocation 
systems. As always when using model checking, the state space explosion is the 
m ain problem  for scalability. A ltogether, in our view, the present work nicely 
illustrates the usefulness of model checking techniques to support the design 
process of applications th a t involve resource allocation and scheduling. Building 
models th a t are ju st abstract enough for addressing a specific question, often 
provides a good way to deal w ith the state space explosion problem.
Acknowledgements.  The authors thank B iniam  Gebremichael for his useful 
suggestions concerning the SMV model, and the anonymous reviewers for their 
helpful com m ents on a prelim inary version of the present paper.


--- Page 17 ---
R eferences
1. R. Alur, C. Courcoubetis, and D. L. Dill. Model checking in dense real time. 
Information and Computation,  104:2-34, 1993.
2. R. Alur and D. L. Dill. Automata for modeling real-time systems. In Proceedings  
17th ICALP,  pages 322-335, 1990.
3. R. Alur and D. L. Dill. A theory of timed automata. TCS,  126:183-235, 1994.
4. N. C. W. M. Braspenning. Scheduling and behavior verification of machines based 
on task-resource models. M aster’s thesis, Department of Mechanical Engineering, 
Eindhoven University of Technology, The Netherlands, October 2003. Confidential.
5. M.C. Browne, E.M. Clarke, and O. Griimberg. Characterizing finite Kripke struc­
tures in propositional temporal logic. TCS,  59(1,2):115-131, 1988.
6. R. E. Bryant. Graph-based algorithms for boolean function manipulation. IEEE  
Transaction on Computers,  C-35(8):677-691, August 1986.
7. E. M. Clarke, O. Grumberg, and D. A. Peled. Model Checking.  MIT Press, 2000.
8. E. W. Dijkstra. Cooperating sequential processes. Technical report, Eindhoven 
University of Technology, The Netherlands, 1965.
9. A. Fehnker. Scheduling a steel plant with timed automata. In Proceedings  
RTCSA’ 99.  IEEE Computer Society Press, 1999.
10. B. Gebremichael and F. W. Vaandrager. Control synthesis for a smart card per­
sonalization system using symbolic model checking. In Proceedings FORMATS’ 03,  
LNCS 2791, pages 189-203. Springer-Verlag, 2004.
11. V. Hartonas-Garmhausen, E. M. Clarke, and S. Campos. Deadlock prevention in 
flexible manufacturing systems using symbolic model checking. In IEEE Confer­
ence on Robotics and Automation,  volume 1, pages 527-532, 1996.
12. M. Hendriks, N.J.M. van den Nieuwelaar, and F.W. Vaandrager. Model checker 
aided design of a controller for a wafer scanner. Report NIII-R0430, Institute for 
Computing and Information Sciences, University of Nijmegen, June 2004.
13. K. G. Larsen, P. Pettersson, and W. Yi. UPPAAL in a nutshell. International  
Journal on Software Tools for Technology Transfer,  1(1/2):134-152, 1997.
14. M. Lawley and S. A. Reveliotis. Deadlock avoidance for sequential resource alloca­
tion systems: Hard and easy cases. International Journal of Flexible Manufacturing  
Systems , 13(4):385-404, 2001.
15. M. Lawley, S. A. Reveliotis, and P. Ferreira. Design guidelines for deadlock han­
dling strategies in flexible manufacturing systems. International Journal of Flexible  
Manufacturing Systems,  9(1):5-30, January 1997.
16. K. L. McMillan. Symbolic Model Checking . PhD thesis, Carnegie Mellon University, 
Pittsburgh, May 1992.
17. T. Murata. Petri nets: Properties, analysis, and applications. Proceedings of the  
IEEE , 77(4):541-580, 1989.
18. J. Park and S. A. Reveliotis. Deadlock avoidance in sequential resource allocation 
systems with multiple resource acquisitions and flexible routings. IEEE Transac­
tions on Automatic Control,  46(10):1572-1583, 2001.
19. S. A. Reveliotis, M. Lawley, and P. Ferreira. Polynomial-complexity deadlock 
avoidance policies for sequential resource allocation systems. IEEE Transactions  
on Automatic Control , 42(10):1344-1357, 1997.
20. W. Stallings. Operating Systems.  Prentice-Hall, 1998.
21. Y. Wang and Z. Wu. Deadlock avoidance control synthesis in manufacturing sys­
tems using model checking. In IEEE American Control Conference , volume 2, 
pages 1702-1704, 2003.
22. S. Yovine. KRONOS: a verification tool for real-time systems. International Journal  
on Software Tools for Technology Transfer,  1(1/2):123-133, 1997.

