--- Page 1 ---
Co-Simulation of Hybrid Systems with SpaceEx and Uppaal
Sergiy Bogomolov1Marius Greitschus2Peter G. Jensen3Kim G. Larsen3
Marius Miku ˇcionis3Thomas Strump2Stavros Tripakis4
1IST Austria, Austria
2University of Freiburg, Germany
3Aalborg University, Denmark
4Aalto University, Finland, and University of California, Berkeley, USA
Abstract
The Functional Mock-up Interface (FMI) is an indus-
try standard which enables co-simulation of complex
heterogeneous systems using multiple simulation en-
gines. In this paper, we show how to use FMI in
order to co-simulate hybrid systems modeled in the
model checkers S PACE EXand U PPAAL . We show how
FMI components can be automatically generated from
SPACE EXand U PPAAL models. We also validate the co-
simulation approach by comparing the simulations of a
room heating benchmark in two cases: ﬁrst, when a sin-
gle model is simulated in S PACE EX; and second, when
the model is split in two submodels, and co-simulated us-
ing S PACE EXand U PPAAL . Finally, we perform a mea-
surement experiment on a composite model to show a
potential for statistical model checking using stochastic
co-simulations.
Keywords: FMI, hybrid system, timed automaton
1 Introduction
Despite advances in model checking and other for-
mal veriﬁcation techniques, simulation remains the
workhorse for system analysis. A plethora of simulation
tools are available today, from academia as well as from
industry. These tools support a large variety of model-
ing languages, targeted at different types of systems from
various disciplines (e.g., mechanical, electrical, digital,
continuous or discrete, or mixes thereof). Unfortunately,
these tools can rarely interoperate. This is a problem
because modern cyber-physical systems are highly com-
plex and multidisciplinary, requiring specialized model-
ing languages and tools from several domains.
The Functional Mock-up Interface1(FMI) is a stan-
dard developed to address this problem. FMI deﬁnes
an XML schema for describing simulation components
and a C API that these components must implement.
The components are called functional mock-up units ,
1Seehttps://www.fmi-standard.org/ for more details.or FMUs. An FMU is typically generated automati-
cally (exported) from some simulation tool, and corre-
sponds to a (sub-)model designed in that tool. The sub-
models/FMUs are then imported into a host simulator.
The host commands the simulation by calling the API
methods of the FMUs, thus effectively achieving integra-
tion of the original simulation environments. FMI sup-
ports two integration modes: (a) model exchange , where
the host simulator is handles the numerical integration;
and (b) co-simulation , where each FMU implements its
own numerical integration mechanism (or any other in-
ternal mechanism to advance its state in time). Because
each mode imposes its own requirements on FMUs (for
instance, in model exchange, the FMUs must provide the
host with information such as state derivatives, which are
not necessary for co-simulation) the FMI APIs for the
two modes are different.
In this paper, we use FMI in order to connect two
state-of-the-art modeling and veriﬁcation tools for cyber-
physical systems: S PACE EX(Frehse et al., 2011) and
UPPAAL (Larsen et al., 1997). S PACE EXis a tool
for modeling and verifying hybrid systems (Alur et al.,
1995). U PPAAL is primarily a model-checker for timed
automata (Alur and Dill, 1994), however, it also supports
statistical model-checking of hybrid systems (David
et al., 2011).
Our goal is to integrate these two tools for co-
simulation. That is, we want to be able to: (a) build a
sub-model of the system (e.g., the model of the plant un-
der control) in S PACE EX; (b) build another sub-model
(e.g., the controller ) in U PPAAL ; (c) automatically gen-
erate an FMU for each sub-model; (d) import the FMUs,
connect and co-simulate them in a host environment.
The motivations for connecting S PACE EXand
UPPAAL in this manner are numerous. First, although
both S PACE EXand U PPAAL support simulation of hy-
brid systems, each tool offers its own modeling lan-
guage, which is not compatible with that of the other
tool. Translating from one language to the other is lim-
ited to common features supported by the tools. For
example, even though the frameworks CIF (Agut et al.,
DOI
10.3384/ecp15118159Proceedings of the 11thInternational Modelica Conference
September 21-23, 2015, Versailles, France159

--- Page 2 ---
2013; Beohar et al., 2010) and HSIF (Pinto et al., 2006)
solve the complexity problem of one format translation
to another by performing at most two translations, the
approach still suffers from the fact that U PPAAL features
like committed locations and C-like function code are not
supported in S PACE EXand U PPAAL has limited support
for ODEs. Moreover, by using co-simulation, we are
able to take advantage not just of the speciﬁc strengths
of the language of each tool, but also of their native sim-
ulation engines, since each FMU is internally running
essentially a “copy” of the simulation algorithm of the
original tool.
As host environment we use the tool Ptolemy2.
Ptolemy is a modeling and simulation environment for
heterogenous systems (Eker et al., 2003). Recently, sup-
port has been implemented in Ptolemy for using it as
a host environment for co-simulation based on FMI.
FMUs (developed by other tools) can be imported into
Ptolemy, connected using Ptolemy’s graphical user in-
terface, and co-simulated using an implementation of
the co-simulation algorithm described by Broman et al.
(2013). This algorithm has desirable properties, such as
determinacy , namely, the fact that the results of the simu-
lation are independent of arbitrary factors such as names
of the FMUs, order of creation, or order of evaluation in
the diagram.
The contributions of this paper are the following:
1. We show how FMUs can be generated automati-
cally from models of hybrid and timed automata
built in S PACE EXand U PPAAL . There are several
subtleties involved in this, as hybrid and timed au-
tomata are models designed primarily with veriﬁ-
cation in mind, whereas FMI is designed for sim-
ulation and therefore imposes certain properties on
FMUs, such as determinism.
2. We report on the implementation and case studies.
In particular, we apply our co-simulation frame-
work to a room heating benchmark (Fehnker and
Ivancic, 2004).
3. We validate the co-simulation algorithm proposed
by Broman et al. (2013) by comparing the results
of the case study in two settings: (a) when the case
study is modeled and simulated in a single tool, and
(b) when the various components of the case study
are modeled in two tools and co-simulated using
our framework. We show that our co-simulation
framework computes the same simulation trajecto-
ries as the setting (b) provided that the maximum
simulation step size of co-simulation is sufﬁciently
small.
4. We demonstrate how stochastic simulations can be
included into the composite model with hybrid sys-
tems and applied a simple statistical measurement
2Seehttp://ptolemy.eecs.berkeley.edu/ .to show the potential for statistical model checking
using FMI co-simulations.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In
Sec. 2, we introduce the necessary background on FMI
for this work. Afterwards, we present our translation
of S PACE EXand U PPAAL models into FMUs in Sec. 3.
This is followed by the case study in Sec. 4. We discuss
related work in Sec. 5. Finally, we conclude the paper in
Sec. 6.
2 Background on FMI
Conceptually an FMU can be seen as a (timed) state
machine. This machine has a set of input variables (or
ports ), a set of output variables, and a set of internal
states. The machine interacts with its environment only
by means of a clearly deﬁned set of interface methods .
These methods are speciﬁed in the FMI standard. For
the purposes of this paper, and following the formaliza-
tion presented by Broman et al. (2013), the key interface
methods of FMI (for co-simulation) are:
•A method to initialize the state of the FMU. If Sis
the set of states of the FMU, then init∈S.
•A method setto set a given input variable to a cer-
tain value. The signature of set isset:S×U×
V→S, where Uis the set of input variables of the
FMU, and Vis the set of all possible values (for
simplicity we ignore typing and use a single uni-
verseVof values for all variables). Given state s,
input variable u∈U, and value v∈V,set(s,u,v)
returns the new state obtained after setting utov.
•A method get which returns the value of a given
output variable. Its signature is get:S×Y→V,
where Yis the set of output variables of the FMU.
Given state sand output variable y∈Y,get(s,y)
returns the value of yins.
•A method doStep which advances the state of
the machine in time. Its signature is doStep :
S×R≥0→S×R≥0, whereR≥0is the set of non-
negative real numbers. The behavior of doStep is
explained below.
As said above, an FMU is essentially a state machine:
thegetmethod corresponds to the output function of the
machine, while the doStep method corresponds to the
transition function. The difference is that doStep takes
as input a time step h ∈R≥0: in that sense, an FMU is a
timed state machine.
The behavior of doStep is as follows. Given state
s∈S, and time step h∈R≥0, a call to doStep(s,h)is
interpreted as the co-simulation algorithm “asking” the
FMU to perform a simulation step of length h. For aCo-Simulation of Hybrid Systems with SpaceEx and Uppaal
160 Proceedings of the 11thInternational Modelica Conference
September 21-23, 2015, Versailles, FranceDOI
10.3384/ecp15118159

--- Page 3 ---
number of reasons, including numerical integration is-
sues, the FMU may “accept” or “reject” this request. If it
rejects, it means that it was not able to advance time by h
(but may have been able to advance time by a smaller de-
layh′<h). Formally, doStep(s,h)returns a pair (s′,h′)
where s′∈Sis a state and h′∈R≥0is a time step, such
that:
•either h′=h, which is interpreted as Fhaving ac-
cepted h , and having moved to a new state s′;
•or 0≤h′<h, which is interpreted as Fhaving re-
jected h , but having made partial progress up to h′,
and having reached a new state s′.
It is worth noting that FMUs are deterministic ma-
chines, in the sense that for a given sequence of inputs
(i.e., a sequence of input values and time steps), the se-
quence of states and outputs that the machine produces
is unique. This is because there is a unique initial state
init∈S, and set,get,doStep are all total functions .
Moreover, the fact that these functions are total implies
that the machine is able to accept any input at any time,
therefore, it is implicitly input-enabled .
We also rely on zero-time steps in a sense of allowing
doStep(s,h)calls with h=0 (despite that version 2.0 of
the FMI standard forbids this), because they are essential
for modeling discrete transitions like instantaneous mode
switches in hybrid automata models.
In addition to the above, each FMU comes with a set
ofinput-output dependencies ,D⊆U×Y.Dspeciﬁes
for each output variable which input variables it depends
upon (if any): (u,y)∈Dmeans that output variable yde-
pends on input variable u. This information is used to
ensure that a network of FMUs has no cyclic dependen-
cies, and also to determine the order in which all network
values are computed during a simulation step (Broman
et al., 2013).
FMI speciﬁes the methods that every FMU must im-
plement, but it does notspecify the co-simulation algo-
rithm (also called a master algorithm ). In fact, devising
such an algorithm with good properties is not a trivial
problem, and has been the topic of previous work (Bro-
man et al., 2013). In that work, two co-simulation algo-
rithms were proposed and proved to have desirable prop-
erties, such as termination of a simulation step, and de-
terminacy . The determinacy property says that the re-
sults of a simulation do not depend on the order in which
the algorithm chooses to call doStep over a set of FMUs.
This ensures that the simulation results are well-deﬁned
and are not inﬂuenced by arbitrary factors such as FMU
names, order of creation, geometrical position in the dia-
gram of a graphical model, etc., as is often the case with
simulation tools.
In a nutshell, the co-simulation method proposed
by Broman et al. (2013) relies on the following princi-
ple. First, the co-simulation algorithm chooses a default
time step, hmax, called the maximum step size . Second,the algorithm saves the state of each FMU in the model
(FMI speciﬁes methods for an FMU to export and import
its state, although these are optional). Assuming there
arenFMUs, F1,...,Fn, the algorithm maintains nstates,
s1,...,sn. Third, the algorithm calls Fi.doStep(si,hmax)
on each FMU Fi, and collects the returned time steps
h′
1,...,h′
n. There are two cases: either all FMUs accepted
the proposed time step, i.e., h′
1=h′
2=···=h′
n=hmax,
in which case this simulation step is over, and the algo-
rithm proceeds to the next one; or at least one FMU Fi
rejected hmax, i.e., h′
i<hmaxfor some i. In the latter
case, the algorithm computes the minimum of h′
1,...,h′
n,
hmin=min{h′
1,...,h′
n}, restores the saved state of each
FMU, and tries again with new step size hmin.
Assuming that the FMUs satisfy the reasonable
“monotonicity” property that if they were able to ad-
vance time by h′
ithen they are also able to advance time
by any smaller step, and by the fact that hminis smaller
than all h′
i, the second attempt is guaranteed to succeed.
That is, hminwill be accepted by all FMUs. As a result,
at most after two attempts, a co-simulation step is suc-
cessful, and the algorithm proceeds with the next step,
repeating the same procedure as above.
The FMI standard sets out a framework where FMUs
share the notion of time and exchange variable values via
input-output ports: outputs from one FMU are mapped as
inputs to other FMU(s) and so on. The output port val-
ues are said to be owned and controlled by the emitting
FMU, whereas the inputs are computed and provided
by another (outputting) FMU. The framework foresees
that before producing an output an FMU may ﬁrst need
some input values and thus input-output dependency in-
formation is introduced. Overall the I/O port connec-
tivity graph derived from the model of interconnected
FMUs, together with the local I/O dependencies of each
individual FMU, result in a global I/O dependency graph
for the entire model (Broman et al., 2013).
Time and I/O values are synchronized by the co-
simulation algorithm: the time is agreed by repeatedly
consulting each FMU and the I/O values are propagated
according to dependencies. The co-simulation algorithm
assumes that each FMU provides a static dependency list
of its ports before simulation starts, and that the result-
ing global I/O dependency graph is acyclic, and therefore
there exists a schedule for computing the value of every
input port before the value of a dependent output port is
requested (Broman et al., 2013).
3 Translating Models into FMUs
The behavior of individual FMUs is provided by the
model-checker’s simulation engines based on the guide-
lines described by Tripakis (2015). In particular, the
report distinguishes continuous and discrete dynamics.
The continuous behavior is modeled by differential equa-
tions over continuous variables whose values can beSession 3A: FMI 2
DOI
10.3384/ecp15118159Proceedings of the 11thInternational Modelica Conference
September 21-23, 2015, Versailles, France161

--- Page 4 ---
shared among FMUs by the means of port connec-
tions. The output ports of an FMU are mapped to the
owned/controlled variables which are read and written
to, whereas input ports map to read-only variables within
the FMU.
The discrete behavior is modeled by discrete transi-
tions in the timed/hybrid automata control ﬂow struc-
ture. The discrete transitions are designed to be exe-
cuted with micro-steps of zero delay. Transitions can
also be decorated with event labels and each tool sup-
ports its own kind(s) of synchronizing compositions in-
ternally and therefore the discrete transition synchroniza-
tion is also handled individually within the tools. Tri-
pakis (2015) provides the means of discrete transition
synchronization by allocating two special port variables:
one for incoming (input) synchronization and one for
outgoing (output) synchronization. The domain of dis-
crete input (output) ports coincides with the set of input
(output) labels plus a special value absent which denotes
no synchronization or an internal discrete transition.
3.1 Uppaal
UPPAAL uses timed automata models (Alur and Dill,
1994), extended with discrete variables over structured
types to describe behaviors of a timed system. In timed
automata, the continuous dynamics is controlled by real-
valued clock variables (with derivatives set to one) and
discrete states complemented with integer variables –
both of which are candidates for exchange via FMU
input-output ports. Statistical model checking (SMC) ex-
tensions (David et al., 2011, 2015) allow a ﬁner control
of the clock derivatives by means of ordinary differential
equations, moreover the discrete transitions are stochas-
tic where the execution is determinized by probability
distributions over time and over branching edges. The
stochastic semantics of a parallel composition is simi-
lar to the FMI co-simulation algorithm (Broman et al.,
2013): the way the minimum delay is negotiated and
thus the timed composition within the FMI framework
is straightforward, and task is to ﬁnd a systematic way of
handling discrete synchronizations. U PPAAL also sup-
ports the maximal progress or ASAP semantics on edges
labeled with urgent channels.
UPPAAL supports the notion of discrete I/O synchro-
nization natively by means of input and output channel
labels. Thus, its discrete input and output transitions can
be mapped directly to the input/output port variables of
an FMU that is dedicated to transfer the synchroniza-
tion label name. Nonetheless, we distinguish the fol-
lowing kinds of transitions: internal (transitions without
I/O channel synchronization or internally synchronized
transitions for which channels are not marked as input or
output), input transitions (labeled by an input synchro-
nization where the channel name is marked as an FMU
input), and output transitions (labeled by an output syn-
chronization where channel is marked as an FMU out-put). The marked outputs are controlled by the U PPAAL
simulation and are executed asynchronously irrespective
of whether the receiving FMU is ready to synchronize.
Meanwhile, the input transitions are executed only when
there is a corresponding input label set on a discrete input
port. At most one (internal, input or output) transition is
allowed at a time, hence ﬁne-grained simulation control
can be achieved by the co-simulation algorithm.
UPPAAL FMUs do not introduce I/O dependencies be-
tween continuous variables because the models do not
use algebraic expressions to compute variable values. In-
stead of algebraic expressions the automata use discrete
transitions to update the variable values. However, only
one discrete transition is allowed at a time, therefore all
discrete outputs have dependencies on the inputs dedi-
cated to synchronization labels which restrict the selec-
tion of a particular discrete transition and hence speciﬁc
variable update.
3.2 SpaceEx
SPACE EX(Frehse et al., 2011) uses hybrid automata to
describe system behavior where the continuous variable
derivatives are constrained by differential equations. The
continuous variables are candidates for input and output
exchange via FMU ports. The discrete transitions of hy-
brid automata can be decorated with labels. Synchro-
nization may involve multiple participating processes,
but there is no notion of input and output – all processes
are equal contributors, therefore the simulator needs to
implement the input/output semantics required by FMI.
We use a special label naming notation to mark input and
output labels (see Fig. 6). The transitions with input la-
bels are only executed when the discrete input variable of
FMU is set to the corresponding label name. Meanwhile,
the transitions with an output label are controlled by
SPACE EX’ simulation, and are executed asynchronously
by setting the discrete output variable with the label
name irrespectively of whether the receiving FMU can
synchronize with it. We ensure the S PACE EXFMU de-
terminism by enforcing the must-semantics of discrete
transitions in a hybrid automaton. In other words, a dis-
crete transition is taken as soon as its guard is enabled.
Finally, we resolve the non-determinism between input,
output, and internal transitions in the following way: in-
put transitions have priority over output transitions and
output transitions are preferred over the internal ones.
Both U PPAAL and S PACE EXtranslations simulate the
source models as they are without intermediate transfor-
mations, except of the following additions: 1) input en-
abledness is ensured by broadcast channels in U PPAAL
modeling and asynchronous I/O is implemented for
SPACE EXsynchronization labels, 2) for determinization
SPACE EXuses maximal progress whereas U PPAAL uses
stochastic semantics with a possibility of urgent channels
for maximal progress.Co-Simulation of Hybrid Systems with SpaceEx and Uppaal
162 Proceedings of the 11thInternational Modelica Conference
September 21-23, 2015, Versailles, FranceDOI
10.3384/ecp15118159

--- Page 5 ---
x=1a!x=1b!a?
b!x=1c!b?
c!x=1d!c?
d!
A1 A2 A3 A4
Figure 1. An example of four timed automata chain.
3.3 Discussion on Co-Simulation Semantics
In this section, we discuss the co-simulation seman-
tics and contrast it to those typically used by a model-
checking tool. In particular, we demonstrate by exam-
ple how the FMI co-simulation algorithm resolves in-
put/output dependencies and contrast it with execution
analysed in a model checker. Our goal is to offer insights
in the differences of the two semantics.
Consider a system model shown in Fig. 1 which con-
sists of four timed automata composed in parallel. La-
bels of the form a! denote sending output a, whereas a?
denotes receiving an input a. The variable xis aclock
measuring time starting from zero. The constraint x=1
is aguard which allows the corresponding transition of
the automaton to occur only if the guard is satisﬁed, i.e.,
in this case only when xequals 1. The automata synchro-
nize in a chain: the ﬁrst can output ato the second one,
the second one can output bto the third one and so on.
In principle, the system can be loaded into an FMI
model in any combination: individually (one automaton
per FMU) or collectively (multiple automata per FMU),
but before an FMU can be loaded into an FMI model, it
must declare its input/output dependencies. According
to Broman et al. (2013) each automaton should expose
an input/output variable which will contain the synchro-
nization label value. Automaton A1in the example above
will have only an output variable, which may have values
{a, absent }. Automaton A2will have an input variable
ranging over { a, absent } and an output variable ranging
over { b, absent }, and so on. The special value absent de-
notes that currently there is no synchronization. Timed
automata must declare a dependency between its input
and output label variable in order to avoid simultaneous
input and output synchronizations.
In addition, it is assumed that each FMU is input-
enabled , meaning that it can handle (i.e., it is able to
receive) any declared input at any time. If a component
is not input-enabled and an input synchronization is trig-
gered then simulation is aborted, to avoid such situation
we allow only broadcast channels, which do not block
the sender process and receiver may simply ignore the
synchronization if has no receiving edge.
Suppose the automata from Fig. 1 are loaded within
separate FMUs and connected according to synchroniza-
tion labels. That is, the output of FMU(A1)is connected
to the input of FMU(A2), the output of FMU(A2)is con-
nected to the input of FMU(A3), and so on. The co-
simulation algorithm would detect that it has to fulﬁll in-
puts values for the FMU(A4),FMU(A3), and FMU(A2)in order to proceed, therefore the input/output value
propagation will have to start with FMU(A1)and then
proceed to the FMU(A2)etc.. Once the values of all in-
put and output variables are propagated, the algorithm
proceeds with advancing each FMU in time by calling
doStep(). It is this dynamic behavior in time which in-
terests us in this example.
In particular, observe that A2,3,4automata are non-
deterministic in the sense that, according to U PPAAL se-
mantics, at time x=1 an automaton can either delay, or
take an outputting transition, or synchronize on inputs.
For instance, at time x=1,A2can either emit b, or re-
ceive a(which will be available in this case, because it is
sent by A1at exactly that time), or let the time pass. In
timed automata semantics, all these options are possible
at the individual component level. Moreover, not only in-
dividual components can be non-deterministic, but their
composition is non-deterministic as well, based on so-
called interleaving semantics . This means that when
multiple automata are enabled at a given time, the choice
of which one to execute is arbitrary. Non-determinism
is a useful abstraction and thus model reduction tech-
nique in veriﬁcation and model-checking. The same is
true when these tools are used for simulation, i.e. differ-
ent simulations in U PPAAL may yield different results.
In FMI, the situation is very different, as all FMUs are
treated as deterministic components, and their composi-
tion, ensured by the co-simulation algorithm, is guaran-
teed to yield deterministic results as well. Interestingly,
in this example, if all automata decide to output at time
x=1, some of them will succeed outputting in parallel,
while others will be preempted by incoming inputs. In
particular, the master algorithm will request FMU(A1)
to produce its output, and thus FMU(A2)will be busy
handling an input and will not be producing output at
that time. Since FMU(A2)is not sending anything, then
FMU(A3)will be free to produce an output and hence
preempt FMU(A4).
As witnessed from above, such FMI system selects a
particular sequence of steps (which is expected) but is
not able to simulate all possible execution orders as in
original semantics even if we allow FMUs to determinize
their actions by themselves, which means that FMI sim-
ulations are selecting a particular subset of all possible
behaviors and some behaviors may not be reproducible
in FMI. Also FMI simulations may contain parallel syn-
chronizations (e.g. actions A1a֌A2andA3c֌A4at
the same computation step) which are possible only in
several steps in timed automata semantics (action aand
only then action cwithin zero-time), hence the interme-
diate state between aandcactions might not be acces-
sible in FMI without very ﬁne grained control over indi-
vidual doStep()calls in one zero-time computation step.
However, the successor state of such parallel executions
can be matched with a state after multiple transitions in
the given automata semantics, hence the FMI simulationSession 3A: FMI 2
DOI
10.3384/ecp15118159Proceedings of the 11thInternational Modelica Conference
September 21-23, 2015, Versailles, France163

--- Page 6 ---
states in between system computation steps are included
in the original semantics, albeit deﬁnite proof requires
more formal insight to examine all scenarios.
4 Case Study
We have implemented the FMI standard in the
UPPAAL (Larsen et al., 1997) and S PACE EX(Frehse
et al., 2011) model checkers by providing model export
to FMU3. In this section, we present and evaluate the
performance of the resulting FMI framework on a case
study inspired by the well-known room heating bench-
mark originally proposed by Fehnker and Ivancic (2004).
Our model consists of a room with a heater (Fig. 2) and
a controller (Fig. 3) which regulates the heater behavior.
We model the room and the controller as a S PACE EXand
UPPAAL FMU, respectively (see Fig. 4). Our bang-bang
controller turns the heater on and off as soon as some
temperature thresholds TlowandThighhave been reached.
The as-soon-as-possible behavior is enforced by using
urgent channels which effectively make the controller
deterministic. The room temperature Tevolves accord-
ing to the following differential equation:
˙T=k·(Tenv−t)+hpower
˙Tenv=0
˙hpower=0
In other words, the room temperature depends linearly
on the difference between the current room temperature
Tand outside temperature Tenv. We assume the outside
temperature Tenvand heater power hpower to be constant.
The constant kdeﬁnes the heat exchange rate between
the room and outside environment. If the heater is off,
the heater power is set to zero.
4.1 Evaluation
We evaluate our FMU framework by comparing simula-
tion trajectories of the FMUs with the ones produced by
a SPACE EXmodel consisting of both the controller and
room components. We consider three different simula-
tion step values: 1 (see Fig. 5a), 0.1 (see Fig. 5b) and
0.01 (see Fig. 5c). Considering the simulations, we ob-
serve that the FMU trajectories overshoot the controller
constraints in the sense that the controller exhibits a de-
layed reaction when the room temperature crosses the
temperature thresholds. The behavior is justiﬁed by the
fact that the method call doStep for every FMU relies
only on the local information about the state evolution
when making decisions, e.g., the controller FMU does
not have any information about the room temperature
evolution beyond the value which can be provided when
3A package containing the benchmarks is available for download
athttp://swt.informatik.uni-freiburg.de/tool/spaceex/
co-simulation .off
˙T=k·(Tenv−T)
˙Tenv=0
˙hpower=0
on
˙T=k·(Tenv−T)+hpower
˙Tenv=0
˙hpower=0hon? hoff?
Figure 2. Room component modelled in S PACE EX. The com-
ponent switches between “on” and “off” modes. The temper-
ature variable Tis exported as output and synchronizations la-
belshonandhoffas inputs.
off onT≤Tlow
hon!
T≥Thigh
hoff!
Figure 3. Controller in U PPAAL uses urgent channels to en-
sure as-soon-as-possible transition trigger. Temperature Tis
an input and labels honandhoffare outputs.
the method doStep is called. Therefore, the controller
FMU detects that the guard is enabled only a simulation
iteration later after this event has already happened. We
observe that the impact of the overshooting can be made
arbitrary small by choosing a small enough simulation
step (see Fig. 5c vs. Fig. 5a and Fig. 5b).
We note that the overshooting problem is inherent
to the considered master algorithm and can be cir-
cumvented by incorporating additional cross-component
knowledge into the master algorithm. Overall, our exper-
iments validate that on this case study our co-simulation
framework based on S PACE EXand U PPAAL provides
equivalent simulation results compared to the setting
where all components are modelled in one tool.
4.2 Supervisory Control Example
In this section, we show how supervisory control systems
similar to the benchmarks presented by Fehnker and
Ivancic (2004) can be modeled using the FMI paradigm.
Compared to Section 4.1, we consider a model of the
building with two rooms sharing a common wall and
a heater. In this setting, the room temperature is inﬂu-
FMU
FMUController
Roomhmode
hmode TT
Figure 4. SPACE EXand U PPAAL FMUs connected using the
room temperature Tand heater mode hmode.Co-Simulation of Hybrid Systems with SpaceEx and Uppaal
164 Proceedings of the 11thInternational Modelica Conference
September 21-23, 2015, Versailles, FranceDOI
10.3384/ecp15118159

--- Page 7 ---
 18 19 20 21 22 23
 0  2  4  6  8  10  12  14FMI
SpaceEx
(a)Maximum step size 1.
 18 19 20 21 22 23
 0  2  4  6  8  10  12  14FMI SpaceEx
(b)Maximum step size 0 .1.
 18 19 20 21 22 23
 0  2  4  6  8  10  12  14FMI SpaceEx
(c)Maximum step size 0 .01.
Figure 5. Simulation trajectories: each red xis a data point re-
ported by S PACE EX, and blue +reported by the co-simulation.
enced by both the outside temperature and heat transfer
between the rooms. Figure 6 shows a hybrid automaton
from S PACE EXmodeling the room temperature dynam-
ics. The difference from the previous example here is an
extra term (Tother−t)∗0.2 denoting a contribution from
another room. Another room is modeled analogously ex-
cept that it responds to heater2_on andheater2_off sig-
nals instead of heater1_on andheater1_off .
Our controller consists of two parts: local bang-bang
controller and a supervisor shown in Fig. 7. In order to
model the transitions of the heaters between the rooms,
we assume that the controllers can be turned on/off by
the supervising controller. Therefore, the local controller
has an extra mode besides OnandOffwhich stands for
the controller being currently deactivated. The supervis-
ing controller has two kinds of stochastic behavior: it can
pick any pair of rooms (one recipient and another donor)
to transfer the heater, and it can choose the timing of
transfer. When a pair of rooms is selected (by choosing
concrete room identiﬁers for recanddonor variables) the
donor is disabled by moving from location decide to lo-cation move and the recipient is enabled by going from
move toidle. The supervisor may stay in location idle
arbitrary long, but the exact duration is decided by an ex-
ponential probability distribution of rate 1 which means
the duration of 1/1 time units on average. Similarly the
supervisor may stay in decide andmove but the duration
will be 1/10000 on average, i.e. denoting that the heater
is moved rather quickly.
Figure 8 shows the overall component connectivity di-
agram where the supervisor is reading temperatures from
each room and controls the local movable heater con-
trollers. The movable heaters then may either turn on the
heat in their room or let them cool off giving the heat to
Figure 6. Hybrid automaton for a heated room connected to
another room. Inputs are temperatures Tenv ,Tother and labels
IN_heater1_on andIN_heater1_off , while output is tempera-
turet. We use the preﬁx INto mark input labels.
(a)Local bang-bang controller which can be moved (disabled).
The inscribed Umeans urgent location where time delay is
not allowed. The inputs are temperature variable T[id] and
labels enable[id] and disable[id] , while outputs are labels
heater1_on andheater1_off .
(b)Supervising controller moves the heaters between rooms by
reading inputs on T[i]and sending outputs on labels enable[i]
anddisable[i] where iis the room index.
Figure 7. Two layers of U PPAAL controllers.Session 3A: FMI 2
DOI
10.3384/ecp15118159Proceedings of the 11thInternational Modelica Conference
September 21-23, 2015, Versailles, France165

--- Page 8 ---
outside. The individual heated rooms are then connected
to the outside temperature and to each other denoting the
heat exchange. The splitter FMUs are repeaters needed
to connect multiple components to the same signal.
In the following, we discuss the behavior of the result-
ing composed model. Figure 9 shows the temperature
dynamics in each room. In particular, the plot shows that
in the beginning the temperature drops until the super-
visor detects a room temperate below T get=17◦, then
around 6 time units a heater raises the temperature in
room 1. The local controller keeps rising the tempera-
ture until it goes over 22◦bound at around 7.5 time units.
Notice that the temperature in room 2 also rises due to
heat exchange between the rooms. Around 10 time units
the supervisor decides to hand over the heater to room 2.
At 14 time units the heater is switched back to room 1
and so on. We can conclude that even though the tem-
perature drops well below 18◦overall it seems that the
controllers manage to sustain the temperature at the sim-
ilar level without loosing control (without dropping to
outside temperature level).
4.3 Stochastic Simulations and SMC
The following is a demonstration of statistical model
checking (SMC) using the FMI framework. We show
how the performance of two stochastic controllers simu-
lated by U PPAAL can be compared using SMC approach
together with the heated room simulation provided by
SPACE EX. Figure 10 shows two controllers: (a) reacting
within 1 time unit to 18 .0◦and 22.0◦temperature bounds
and (b) reacting within 2 time units to 19 .0◦and 21.0◦
temperature bounds. The channels used in these con-
trollers are not urgent and therefore the delay between
temperature detection and heater activation is decided
stochastically based on uniform distribution over the al-
lowed delay by invariants, i.e. the concrete delay will be
chosen from [0,1]for the ﬁrst controller and from [0,2]
for the second one. The OnandOfflocations do not have
any invariant and therefore in principle the process may
stay there forever. In such cases U PPAAL uses an expo-
nential (Poisson) probability distribution to decide a par-
ticular time delay and hence asks to provide a rate of the
exponential. The higher the exponential rate, the shorter
the delays, hence we can provide a high rate to ensure
that the detecting transition is ﬁred arbitrary quickly.
In our setup, we would like to know which controller
is better at keeping the room temperature within 18 .0◦
and 22.0◦bounds. In order to answer this question we
setup two FMI models for each controller with an equal
room, run 100 simulations with 100 time units in length
and 0.05 granularity, compute the amount of time spent
outside the temperature range for each simulation and
then compute the conﬁdence intervals for both models.
Table 1 shows a summary of amounts of time during
which the temperature was either below or above the
range. The estimated time duration use conﬁdence in-terval (CI) notation which means that if we repeat the
measurement experiment then the real mean (which is
unknown) will fall into the interval with a probability of
95%. The results show that the second controller was
more successful at maintaining the lower bound of the
temperature, but was more overshooting beyond the up-
per bound. In total, the ﬁrst controller kept the tempera-
ture in good range longer by 8.57 time units on average,
which is much larger than conﬁdence interval, hence the
ﬁrst controller is better.
Table 1. Time with temperature outside the range (95% CI).
Controller Time below Time above Total
Wide and fast 7 .56±0.20 32.69±3.36 40.26±0.59
Narrow and slow 2 .40±0.19 46.43±0.82 48.83±0.79
5 Related Work
The FMI standard and corresponding documentation are
constantly evolving, as new versions of the standard are
developed. The web site4also contains a list of tools
supporting FMI. Descriptions of FMI can also be found
in the academic literature (Blochwitz et al., 2011).
Discussions about the limitations of FMI can be found
in the works by Broman et al. (2013, 2015). Broman
et al. (2013) also formalize the main methods of FMI
(get,set,doStep ) by establishing a contract (pre-
/post-conditions) for each method and propose a mas-
ter algorithm (i.e., a co-simulation algorithm). Further-
more, the authors proves its termination, determinacy,
and other properties. However, the paper does not dis-
cuss how FMUs can be created. A different, master-slave
based, co-simulation approach is proposed by Bastian
et al. (2011), but formal properties such as determinacy
are not discussed in this work.
Broman et al. (2015) deﬁnes a suite of test models that
should be supported by a hybrid co-simulation environ-
ment, giving a mathematical model of an ideal behav-
ior, plus a discussion of practical implementation con-
siderations. Furthermore, the paper describes a set of ba-
sic modeling components in the spirit of Ptolemy actors
(constant, gain, adder, integrator, etc.). Finally, the au-
thors provide a kind of denotational description for each
component (input and output signals), but no encoding
into FMUs is discussed.
The FMU generation problem for various formalisms
is discussed by Tripakis (2015). This work only refers
to a generic model of timed machines which does not
include the particularities of U PPAAL ’s timed automata.
In addition, hybrid automata are not considered in this
work.
Recently, the co-simulation algorithm presented
by Broman et al. (2013) has been implemented in the
4https://www.fmi-standard.org/Co-Simulation of Hybrid Systems with SpaceEx and Uppaal
166 Proceedings of the 11thInternational Modelica Conference
September 21-23, 2015, Versailles, FranceDOI
10.3384/ecp15118159

--- Page 10 ---
how the non-deterministic models can be determinized
using stochastic semantics and included into FMI co-
simulation. We also provided an example how statisti-
cal model checking can be performed using numerous
FMI simulations which is an essential feature evaluating
stochastic behavior. The integration of model-checkers
into co-simulation frameworks provides further possibil-
ities of analyzing early design models like conformance
monitoring by checking that a simulation trace of a re-
ﬁned (e.g. hybrid) model is included in a more a ab-
stract (e.g. timed automata) speciﬁcation. We envision
our work being a further step towards integrating tools
developed in the formal methods community into the in-
dustrial system design and modeling workﬂow of cyber-
physical systems.
7 Acknowledgments
We are grateful to Christopher Brooks, Fabio Cremona,
and Edward Lee from UC Berkeley, for their work on
the Ptolemy framework. This work was partly sup-
ported by the European Research Council (ERC) under
grant 267989 (QUAREM), by the Austrian Science Fund
(FWF) under grants S11402-N23 (RiSE) and Z211-N23
(Wittgenstein Award), by the German Research Foun-
dation (DFG) as part of the Transregional Collabora-
tive Research Center “Automatic Veriﬁcation and Anal-
ysis of Complex Systems” (SFB/TR 14 A V ACS), by
EU FET project SENSATION, the Sino-Danish Cen-
ter IDEA4CPS and the Center DiCyPS of the Dan-
ish Innovation Foundation, by Academy of Finland, by
the National Science Foundation (awards #1329759 and
#1139138), and by the Industrial Cyber-Physical Sys-
tems Research Center (iCyPhy) supported by IBM and
United Technologies Corporations.
References
D.E. Nadales Agut, Dirk A. van Beek, and J.E. Rooda. Syn-
tax and semantics of the compositional interchange for-
mat for hybrid systems. The Journal of Logic and Alge-
braic Programming , 82(1):1 – 52, 2013. ISSN 1567-8326.
doi:10.1016/j.jlap.2012.07.001.
R. Alur, C. Courcoubetis, N. Halbwachs, T. A. Henzinger, P.-
H. Ho, X. Nicollin, A. Olivero, J. Sifakis, and S. Yovine.
The algorithmic analysis of hybrid systems. Theoretical
Computer Science , 138(1):3–34, 1995.
Rajeev Alur and David L. Dill. A theory of timed automata.
Theoretical Computer Science , 126:183–235, 1994.
Stanley Bak, Sergiy Bogomolov, and Taylor T. Johnson.
HYST: a source transformation and translation tool for hy-
brid automaton models. In Proceedings of the 18th Inter-
national Conference on Hybrid Systems: Computation and
Control, HSCC, Seattle, WA, USA, April 14-16, 2015 , pages
128–133. ACM, 2015.Jens Bastian, Christoph Clauß, Susann Wolf, and Peter Schnei-
der. Master for Co-Simulation Using FMI. In 8th Interna-
tional Modelica Conference , 2011.
Harsh Beohar, D. E. Nadales Agut, Dirk A. van Beek, and
Pieter J. L. Cuijpers. Hierarchical states in the compo-
sitional interchange format. In Luca Aceto and Pawel
Sobocinski, editors, Proceedings Seventh Workshop on
Structural Operational Semantics, SOS 2010, Paris, France,
30 August 2010. , volume 32 of EPTCS , pages 42–56, 2010.
doi:10.4204/EPTCS.32.4.
T. Blochwitz, M. Otter, M. Arnold, C. Bausch, C. Clauß,
H. Elmqvist, A. Junghanns, J. Mauss, M. Monteiro, T. Nei-
dhold, D. Neumerkel, H. Olsson, J.-V . Peetz, and S. Wolf.
The Functional Mockup Interface for Tool independent Ex-
change of Simulation Models. In 8th International Model-
ica Conference , Dresden, Germany, March 2011. Modelica
Association.
D. Broman, C. Brooks, L. Greenberg, E. A. Lee, S. Tripakis,
M. Wetter, and M. Masin. Determinate Composition of
FMUs for Co-Simulation. In 13th ACM & IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Embedded Software (EMSOFT’13) ,
2013.
D. Broman, L. Greenberg, E. A. Lee, M. Masin, S. Tripakis,
and M. Wetter. Requirements for Hybrid Cosimulation
Standards. In Hybrid Systems: Computation and Control
(HSCC) , 2015.
Alexandre David, Kim G. Larsen, Axel Legay, Marius
Miku ˇcionis, Danny Bøgsted Poulsen, Jonas van Vliet, and
Zheng Wang. Statistical model checking for networks of
priced timed automata. In Uli Fahrenberg and Stavros Tri-
pakis, editors, Formal Modeling and Analysis of Timed Sys-
tems, volume 6919 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science ,
pages 80–96. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2011.
Alexandre David, Kim G. Larsen, Axel Legay, Marius
Miku ˇcionis, and Danny Bøgsted Poulsen. Uppaal SMC tu-
torial. International Journal on Software Tools for Technol-
ogy Transfer , 2015.
J. Eker, J. Janneck, E. Lee, J. Liu, X. Liu, J. Ludvig, S. Neuen-
dorffer, S. Sachs, and Y . Xiong. Taming heterogeneity – the
Ptolemy approach. Proceedings of the IEEE , 91(1):127–
144, January 2003.
Ansgar Fehnker and Franjo Ivancic. Benchmarks for hybrid
systems veriﬁcation. In In Hybrid Systems: Computation
and Control (HSCC) , pages 326–341. Springer, 2004.
Y . A. Feldman, L. Greenberg, and E. Palachi. Simulating
Rhapsody SysML Blocks in Hybrid Models with FMI. In
10th Modelica Conference , pages 43–52, 2014.
Goran Frehse, Colas Le Guernic, Alexandre Donzé, Scott
Cotton, Rajarshi Ray, Olivier Lebeltel, Rodolfo Ripado,
Antoine Girard, Thao Dang, and Oded Maler. SpaceEx:
Scalable Veriﬁcation of Hybrid Systems. In Shaz Qadeer
Ganesh Gopalakrishnan, editor, 23rd International Con-
ference on Computer Aided Veriﬁcation (CAV) , LNCS.
Springer, 2011.
Kim G. Larsen, Paul Pettersson, and Wang Yi. Uppaal in a
nutshell. International Journal on Software Tools for Tech-
nology Transfer , 1(1-2):134–152, 1997.Co-Simulation of Hybrid Systems with SpaceEx and Uppaal
168 Proceedings of the 11thInternational Modelica Conference
September 21-23, 2015, Versailles, FranceDOI
10.3384/ecp15118159

--- Page 11 ---
Alessandro Pinto, Alberto L. Sangiovanni-Vincentelli, Luca P.
Carloni, and Roberto Passerone. Interchange formats for
hybrid systems: review and proposal. In Hybrid Systems:
Computation and Control , HSCC. Springer, 2005.
Alessandro Pinto, Luca P. Carloni, Roberto Passerone, and Al-
berto Sangiovanni-Vincentelli. Interchange format for hy-
brid systems: Abstract semantics. In Joao P. Hespanha and
Ashish Tiwari, editors, Hybrid Systems: Computation and
Control , volume 3927 of LNCS , pages 491–506. Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, 2006.
Uwe Pohlmann, Wilhelm Schäfer, Hendrik Reddehase, Jens
Röckemann, and Robert Wagner. Generating Functional
Mockup Units from Software Speciﬁcations. In 9th Mod-
elica Conference , pages 765–774, 2012.
Stavros Tripakis. Bridging the Semantic Gap Between Het-
erogeneous Modeling Formalisms and FMI. In Interna-
tional Conference on Embedded Computer Systems: Archi-
tectures, Modeling and Simulation – SAMOS XV , 2015.Session 3A: FMI 2
DOI
10.3384/ecp15118159Proceedings of the 11thInternational Modelica Conference
September 21-23, 2015, Versailles, France169
