--- Page 1 ---
Aalborg Universitet
Analytical Performance Verification of FCS-MPC Applied to Power Electronic
Converters
A Model Checking Approach
Novak, Mateja; Dragicevic, Tomislav; Blaabjerg, Frede; Nyman, Ulrik Mathias
Published in:
Proceedings of 2017 IEEE 18th Workshop on Control and Modeling for Power Electronics (COMPEL)
DOI (link to publication from Publisher):
10.1109/COMPEL.2017.8013279
Publication date:
2017
Document Version
Accepted author manuscript, peer reviewed version
Link to publication from Aalborg University
Citation for published version (APA):
Novak, M., Dragicevic, T., Blaabjerg, F., & Nyman, U. M. (2017). Analytical Performance Verification of FCS-
MPC Applied to Power Electronic Converters: A Model Checking Approach. In Proceedings of 2017 IEEE 18th
Workshop on Control and Modeling for Power Electronics (COMPEL) IEEE Press.
https://doi.org/10.1109/COMPEL.2017.8013279
General rights
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright owners
and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
            - Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the public portal for the purpose of private study or research.
            - You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit-making activity or commercial gain
            - You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the public portal -
Take down policy
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us at vbn@aub.aau.dk providing details, and we will remove access to
the work immediately and investigate your claim.

--- Page 2 ---
Downloaded from vbn.aau.dk on: April 01, 2026

--- Page 3 ---
Analytical Performance Veriﬁcation of FCS-MPC
Applied to Power Electronic Converters:
A Model Checking Approach
Mateja Novak, Tomislav Dragicevic, Frede Blaabjerg
Department of Energy Technology
Aalborg University
Aalborg, Denmark
Email:nov@et.aau.dk, tdr@et.aau.dk, fbl@et.aau.dkUlrik Mathias Nyman
Department of Computer Science
Aalborg University
Aalborg, Denmark
Email: ulrik@cs.aau.dk
Abstract —Since the introduction of ﬁnite control set model
predictive control (FCS-MPC) in power electronics the algorithmhas been missing an important aspect that would speed upits implementation in industry: a simple method to verify the
algorithm performance. This paper proposes to use a statisticalmodel checking (SMC) method for performance evaluation of
the algorithm applied to power electronics converters. SMC is
simple to implement, intuitive and it requires only an operational
model of the system that can be simulated and checked against
properties. Device under test for control algorithm application inthis paper is a standard 2-level voltage source converter (VSC)
with LC output ﬁlter used for uninterruptible power supply
(UPS) systems. The performance of control algorithm is veriﬁed
using the UPPAAL SMC toolbox and the behavior is compared tosimulation results obtained from equivalent MA TLAB/Simulink
model and measurements from experimental set-up. Performance
results are presented in terms of probabilities with correspondinguncertainties for calculated difference between the referencecapacitor voltage value and the measured output voltage, and asimple moving average value. Algorithm’s performance is tested
with parameter uncertainties introduced in the model as well.
I. I NTRODUCTION
Rapid development of the digital control systems and ex-
ponential rise of their computing power has led to emergenceof new control algorithm designs such as model predictivecontrol (MPC) in various sectors of the industry [1]. Com-pared to the traditional control algorithms based on linear or
hysteresis controllers, the MPC concept has an intuitive designmethodology and it suits the non-linear systems. Constraints of
the system and multiple objectives can simply be implementedbut with the cost of higher calculation time compared to thelinear control. Nevertheless the computing power of today’scommercially available DSP’s is sufﬁcient for execution of
large number of calculations. Therefore, main obstacle pre-
venting a wide spread implementation of MPC algorithms to
power converters is the non-existence of tools for the stability
and performance evaluation, which is mandatory before anyapplication in industry [1]–[4]. Stability and performance
evaluation have to prove that below all transients the totalharmonic distortion (THD) factor of the converter current and
voltage will stay under the maximum allowed values deﬁnedin application standards. Transient system performance should
also be evaluated to ensure the stability. Well established
methods for linear system stability and performance evaluationcan not be used and a closed loop stability analysis is typicallyvery complex. Ref. [5] presents an attempt to solve this issue,yet the method remains quite complicated as it is based onnonlinear control theory. The developed method should be
simple and intuitive like the control design itself so that
new MPC control algorithms could easily and quickly beveriﬁed for various applications. SMC approach could offerthe needed simplicity and at the same time be a powerfultool to evaluate the behavior of the system. This approachhas been successfully used in various industrial systems e.g.
sensor networks and communication systems, aeronautic and
automotive embedded systems to solve problems that arebeyond the scope of classical formal techniques [6]–[8], andthis method is applied in this paper as well.
UPPAAL SMC toolbox for model checking is appropriate
for systems that can be modeled as a collection of non-
deterministic processes with ﬁnite control structure and real-
valued clocks that can evolve with rates speciﬁed by differ-
ential equations [9]. It can validate the performance of a de-terministic or stochastic controller in a stochastic environmentand run several consecutive simulations very fast in order toestimate the probability of the speciﬁed event with conﬁdencelevels and its probability distribution. The toolbox allowsthe user to visualize the results in the form of probability
distributions, evolution of the number of runs with timedbounds and computation of expected values. Some successful
implementations of SMC with UPPAAL toolbox include ap-
plications like schedulability analysis and quantitative aspects
of scheduling systems as well as performance evaluation ofcontroller strategies [6]–[10]. These facts make the UPPAAL
SMC toolbox a very promising candidate for another ﬁeld
of implementation - the analytical performance veriﬁcationof FCS-MPC algorithms in power electronics. Using SMC,
the probability of system state variables staying within certainboundaries during transitional states could easily and quickly
be assessed.

--- Page 4 ---
The paper is structured as follows: in ﬁrst section the state-
space equations of the system model are presented along with
the control algorithm to be tested. The cost function is deﬁnedand the principle for weighting factor selection is explained.
Section III gives an insight into the SMC approach and why
it can be used to perform a performance validation of a FCS-MPC algorithm. In Section IV the FCS-MPC algorithm is ﬁrst
tested in MATLAB/Simulink simulation and then on an equiv-
alent experimental set-up. Finally, the algorithm performanceis veriﬁed in UPPAAL SMC for transient load changes using
UPPAAL SMC’s Veriﬁer toolbox. The results are presentedgraphically and summed up in a table of tested query results. In
the last section, conclusions are drawn from obtained results.
II. S
YSTEM MODEL
The power converter selected for demonstration of the SMC
approach is a two-level VSC with LC output ﬁlter used for
UPS application which is connected to a linear load [11] (seeFig. 1 and Fig. 2). Converter control is based on the following
ﬁnite control set MPC (FSC-MPC) algorithm:
1) Measurement of the converter output current i.e. induc-
tor current ( i
f), capacitor voltage ( vc) and load current
(io)
2) V oltage prediction for the next sampling instant for all
possible switching states
3) Cost function evaluation for each prediction4) Selection of the switching vector S
abcdeﬁning the
converter output vector ( vi) that minimizes the cost
function
5) Application of the selected switching state
3UHGLFWLYHPRGHO0LQLPL]DWLRQ
RIWKHFRVW
IXQFWLRQ
YFNLINLRN OHYHO96&
6DEFN
/2$'
&I&I&I/I
/I
/ID
E
F
YFDEFLRD
LRE
LRFLID
LIE
LIF
YFN9'&
Fig. 1. Simpliﬁed scheme of model predictive control for 2-level VSC
Eight possible output vectors Vi,i∈[0..7]with the switching
combinations indicating whether the positive p(VDC)or
negative n(−VDC)potential is connected to the converter
phase voltage output Vi(Va0,Vb0,Vc0)are shown in Fig. 2.
The logic behind the switching vectors Sabc=Sa,Sb,Scis
the following:
Sx=/braceleftBigg
1,if S 1xis on and S 2xis off
0,if S 1xis off and S 2xis on,x∈a,b,c(1)
Dynamics of the system can be expressed by two differential
equations of the converter LC ﬁlter in stationary αβframe,VDCS1a
S2aaS1b
S2bbS1c
S2ccV2(p,p,n)
V1(p,p,n)
V6(p,n,p) V5(n,n,p)V4(n,p,p)V3(n,p,n)p
nV0(p,p,p)
V7(n,n,n)VB
VA
D E
Fig. 2. (a) two-level VSC and (b) possible voltages generated by the converter
one for the converter current i.e. ﬁlter current ifαβ and the
second one for the converter output voltage viαβ:
ifαβ=Cdvcαβ
dt+ioαβ (2)
viαβ=Ldifαβ
dt+vcαβ (3)
where:ioαβ andvcαβ are the load current and capacitor
voltage in stationary αβframe, while C and L correspond
to ﬁlter capacitance and inductance. Following state-spacerepresentation of the model is obtained using (2) and (3):
d
dt⎡
⎣ifαβ
vcαβ
ioαβ⎤
⎦=⎡
⎣0−1
LRload
1
C0−1
CR load
00 0⎤
⎦⎡
⎣ifαβ
vcαβ
ioαβ⎤
⎦+⎡
⎣1
L
0
0⎤
⎦viαβ
(4)
The primary control objective of the algorithm is voltagecontrol with minimization of switching frequency as secondaryobjective to limit commutation number of power switches.
Therefore the cost function of the presented system is deﬁned
as:
g=(v
∗
α−vP
α)2+(v∗
β−vP
β)2+λsw·n2(5)
wherev∗
cαandv∗
cβrepresent the real and imaginary parts of
reference voltage vector v∗
c(k)=v∗
cα+jv∗
cβ,vP
cαandvP
cβthe
real and imaginary parts of predicted voltage vector vP
c(k+
1) =vP
cα+jvP
cβ,λswis the weighting factor of secondary
objective and nis the number of switches that change state
when the switching state Sx(k),x∈(a,b,c)is applied and it
is calculated using the following expression:
n=|Sa(k)−Sa(k−1)|+|Sb(k)−Sb(k−1)|
+|Sc(k)−Sc(k−1)|(6)
As there are no analytical or numerical methods to determine
the weighting factors, two performance values are deﬁned:THD factor of the capacitor voltage and average switching
frequency f
swavgcalculated as a sum of the switching fre-
quencies in each phase divided by the number of switches
during the simulation time interval:
fswavg=n/summationdisplay
i=1fswai+fswbi+fswci
6(7)

--- Page 5 ---
TABLE I
CALCULATED PERFORMANCE V ALUES FOR SELECTED WEIGHTING
FACTORS
λsw THD fswavg [kHz]
0 1.12% 18.3
0.1 1.45% 15.1
0.2 1.76% 13.2
0.3 2.24% 12.1
0.4 2.79% 11.9
0.5 3.38% 10.2
wherei∈1,2,nrepresents the number of switches in each
phase leg. The permitted THD factor for UPS is deﬁned by the
IEC 62040-3 standard, hence the selected weighting factor forswitching frequency in the cost function should not produce
a larger THD than deﬁned in the standard [12]. Simulationsin MATLAB/Simulink were performed for different values ofλ
swto calculate the performance values and the results are
presented in Table I. The weighting factor λsw= 0.3 was
chosen to be used for further performance evaluation as it isgiving a good trade-off between the output voltage harmonicdistortion and the average switching frequency. For λ
sw= 0.3
the average switching frequency was 5 kHz lower than for λsw
= 0 but with a cost of 1% higher THD factor of the output
voltage . In discrete system model, predicted voltage vector
vP(k+1) is calculated using the measurements of converter
output current, capacitor voltage and load current. To obtain
discrete-time model of the system (4), forward Euler method
was used. Simulations were performed in MATLAB/Simulink
with the following system parameters: VDC= 300 V , L= 2.4
mH,C=2 5μF,Ts=2 5μs,Rload =6 0Ω,λsw= 0.3
andVcref= 100 V . This also corresponds to experimental set-
up values. Weighting factor value was selected to keep theTHD factor of the UPS output voltage in accordance with
IEC 62040-3. Control algorithm in experimental set-up alsoincludes a delay compensation as presented in [13].
III. M
ODEL CHECKING USING UPPAAL SMC
SMC can be deﬁned as a series of techniques that monitor
several runs of the system with respect to some propertyand afterwards use the results from the statistics theory to
get an overall estimate of the design correctness [9], [14].
For engineers the technique is easy to understand, to im-plement and to use, particularly for industrial applications.
The probability distributions that drive the timed behaviorsof the system can be speciﬁed through user interface and the
estimated probability can be compared to a value or to another
probability. In other words the system Swill be simulated
for a ﬁnite number of executions, resulting in a number ofsamples which will be used to test the speciﬁed hypothesise.g. does the property φ=ΔV(system voltage deviation) stay
under threshold θ= 0.5 % during the transient load change?
The result of this test will be the probability of satisfaction or
violation of the speciﬁed property φ[15]. The toolbox support-engine used for the hypothesis testing relies on the results
coming from the statistics like sequential hypothesis testingor Monte Carlo simulation. Let us illustrate how one of thealgorithms e.g the Monte Carlo algorithm will estimate theprobability γof satisfying property φ[16]. First the user will
specify the number of random simulations ρ
1,ρ2...ρN−1,ρN,
and then probability γwill be estimated as:
˜γ=1
NN/summationdisplay
i=11(ρi|=φ) (8)
where 1is an indicator function that will return 1 if the
propertyφis satisﬁed for simulation run ρi, otherwise it will
return 0. The simulation will stop either when the simulationnumber N or a state violating property φis reached. The
iteration number N can be determined by Chernoff’s bound
[17] to obtain a conﬁdence interval. The bound will determine
the required number of simulations to be performed so that aconﬁdence δwith precision /epsilon1entered by the user are obtained
for the estimated probability.
As mentioned in the introduction, the idea behind this paper
is to use the UPPAAL SMC toolbox to create a model of the
MPC controller for a 2-level VSC in order to check the algo-rithm performance during transient load changes and parame-
ter uncertainties. Differential equations presented in the systemmodel (4) specify the evolving rates of clocks i.e systemvoltage and current. The controller has a ﬁnite structure, there
are eight possible converter output voltage vectors and the one
selected is the product of the cost minimization function (5).Build model can now be used to make performance analysisfor different FCS-MPC algorithms just by changing the costfunction. In order to check how the secondary objective inthe cost function affects the performance of the model, twoλ
swvalues were used for result comparison. Model parameters
were adjusted to ﬁt the MATLAB/Simulink model.
IV . E V ALUATION AND COMPARISON
Simulation results obtained from the MATLAB/Simulink
model were used as a benchmark data to check the behavior
of the model designed in UPPAAL SMC. The implementedMPC algorithm in Simulink shows good voltage referencetracking performance for linear load as it can be observedin Fig.2. The algorithm was also tested on an experimental
converter set-up as displayed in Fig. 4 using the MicroLabBoxwith DS1202 PowerPC DualCore 2 GHz processor board and
DS1302 I/O board from dSpace. Set-up parameters: DC supplyvoltageV
DC= 300 V , output ﬁlter values L= 2.4 mH, RL=
50 mΩandC=2 5μF, control algorithm time sample Ts
=2 5μs, linear load Rload =6 0Ωand capacitor voltage
reference Vcref = 100 V . Calculation time of the control
algorithm is approximately 15 μs, and to compensate this
delay the predictions are calculated one step further ahead and
applied at the beginning of the next time sampling interval.Fig. 5 and Fig. 6 show the measured capacitor line to line
voltages for λ
sw= 0 andλsw= 0.3. It can be observed how
higher weighting factor for secondary objective resulted withincreased capacitor voltage ripple.

--- Page 6 ---
        
7LPHV>V@&DSDFLWRUYROWDJH>9@YFA UHIYFA PHV
YFB PHV
YFB UHI
Fig. 3. Simulated capacitor voltage in stationary αβframe using the Simulink
model of the VSC
Fig. 4. Experimental set-up for veriﬁcation of the FSC-MPC algorithm on a
VSC
Fig. 5. Capacitor voltage measurements in experimental set-up using λsw=0
for VSC
Using the UPPAAL SMC veriﬁer system currents and
voltages can also be presented graphically as shown in Fig.7. for linear load and cost function (5). By comparing thesimulated capacitor voltage to the controller reference, thetracking ability of the algorithm was again proved to besatisfying, meaning the modeling in UPPAAL was correct,hence the model can be used for analytical performancevalidation during the transient load. Algorithm performancewas assessed through two queries for the time interval of 40ms:
Fig. 6. Capacitor voltage measurements in experimental set-up using
λsw= 0.3 for VSC
        
7LPH>V@-
-&DSDFLWRUYROWDJH>9@YFAPHV
YFBPHV
YFA UHI
YFBUHI
Fig. 7. Reference voltage and measured capacitor voltage in stationary αβ
frame in the UPPAAL model of the VSC
diff=(v∗
cα−vm
cα)2+(v∗
cβ−vm
cβ)2(9)
wherev∗
αandv∗
βrepresent the real and imaginary parts of
reference voltage vector v∗(k),vm
αandvm
βare the values of
measured capacitor voltage vm
c(k)=vm
c=vm
cα+jvm
cβand the
second query was the simple moving average value ( SMA )
of the difference calculated on n= 10 sample subsets.
SMA=SMAprev+diffM
n−diffM−n
n(10)
As it can be seen from the queries focus of the performance
evaluation is on reference tracking ability, i.e. the difference
between reference and output values is calculated. The load ischanging stochastically during the time interval in UPPAAL
simulations so that through several runs all possible transients
can be evaluated in the queries. An example of the loadcurrent waveform during one simulation run is shown in Fig.8. Simulation for every query is ﬁnished when the numberof simulations needed for calculated probability conﬁdencelevelδ= 0.95 is achieved or a state violating the property is
reached. Some of the tested probabilities with correspondinguncertainty of /epsilon1= 0.05 for transient load with parameter
uncertainty are shown in Table II. This parameter exampleuncertainty is introduced into the model as a false estimationof the system inductance.
The queries were tested for λ
sw= 0 with the capacitor
voltage as primary objective and λsw= 0.3 with switching

--- Page 7 ---
TABLE II
QUERY PROBABILITY RESULTS OBTAINED FROM UPPAAL SMC TOOLBOX VERIFIER
Query Parameter uncertainty Probability ( λsw=0 ) Probability ( λsw= 0.3) Number of runs
diff < 8% 0 0.699 - 0.799 0 - 0.097 326/36
diff < 10% 0 0.902 - 1 0.107 - 0.206 36/217
diff < 12% 0 0.902 - 1 0.620 - 0.720 36/357
diff < 15% 0 0.902 - 1 0.902 - 1 36/36
diff < 12% 30% 0.596 - 0.696 0 - 0.097 369/36
diff < 15% 30% 0.902 - 1 0.667 - 0.767 36/328
SMA< 8% 0 0.774 - 0.874 0 - 0.097 238/36
SMA< 10% 0 0.902 - 1 0 - 0.097 36/36
SMA< 12% 0 0.902 - 1 0.632 - 0.732 36/351
SMA< 10% 30% 0.222 - 0.322 0 - 0.097 322/36
SMA< 12% 30% 0.654 - 0.754 0.013 - 0.11 337/88
SMA< 15% 30% 0.902 - 1 0.641- 0.741 36/345
       
7LPH>V@-
-/RDGFXUUHQW>$@LRA
LRB

Fig. 8. Load current under transient load change in the UPPAAL model of
the VSC
frequency minimization applied as the secondary objective.
The last column in the Table II represents the number ofruns that the UPPAAL SMC toolbox performed during query
processing. If the query probability is close to 0 or 1, the
number of runs necessary for assessment is low. The secondquerydiff < 10% forλ
sw= 0 will be presented in
detail. Number of simulations needed to provide the level of
uncertainty /epsilon1= 0.05 was 36, during each simulation run the
load value changed stochastically which results in current like
shown in Fig. 8, difference and SMA values were calculatedfor each run. An example of the calculated values for one
run is presented in Fig. 9 and Fig. 10. The ﬁrst transient(t = 0 - 4 ms) which occurs because of the system’s initial
states were set to 0 was omitted from the calculation. It
can be observed that the difference is staying below 10%threshold, meaning that the system voltage is always tracking
the reference even under transient load change and there are
no signiﬁcant degenerations in the reference tracking.
As presented in the Table II the system with λ
sw= 0.3
showed higher probability to produce larger difference valueduring the transients. The lowest difference guaranteed to have
Fig. 9. Difference between the reference and capacitor voltage in UPPAAL
model during one simulation run under transient load change
Fig. 10. SMA of the reference and capacitor voltage in UPPAAL modelduring one simulation run under transient load change
a probability close to 1 was 10% for ﬁrst function, which
means that during the load transients at no time the difference

--- Page 8 ---
between the reference (100 V) and system voltage will be
larger than 10 V . Both λswvalues produced a probability
close to 1 for differences <15%. With the introduction of the
parameter uncertainty it can be seen that the the probabilityof exceeding the difference threshold for system with λ
sw
= 0.3 was 30% lower. It can be deduced that the parameter
uncertainty has a larger impact on this type of cost function.
The obtained results are also useful for weighting factor
selection as the performance degradation/improvement of eachsecondary term in the cost function can easily be evaluated.
If the calculated SMA value of the system needs for instanceto stay during transients below 12% a lower λ
swvalue should
be selected for (5).
V. C ONCLUSION
In this paper the performance evaluation of the FSC-MPC
algorithm for 2-level VSC was done using UPPAAL SMCtoolbox. A conversion from the Simulink system model toUPPAAL model was simple and the process of performanceevaluation was uncomplicated and fast. Created model inthe toolbox proved that the reference tracking error of thedesigned control algorithm will stay below 15% with the
corresponding probability certainty of 0.95 even with intro-
duction of the parameter uncertainty under transient load.Cost function with weighting factor λ
sw= 0.3 presented two
times higher probability that the difference will be higherthan 12% because the applied switching state was chosennot only to minimize reference error but also to choose thestate with lower number of commutations. Overall, during theperformance evaluation no signiﬁcant degradation of referencetracking was found during transients nor under model param-eter uncertainty. The presented MPC performance validationapproach showed many possibilities for future work with focuson analytical performance evaluation of other MPC algorithmsand converter topologies plus more complex load models.
Further research will show if the SMC is the new powerful tool
to solve the problem of performance and stability evaluation
for MPC algorithms in different types of power converters.
R
EFERENCES
[1] S. Kouro, M. A. Perez, J. Rodriguez, A. M. Llor, and H. A. Young,
“Model predictive control: MPC’s role in the evolution of power
electronics,” IEEE Industrial Electronics Magazine , vol. 9, no. 4, pp.
8–21, Dec 2015.
[2] S. Vazquez, J. Rodriguez, M. Rivera, L. G. Franquelo, and M. No-
rambuena, “Model predictive control for power converters and drives:Advances and trends,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics ,
vol. 64, no. 2, pp. 935–947, Feb 2017.
[3] V . Yaramasu and B. Wu, Model Predictive Control of Wind Energy
Conversion Systems , ser. IEEE Press Series on Power Engineering.
Wiley, 2016.
[4] S. Vazquez, J. I. Leon, L. G. Franquelo, J. Rodriguez, H. A. Young,
A. Marquez, and P. Zanchetta, “Model predictive control: A review
of its applications in power electronics,” IEEE Industrial Electronics
Magazine , vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 16–31, March 2014.
[5] R. P. Aguilera and D. E. Quevedo, “Predictive control of power
converters: Designs with guaranteed performance,” IEEE Transactions
on Industrial Informatics , vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 53–63, Feb 2015.
[6] A. David, K. G. Larsen, A. Legay, and M. Miku ˇcionis, “Schedulability
of herschel revisited using statistical model checking,” Int. J. Softw. Tools
Technol. Transf. , vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 187–199, Apr. 2015.[7] A. Boudjadar, A. David, J. Kim, K. Larsen, M. Mikuionis, U. Nyman,
and A. Skou, “Statistical and exact schedulability analysis of hierarchical
scheduling systems,” Science of Computer Programming , vol. 127, pp.
103–130, 5 2016.
[8] K. G. Larsen, M. Miku ˇcionis, M. Mu ˜niz, J. Srba, and J. H. Taankvist,
Online and Compositional Learning of Controllers with Application toFloor Heating . Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2016, pp. 244–259.
[9] A. David, K. G. Larsen, A. Legay, M. Miku ˘aionis, and D. B. Poulsen,
“Uppaal SMC tutorial,” Int. J. Softw. Tools Technol. Transf. , vol. 17,
no. 4, pp. 397–415, Aug. 2015.
[10] Statistical model-checker - new SMC extension of UPPAAL. [Online].
Available: http://people.cs.aau.dk/
∼adavid/smc/
[11] P. Cortes, G. Ortiz, J. I. Yuz, J. Rodriguez, S. Vazquez, and L. G.
Franquelo, “Model predictive control of an inverter with output LC ﬁlter
for UPS applications,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics ,
vol. 56, no. 6, pp. 1875–1883, June 2009.
[12] “IEC standard for uninterruptible power systems (UPS) - part 3: Method
of specifying the performance and test requirements,” IEC 62040-
3:2011 , no. 2, pp. 1–214, March 2011.
[13] J. Rodriguez and P. Cortes, Delay Compensation . John Wiley and Sons,
Ltd, 2012, pp. 177–189.
[14] P. Bulychev, A. David, K. Guldstrand Larsen, A. Legay, M. Miku ˇcionis,
and D. Bøgsted Poulsen, Checking and Distributing Statistical Model
Checking . Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2012, pp.
449–463.
[15] A. Legay, B. Delahaye, and S. Bensalem, Statistical Model Checking:
An Overview . Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2010,
pp. 122–135.
[16] Q. Cappart, C. Limbre, P. Schaus, J. Quilbeuf, L. M. Traonouez,
and A. Legay, “Veriﬁcation of interlocking systems using statistical
model checking,” in 2017 IEEE 18th International Symposium on High
Assurance Systems Engineering (HASE) , Jan 2017, pp. 61–68.
[17] H. Chernoff, “A measure of asymptotic efﬁciency for tests of a hypothe-
sis based on the sum of observations,” Ann. Math. Statist. , vol. 23, no. 4,
pp. 493–507, 12 1952.
