--- Page 1 ---
Under consideration for publication in Formal Aspects of Computing
Analysing an autonomous tramway
positioning system with the U PPAAL
Statistical Model Checker
Davide Basile1and Alessandro Fantechi2and Luigi Rucher3and Gianluca Mand `o3
1Institute of Information Science and Technologies ”Alessandro Faedo” - ISTI, National Research Council, Pisa, Italy,
2Dept. of Information Engineering, University of Florence, Italy,
3Thales Italia S.p.A., Florence, Italy
Abstract. The substitution of traditional occupancy detecting sensors with an Autonomous Positioning System (APS)
is a promising solution to contain costs and improve performance of current tramway signalling systems. APS is
an onboard system using satellite positioning and other inertial platforms to autonomously estimate the position of
the tram with the needed levels of uncertainty and protection. However, autonomous positioning introduces, even in
absence of faults, a quantitative uncertainty with respect to traditional sensors. This paper investigates this issue in
the context of an industrial project: a model of the envisaged solution is proposed, and it is analysed using U PPAAL
Statistical Model Checker. A novel model-driven hazard analysis approach to the exploration of emerging hazards is
proposed. The analysis emphasises how the virtualisation of legacy track circuits and on-board satellite positioning
equipment may give rise to new hazards, not present in the traditional system.
Keywords: railway, signalling, statistical model checking, Uppaal, autonomous positioning system
1. Introduction
Innovations in the railway sector are currently studied for improving the capacity of the railway network whilst re-
ducing the costs for installing and maintaining line-side equipment. Indeed, modern computer-based, safety-critical
railway signalling systems are often considered expensive both for what concerns investment costs to equip railway
lines, and for the costs of their periodic preventive maintenance.
One promising solution to contain such costs is the substitution of costly occupancy sensors (such as track circuits
or axle counters) by on-board location units based on satellite positioning; such alternative has however to preserve,
or even improve, the safety level of consolidated sensor technologies. This option is one of the themes under the
Multiannual Programme of the Shift2Rail Joint Initiative [Shi15] (Innovation Programme 2, Technical demonstrator
2.4 “Fail-Safe Train Positioning, including satellite technology”) and is the subject of several research projects.
Correspondence and offprint requests to : Davide Basile (ﬁrst author), Institute of Science and Technology of Information, National Research
Council, Via Giacomo Moruzzi 1, 56017, Pisa, Italy, e-mail: davide.basile@isti.cnr.it

--- Page 2 ---
2 Basile et al.
This paper presents results of the SISTER project [CBB+19], funded by Tuscany Region, which has focused on a
scaled down objective at this respect, that is, substituting track circuits installed on tramway lines with an integrated
on-board solution including satellite positioning and an inertial navigation platform. In such applications, track circuits
are adopted for detecting track occupancy and allowing an Interlocking to grant free routes to incoming trams through
a junction. Note that in the case of tramways, safe distancing and compliance to signals is a responsibility left to the
human driver and not to automated equipment.
The principles adopted for the substitution of track circuits are based on the on board computation of the current
tram position calculated autonomously from the received satellite signals, compared against information received
from other sensors. This information is then sent to the Interlocking system that need to know what track circuits are
occupied. Satellite positioning comes however with uncertainty, worsened in urban environments by buildings along
the tramway tracks, which create the so-called “urban canyons”. This is known as the multi-path problem in signal
reception, i.e., interference due to waves refraction and reﬂection [BM12, RCN+13, GJRS13, FNF18]. These problems
could in principle generate false track section occupancy detection, or miss some true track section occupancy, with
obvious consequences on the safety of the overall system.
For this reason, the SISTER project has developed a safety assessment procedure, particularly focused on the
added hazards introduced by satellite positioning uncertainties. In this paper, we address such hazards by means of
a formal model of the SISTER system, in which Stochastic Timed Automata are used to enable reasoning on the
probability of events, by means of U PPAAL SMC, a Statistical Model Checker. Our primary interest is to investigate
whether some particular hazard may actually occur, and the relation between their probability of occurrence and their
known uncertainty sources. Note that we assume the presence of a safety layer to protect against threats identiﬁed by
CENELEC 50159 [Eur10] (e.g., masking, corruption, insertion) preventing, e.g., man-in-the-middle attacks. Threats
due to high uncertainty in the positioning system are analysed.
This paper is an extension of the conference paper [BFRM19]. In particular, all models have been revised and
a new entity originally present in the system speciﬁcation, the Operational Control Center, has been modelled and
analysed. Moreover, the Interlocking and On-board Computer components have been integrated with new modules
and all components are described in detail. The hazard analysis in [BFRM19] is extended to model and analyse 27
new hazards, together with new scenarios and set-up of parameters. Finally, different possible mitigations are proposed
to ﬁx problems encountered in the original speciﬁcation.
We ﬁrst provide a short background section on statistical model checking and U PPAAL (Sect. 2), after which we
describe the project and the proposed methodology (Sect. 3). The system and how substitution impacts its principles
of operations is discussed in Sect. 4. The formalization of Virtual Track Circuits is discussed in Sect. 5, and the
formal model is presented in Sect. 6. The conducted analysis and experiments are in Sect. 7. Finally, related work is
in Section 8 whilst conclusion and future work are in Section 9.
2. Background
Statistical Model Checking (SMC) [LLT+19, AP18] is concerned with running a sufﬁcient number of (probabilis-
tically distributed) simulations of a system model to obtain statistical evidence (with a predeﬁned level of statistical
conﬁdence) of the quantitative properties to be checked. SMC offers advantages over exhaustive (probabilistic) model
checking. Most importantly: SMC scales better, since there is no need to generate and possibly explore the full state
space of the model under scrutiny, thus avoiding the combinatorial state-space explosion problem typical of model
checking. Moreover, the required simulations can be easily distributed and run in parallel. This comes at a price: con-
trary to traditional and to probabilistic model checking, exact results are out of reach. Another advantage of SMC is
its uptake in industry: compared to model checking, SMC is very simple to implement, understand and use, due to the
widespread adoption of Monte Carlo simulation.
UPPAAL SMC [DLL+15] is an extension of U PPAAL [BDL+06], a well-known toolbox for the veriﬁcation of
real-time systems modelled by (extended) timed automata. U PPAAL SMC models are Stochastic Timed Automata:
Timed Automata are ﬁnite state automata enhanced with real-time modelling through clock variables; their stochastic
extension replaces non-determinism with probabilistic choices and time delays with probability distributions (uniform
for bounded time and exponential for unbounded time). These automata may communicate via (broadcast) channels
and shared variables. A signal sent by a broadcast channel (e.g., through a transition with synchronization chan! ,
where chan is the name of the broadcast channel) can be received by all entities that are listening (i.e. whose transition
with synchronization chan? is enabled in their current state). Note that the operation of sending a signal through a
broadcast channel is non-blocking: thus a signal could not be received by any entity and this would not lead to a

--- Page 3 ---
Analysing an autonomous tramway positioning system 3
deadlock. U PPAAL SMC allows to check (quantitative) properties over simulation runs of an U PPAAL SMC model
(i.e. a network of stochastic timed automata). These properties must be expressed in a dialect of the Metric Interval
Temporal Logic (MITL) [BDL+13].
When evaluating a probabilistic property j, the tool will not return the exact value of j, but rather an interval
obtained through simulations. The number of simulations is decided based on the statistical parameters of the model
checker. In Section 7 we will speciﬁcally refer to the probability of false negatives aand probability uncertainty e
(also referred to as u). Let p0be the probability that has been estimated through simulations and pbe the unknown
“real” probability whose value is approximated by p0. The tool executes N=d(ln(2)ln(a))=(2e2)esimulations
ri,i21:::N, sufﬁcient to guarantee that Pr(jp0pje)1a, that is the interval [p0e;p0+e]contains pwith
probability greater than or equal to the conﬁdence interval 1 a, where p0= (#frijrij=jg)=N. Basically, reducing
aorerequires a greater number of simulations to provide the above guarantees on the estimated value of j.
A drawback of SMC is that it can have difﬁculties in efﬁciently observing rare events. Indeed, the number of
simulations could not be sufﬁcient to observe rare events that can be found in only a small fraction of runs, or in no
run at all. An example of a rare event could be the estimation of the position with higher level of uncertainty, because
this has a very low probability. Since we are interested in evaluating the probability of occurrence of particular hazards
occurring in the presence of these rare events, we easily run in this problem. To avoid this, we artiﬁcially inﬂate the
probability of occurrence of such rare events, to be able to observe them in some run (see Section 7).
We brieﬂy summarize the three possible queries used for the description of the properties shown in Section 7.
Firstly, the query Pr(<>[t,t’] ap) denotes the probability that a random simulation run of a model Mreaches a
conﬁguration satisfying the atomic proposition apin the interval of time that goes from ttot0time units.
Similarly, the query Pr[x<=bound](<>cond) evaluates the probability that the condition cond is satisﬁed before
the variable xexceeds the bound value, which is an integer. In case xis not speciﬁed, the formula must be satisﬁed
before bound time units. Generally the condition speciﬁes a certain system conﬁguration. This property can also
be expressed in the form Pr(<>[0, bound] cond) with the same semantics.
Finally, queries of the form Pr(<>[0, bound1]([][0, bound2] cond)) calculate the probability that a system
conﬁguration satisfying cond within bound1 time units will be reached. This condition must continue to be satisﬁed
for subsequent bound2 conﬁgurations. For example, the property Pr(<>[0,150]([][0,7]connectedCounter
[0]>0&&IXLR 0.WaitingLoc)) reported in Section 7 measures the probability that a state is reached in which the
number of connected trams is positive ( connectedCounter[0]>0 ) and the IXL module is waiting to receive a new
position from one of the connected trams ( IXLR 0.WaitingLoc ) for at least 7 units of time ( [][0,7] ), and this
must occur within 150 time units ( <>[0,150] ). In this case the property measures the probability of veriﬁcation of
a hazard. In fact, we want that within a certain time threshold the IXL actually receives the position from at least
one of the currently connected trams. In the formula, this threshold is set to a value lower than 7 time units.
Finally, U PPAAL SMC allows modeling the system to capture the complex interactions by modeling the behavior
of the system, discover and analyze hazards described by tailored formula. Moreover, it allows to express in the model
the intrinsic uncertainty of the autonomous positioning as well as real time delays of communications for a more
accurate analysis of the system speciﬁcation.
3. Project and methodology
One of the goals of the SISTER project [CBB+19], funded by Tuscany Region, is to study the substitution of track
circuits installed on tramway lines with an integrated on-board solution including satellite positioning and an iner-
tial navigation platform. Initially, the industrial partners provided a description of the current tramway system (i.e.
without autonomous positioning and virtual devices). This description was in the form of deliverables describing the
requirements of the system and the operative scenarios. It was initially supposed that substituting physical devices
with virtual ones would have not produced any adverse effect. During the project, an investigation has been carried out
to explore new requirements and possible issues raising from the substitution of physical devices (e.g. track circuits)
with corresponding virtualised ones.
The devised methodology of the SISTER project combines aspects of qualitative and quantitative analysis exploit-
ing the expertise of the involved partners. Starting from initial requirements and operational scenarios, these have
been further reﬁned, together with the SISTER partners, to build operational scenarios for the new tramway system
with autonomous positioning and virtualised equipment. Each scenario has been broken down into small steps, and
for each step potential malfunctionings and mitigations were identiﬁed by applying guide-words. This activity, carried

--- Page 4 ---
4 Basile et al.
out jointly by the consortium members, provided the basis for the various tasks of the project, and in particular it
represented the starting point for the formal modelling and analysis phase described in this paper.
The CENELEC norms [Eur11, Eur17a, Eur17b, Bou15] standardising the railway development process (highly)
recommend formal methods in most of the phases of the railway development process, including also the requirements
phase where our work is positioned. The adoption of formal methods in the railway domain is the subject of recent
studies [GtBvdP20, tBGK18]. Quoting [Bou15], “the use of a model without a textual requirement is tantamount
to discovering our requirements without having expressed them”. Indeed, we have used U PPAAL SMC as an aid
for exploring novel requirements and hazards of the envisioned system. Statistical model checking has been used to
perform quick veriﬁcation to provide early feedback to engineers for requirements discovering, leaving a full state-
space generation to a later phase when the requirements and the models are fully established. Thus, the purpose of our
study is exploratory, and it is not meant to detect all possible hazards nor to analyse all possible scenarios that could
occur in the future realization of the new system.
The formalisation and analysis carried out in this paper has been of help in formalising crucial requirements of the
Autonomous Positioning System (APS) and in identifying new hazards previously overlooked, and it has been a step
forward in the future realisation of the envisioned system.
In particular, initially it was established that the position uncertainty results in overapproximating each tram with
an envelope containing the tram, where the longer the envelope the higher the probability of it containing the real
position of the tram (see Section 4). It was conjectured that this approximation would sufﬁce for ensuring safety.
The formal modelling and analysis has surprisingly discovered corner cases where safety could be at risk also when
approximating the real position of each tram (see Section 7).
Model-driven hazard analysis A hazard is the potential for harm or an adverse effect on the system under analysis.
Hazard Analysis [Eur17a, Eur17b] identiﬁes hazardous events that may have a potentially serious impact on the
system, on the environment and on people who interact with the system either directly or indirectly. For the system to
be considered safe, the probability of hazards to occur (known as Tolerable Hazard Rate (THR))) must be lower than
the identiﬁed Safety Integrity Level (SIL). The safest level is SIL4 109, whilst, e.g., SIL3 106.
When hazard occurrence probability cannot be provided by reliable estimation techniques, e.g. for hazards related
to software faults, SIL is adopted to grade the robustness that a system is expected to achieve through an appropriate set
of recommended development techniques (see, e.g., [Eur11]). In particular, adoption of formal methods in software
development is highly recommended for SIL4 systems [Bou15], in order to reduce, and even get rid of, the residual
software faults that can trigger hazards. The formal model in this paper is however not targeting software development,
but the occurrence of hazards at the system level. It is aimed neither to provide a precise quantitative evaluation of
the THR, but rather to verify qualitatively whether in the presence of adverse rare events (e.g. worse connection, wide
positioning error) the system behaves as expected or incurs in a hazard. Hence, we do not give a quantitative guarantee
of safety by means of showing that THR is lower than the admitted level. Instead, by means of inﬂating the probability
of occurrence of adverse conditions, we quickly verify whether the hazard is likely to occur or its probability of
occurrence remains low, and we leave to further work the accurate quantitative evaluation of the THR.
To the best of our knowledge there are no well-established, largely accepted tools that allow automating the appli-
cation of a hazard analysis: the activity is usually performed by hand, thus becoming a time-consuming and error-prone
activity, albeit some supports exist [E+15].
In this paper, we advocate a model-driven approach to the hazard analysis where each element of the formal
model (e.g., states, transitions, constraints) is systematically reviewed for discovering potential malfunctioning. This
approach consists in exploring new hazards by expressing, using logic formulae, the negation of the expected/modelled
behaviour. Thanks to the rigorous formal framework, it is possible to formalize the discovered hazards in an unam-
biguous way, and formally verify them against the proposed operational model, as discussed in Section 7. Of course,
if the speciﬁcation is correctly modelled and conﬁgured, it is expected that the probability of a hazard to occur is low,
although this is not always the case (see Section 7). However, it is important to note that the discovered hazards are
independent from the behavioural model used to elicit them and the speciﬁc scenario in which they are analysed. The
hazards must occur with probability close to zero in all other behavioural models designed from the same speciﬁcation
of the system for all safe conﬁgurations. Indeed, whilst the target of the proposed formal model is the exploration of
new hazards, there could be future models used for other goals, e.g., code generation, model-based testing, or new
conﬁgurations of the system to be veriﬁed.
The adoption of a formal model to drive the discovering of new hazards is part of the novel contribution of this
paper, which increases the conﬁdence on the usefulness of formal methods in the earlier phases of a system design. It
must also be noted that the hazards discovered in this phase must pass through the same process used for other hazards,

--- Page 5 ---
Analysing an autonomous tramway positioning system 5
e.g., to evaluate their impact and gravity, and that the proposed methodology is not supposed to substitute any phase
of the railway development process, but to integrate and enhance existing practices.
4. Description of the system
The goal of the SISTER project is to provide a new localization system that replaces the old positioning devices
such as track circuits and axle counters with virtual ones. A major advantage of adopting such a solution is to reduce
the cost of maintenance of ground-based equipment. Moreover, urban environment does not facilitate the deployment
of such equipment, due to road shared usage with other vehicles, pedestrian crossings, etc.: this disadvantage can be
overcome by equipment virtualization, freely optimizing the position and number of virtual devices.
The new localization system is based on a proprietary sensor fusion algorithm developed by Thales, which we
consider to be a black box. This algorithm calculates the (virtual) position of the tram based on different sensors
including satellite tracking, inertial measurement unit, odometer. The position is provided together with an estimation
of the uncertainty. This is of help for reducing the satellite positioning uncertainty when, for example, a tram is
traversing a gallery and the satellite signal is not available.
In this paper we will focus on the satellite-based positioning feature of the system, that gives the position informa-
tion in terms of the current location on a line with a related uncertainty: for the purpose of studying rare, but possible
hazards, we take a pessimistic approach about uncertainty estimation. The positioning information is communicated
periodically (e.g., at a frequency of 10Hz) by a tram to the relevant interlocking (IXL) and to the operations control
centre (OCC).
A ﬁrst proposal is aimed at leaving unchanged the conﬁguration parameters of the existing system, i.e. the position
and number of tram detectors on the ground are exactly the same as their virtual counterpart. This solution still takes
into account physical installation constraints that are no longer necessary, but it is compatible with the legacy system,
i.e. it does not require modiﬁcation and a consequent new certiﬁcation of the speciﬁc IXL application.
Fig. 1 shows the principles of operation of the legacy system vs. the new solution, when a tram is approaching a
junction. Notice that in tramway systems junctions are relatively simple, and trafﬁc over the line between two junctions
is not subject to signalling. A local IXL system is used instead for guaranteeing a safe transit through a junction: when
approaching a junction, a tramway has to ask for a route among those available through the junction: this is automated
in the legacy solution by asking for a route to the local IXL after reading a Tag(i.e., a physical object detected by the
tram containing information such as its exact position [ERAMK18]).
The route is assigned by IXL on the basis of the occupancy of Track Circuits (TC) (green ones are free, the red
one is occupied), points are set according to the route, and the protecting signal is set to green. Notice that it is the
driver’s responsibility to drive safely through the assigned route, respecting signals. Also, in tramway lines TC are not
contiguous and are located in speciﬁc positions. Although very simple, the junction layout of Fig. 1 can be considered
representative enough of the few different junction layouts that are typically considered in a tramway system.
In the satellite-based solution, shown in the lower part of Fig. 1 the tram knows its position, and compares it with
an onboard map listing the Virtual Tags (VT) coordinates on the network. If the position matches a VT, a connection is
established with the local IXL (that is, the IXL controlling the junction area referred by the VT), requesting a route to
tram’s destination. The connection establishes a communication session in which a tram periodically communicates
its position to IXL, which check the received position against Virtual Track Circuit (VTC) coordinates, to detect their
occupancy. Indeed, in order to keep the legacy IXL unchanged, connection and VTC mapping are performed by a
wrapper layer that interfaces to IXL. Route, points and signals setting are the same as in the legacy solution. The
connection session terminates when a tram leaves the junction area.
Notice that the correct mapping of position to VTC is a safety-critical function, rated SIL4, as are the other IXL
functions. On the converse, the position-to-VT mapping is not considered safety critical. Indeed, the failure to connect
to an IXL does not open any protecting signal, and there are no safety threats.
Communication with OCC by trams and IXLs (not depicted in Fig. 1) is aimed at monitoring and performing high
level functions of trafﬁc regulation. Notwithstanding its safety-critical nature, the IXL is not fully modeled, because it
is considered a legacy system, already certiﬁed at SIL4, which is not changed in this solution, apart from virtualising
track circuits. Only the SISTER layer will be modeled and analysed. Note that we consider virtual track circuits part
of the SISTER layer. Basically, the unchanged portion of the IXL is oblivious of whether the track detection has been
performed physically (through track circuits) or automatically (through virtual track circuits).
In the following, we assume that position information (i.e. coordinates of tram, VT and VTC) are actually uni-
dimensional, i.e., are mapped over positions on a line (representing the route a tram is following). Indeed, the current

--- Page 6 ---
6 Basile et al.
Track CircuitRBCRadio Block CenterMovement Authority (MA)Track Occupancy
  xL2OBU
Fig. 1. Substituting track circuits with satellite positioning
setting of points (for track branches) is assumed to be performed according to the assigned route, allowing therefore
precise positioning information at this respect, ensuring that the tram is in its assigned track (even in the case of
parallel tracks). Therefore, the experiments that will be discussed in Section 7 do not require multiple routes assigned
to several trams. Hence, abstracting away from two dimensional space is of help for improving performances and
complexity factors.
Virtual Tags and Virtual Track Circuits are two new components of the SISTER system:
Virtual Track Circuits (VTC) correspond to location ranges (track sections) within a virtual map on the ground
system (i.e., interlocking, operations centre): they are hence considered as intervals.
Virtual Tags (VT) are similar but are only available on the map of each tram. Traditional tags could be seen as
points on the line. However, in order to properly compare the satellite-based position with the tag position, it is
safer to deﬁne a VT as a (shorter) interval as well.
In both cases, the detection (i.e. if a tram occupies a VTC or has read a VT), will be implemented through a function
(called LocationReferencing ) that will compare the coordinates of the tram with the map, where both VTC and VT
are identiﬁed by intervals [a;b].
5. Formalising virtual track circuits
In this section the function LocationReferencing , used for checking if a virtual track circuit or virtual tag is occu-
pied, is formally deﬁned. At a given time, let Lvbe the virtual position of a tram, i.e. the positioning data calculated by
the algorithm on board the tram, and let Lbe its actual position. As a ﬁrst contribution, we argue that safety must be
guaranteed assuming the presence of an error ebetween LvandLsuch that L=Lv±e. If such uncertainty is ignored,
potential hazards are introduced, as it will be described below.
These safety requirements are inspired by their aeronautical counterparts [ESA18, LBC+15]. In particular, the
actual error is unknown, hence an uncertainty eis introduced which is an aleatory variable that follows a Normal
distribution with average zero (denoted j0;s2). The sensor fusion algorithm periodically provides Lvandj0;s2. The
protection level (PL) is a statistical bound error computed from Lvandj0;s2such that it guarantees that the probability
of the (unknown) real position error exceeding PLis smaller than or equal to a target value (called integrity risk (IR)).
In other words, the interval [LvPL;Lv+PL]contains the real position with probability greater or equal to 1 IR(e.g.
1109). The alert limit (AL) is the maximum value of PLallowed. Finally, the time-to-alert (TTA) is the maximum
allowable time elapsed in which PL>ALbefore an alert is issued and a degraded operation mode is entered.

--- Page 7 ---
Analysing an autonomous tramway positioning system 7
Fig. 2. Example of the protection level PLreducing the capacity of the network
In this paper, these quantities are either abstracted away or they are global constants and global variables to be set.
For simplicity, it is assumed that the satellite receiver is located in the centre of the tram and hence Lvis centered in
the tram. The location Lvis refreshed according to a constant travelling speed of the tram. The period in which the
location is refreshed will be one of the parameters to set for the analysis performed in Section 7. More importantly,
to simulate the behaviour of the sensor fusion algorithm, periodically a value of PLis selected non-deterministically
(using the select construct of U PPAAL ) from a given interval. Hence, we completely abstract away from the way in
which PLis calculated and consider the sensor fusion algorithm as a black box which provides both LvandPL.
Letlbe the length of the tram, then the corresponding VTC is occupied if LocationReferencingVTC (Lv;PL;a;b)
= true (where aandbidentify the interval associated with the VTC); otherwise it is free, formally:
LocationReferencingVTC (Lv;PL;a;b) = ( aPLl
2Lv)^(Lvb+PL+l
2) (1)
We remark that the function LocationReferencingVTC (Lv;PL;a;b)is exclusively calculated by the IXL. This function
is implemented in the IXL software and replaces the task performed by the train detectors and is part of the SISTER
layer (see Section 4). Similarly, let [a;b]be the position of the Virtual Tag in the map, the tram “reads” the virtual tag
when the function LocationRe f erencingTagV (Lv;PL;a;b)evaluates to true, where its implementation is analogous to
the function LocationReferencingVTC . However, this function is calculated exclusively by the on-board system.
With virtual positioning, an uncertainty about the real position of the trams is thus introduced. This implies an
approximation of the number of occupied VTC.
Example 5.1. Figure 2 shows a vehicle that physically (black tram) occupies VTC 1 and VTC 2, but virtually (grey
tram) also VTC 3. Indeed in this example LvPL<L<Lvand the physical position is behind the virtual one, but
inside the protection level PLprovided by the virtual position. Note that, in case PLwould be ignored, VTC 1 would
be erroneously considered free (i.e. a false negative). Through PLthis false negative is removed but a false positive is
introduced (i.e. VTC 3 is detected occupied whereas it is free). Indeed, LocationReferencingVTC computes an over-
approximation of the real track occupancy and in this example evaluates to true for all the three intervals. Recall that,
as explained in Section 4, VTC are not contiguous.
6. Formal model
In this section we will provide the details of the formal model designed in U PPAAL . We modelled three main
entities: the Operational Control Centre (OCC – one for the whole system), the On-Board Computer (OBC – one
for each tram) and the Interlocking (IXL – one for each junction area). For readability, Figure 3 depicts these three
entities as well as their communication channels that will be described below. Quantities are, for example, the number
of trams, the number of IXLs, the number of VT and VTC (of each IXL) that are instantiated as global constants.
Moreover, other parameters refer to the various delay rates of messages and probability of failure in communications.
In particular, all messages have a speciﬁc probabilityPmsg
1+Pmsgof being received (that is, the message loss probability is
equal to1
1+Pmsg). Each probability of a transition tto occur is given by the weight of tdivided by the sum of the weights
of all outgoing probabilistic transitions. The unbounded delays of the communications are exponentially distributed
with a parametric rate msgRate . These values (probability of message loss and delay rate) are input parameters to the
model, thus allowing to analyse several different scenarios, depending on, for example, the devices used. Some states

--- Page 8 ---
8 Basile et al.
Fig. 3. Intra-Communications diagram
in the model are marked as urgent states, i.e. instantaneous states in which the system spends zero units of time. These
states are used to divide different operations considered to be atomic, i.e. they are performed in sequence in the same
unit of time. Moreover, in U PPAAL each state may have a state invariant that must hold only in that state1. Indeed,
if an invariant is violated then the simulation will stop returning the trace leading to the invariant violation. Invariants
may be used for controlling the ﬂow of time, e.g. by constraining a transition to be enabled and ﬁred at a speciﬁc
instant of time. If, for example, a state has an invariant c<=k , with clock cand constant k, and an outgoing transition
guarded by c>=k , this will force the transition to be ﬁred when the clock exactly reaches the value k, and not later
(otherwise the invariant would be violated).
Each transition of an automaton in U PPAAL can contain a guard, a send (!) or receive (?) signal and an update of
variables. U PPAAL does not primitively allow value-passing, hence variables (named x,yandz) are used to transmit
data together with the signal, thus acting as one-position buffers. Moreover, broadcast channels are organised in arrays
indexed by, for example, the identiﬁer of the IXL or the OBC, to allow for broadcast and unicast communications.
All components listed next are templates in U PPAAL , which is a mechanism allowing to create different instances
of an automaton. This makes it possible to perform simulations and analyses with a certain number of IXLs and OBCs,
not ﬁxed beforehand in the model. In Table 1 we report associations between names of instances of templates (used
in Section 7) and names of corresponding templates (used in this section). Furthermore, this model is parametric and
highly customisable. It is possible to analyse different operational scenarios by adjusting the individual parameters
of the model. The model is publicly available [Bas21]. We now describe the different components that are combined
together to form the overall system.
6.1. Operational control centre
The OCC is in charge of monitoring the whole network of trams. The requirements state that each tram will periodically
connect to the OCC, send its position, and then disconnect. In particular, in case a position from one of the connected
trams is not received within a certain amount of time, a degraded mode is entered. The OCC model is constituted by a
set of automata that are composed together:
OCCConnect this automaton is displayed in Figure 4. It is used to handle connection requests of trams. In its
initial state Waiting it has an invariant OCCconnectedCounter<=nTram to check that the number of connected
trams ( OCCconnectedCounter ) does not exceed the number nTram of trams in the system. It receives a request of
connection from a tram through the channel connectOCC . The identiﬁer of the tram tidis transmitted through a
buffer x(note that in tid=x,x=0 , the use of comma denote a sequence of two instructions). Basically, the content
of the buffer is stored in variable tid, and the buffer is reset. The probability of correct message reception isPmsg
Pmsg+1.
The probability of losing the message is1
Pmsg+1. After receiving the request, it resets the module OCCSupervision
1To help identifying invariant in the graphical automata representation invariants are enclosed in a box and positioned closer to the (name of
the) state they refer to; the box is not present in the original representation produced by U PPAAL .

--- Page 9 ---
Analysing an autonomous tramway positioning system 9
Fig. 4. TheOCCConnect automaton
Fig. 5. TheOCCReceivePos automaton
(signal OCCcheckConnection ) and then acknowledges the connection to the tram (signal connectedOCC ) and
increases the number of connected trams. The delay in message communication is exponentially distributed with
ratemsgRate , an input parameter.
OCCReceivePos this automaton is used to receive the position of each tram, and is depicted in Figure 5. The
position is received through the channel locOCC . Before acknowledging the reception of position through channel
ackOCC , this automaton communicates with OCCSupervision to supervise the positions of the connected trams
(more details below).
OCCDisconnect this automaton is used to handle disconnections of trams, and is depicted in Figure 6. It is always
ready to receive a disconnection request through the channel disconnectOCC . After reception, the number of
connected trams is decreased. For sanity check, it is the only state that has an invariant ensuring that there will
always be a non-negative number of connected trams.
OCCSupervision this automaton is used to supervise the connected trams, and is depicted in Figure 7. An array of
booleans check of length equals to the number of trams is used to ﬂag if a position has been received by a tram (i.e.
check[tid]==true where tidis the identiﬁer of the tram). Two functions resetCheck() andsumCheck() are
used to, respectively, reset the counter and count the number of connected trams that have sent their position within
the time limit. Basically, resetCheck() reset to false all positions of the array check , whilst sumCheck() counts
the number of elements in check that are set to true (i.e. the number of trams that have sent their position). Initially
such counter is reset together with a clock c1, and the state NormalMode is entered. Two invariants are enforced to
hold in this state: the time limit TmaxSafeOCC is not exceeded or there are no connected trams. Each time a new
tram connects, by reception of signal OCCcheckConnection , the clock and the counter of received positions are
reset ( c1=0, resetCheck() ). Each time a new position is received ( checkPosOCC ), either the counters are reset
(if all positions of all connected trams have been received) or the counter of received positions is increased (that
Fig. 6. TheOCCDisconnect automaton

--- Page 10 ---
10 Basile et al.
Fig. 7. TheOCCSupervision automaton
Fig. 8. TheOCCMitigation automaton
is,check[tid] is set to true). If the time limit is exceeded and there are connected trams the FailSafe state is
reached. The delay causing the entrance in the failsafe mode is exponentially distributed with rate failRate . The
system then enters again in NormalMode state upon occurrence of mitigation (signal restoreOCC ).
OCCMitigation this automaton is used to collect the various alerts for entering a degraded mode and actuating the
mitigation, and is depicted in Figure 8. This model abstracts away from physical intervention to restore the system
to its normal state. Here the mitigation is modelled as a (broadcast) signal restoreOCC and the mean-time-to-
recovery is modelled as a delay with exponential distribution whose rate is an input to the model ( restoreRate ).
6.2. On-board computer
The On-Board Computer (OBC) component provides the functions that are necessarily performed on board of a
tram. It interacts with the IXL of each encountered junction area and with the OCC. The autonomous positioning
functionalities are implemented inside the OBC. Several hazards may arise and are handled in this unit as described
below, e.g. failure in establishing and maintaining a connection with both the OCC and an IXL. Each OBC, uniquely
identiﬁed by its identiﬁer, is modelled as a set of automata that are composed together:
OBCCommOCC this automaton is handling the OBC interactions with the OCC, and is depicted in Figure 9. In the
initial state the tram is Disconnected . A parameter freqOCCconnection models the period in which the tram
connects to the OCC to send its position (i.e. one time each freqOCCconnection seconds). Clock c1is used to
check that this period is respected. When ready, the tram sends a connection request connectOCC to the OCC, and
moves to state Connecting . In this state, the tram is waiting a connection acknowledgement from the OCC. The
tram will continue to send requests of connection with that period until an acknowledgement is received. However,
in case no acknowledgement is received within NmaxOCC time units, a failure is issued. This check is performed by
both a state invariant ( c2<=NmaxOCC ) and a transition guard ( c>=NmaxOCC ). When the acknowledgement is received

--- Page 11 ---
Analysing an autonomous tramway positioning system 11
Fig. 9. TheOBCCommOCC automaton
Fig. 10. TheOBCPLautomaton
(connectedOCC ), the tram moves to state Connected . In such state, the tram will proceed to send its position
(locOCC ) to the OCC, until an acknowledgement is received ( ackOCC ). The position is sent each freq time unit,
another parameter in input to the model. A time threshold NmaxPosOCC is set such that if the acknowledgement
is not received within the limit, a failure is issued ( failureOBC ), to enter a degraded mode. Finally, after the
acknowledgement the train disconnects with the signal disconnectOCC and returns to its initial state. Note that
this automaton (as well as the other OBC ones) operates when there is no failure. This ensured with the condition
!failOBC[id] guarding transitions, which requires that the OBC has not failed (the preﬁx !is the notation for
negating a Boolean variable, not to be confused with the postﬁx !used to represent an output operation on a
channel). In case of failure, operations can be restored by reception of the signal restoreOCC .
OBCPLthis automaton is used to simulate the protection level, and is depicted in Figure 10. With a probability
(1-PLprob ) the protection level is set to a worst value worstCasePL . Otherwise, with probability PLprob the pro-
tection level is updated with a stochastic delay modeled with an exponential distribution with rate PLrefreshRate .
The protection level is selected non-deterministically in an interval [minPL,maxPL] . We remark that minPL,
maxPL ,worstCasePL ,PLprob andPLrefreshRate are input parameters and can be tuned to account for the
different conditions to which the real system is exposed (e.g. crowded urban area).
OBCSendPosIXL this automaton is used to periodically send the position to the IXL when connected, and is de-
picted in Figure 11. Initially, the automaton is in NotConnected state. Connection to the IXL (more below) occurs
when the signal connected is received. In state Connected the location and identiﬁer of the train are sent period-
ically to the IXL (according to freq parameter) with signal loc. When the signal disconnected is received the
automaton goes back to its initial state.
OBCDrive this automaton is used to simulate the tram movement, and is depicted in Figure 12. The initial state
is used to initialise the variables with the function initialise() and the next state is Moving . In this state, the
location Lvof the tram is refreshed according to a constant travelling speed, modelled by the hybrid clock state
invariant Lv[id]’==speed (the derivative of the location is the speed), where speed is an input parameter. Indeed,
by only using standard clocks, the speed would be constrained to be equal to 1. Upon reception of signal stop
(due to a failure) the state Stop is reached where the location is no longer updated. After receiving the signal

--- Page 12 ---
12 Basile et al.
Fig. 11. TheOBCSendPosIXL automaton
Fig. 12. TheOBCDrive automaton
restoreOBC of mitigation of the failure, the tram continues its travel in state Moving . The physical behaviour of
the tram acceleration and deceleration has been abstracted away mainly because there were no requirements on
this aspect. Recall that the driving responsibility is left to the (human) driver and it is not automatic, although some
work on modelling train driver behaviour exists [HEPGP21].
OBCMitigation this automaton is depicted in Figure 13 and is similar to OCCMitigation . Its initial state is
NormalOperation . Upon reception of a signal for entering the degraded mode ( failureOBC ) the tram will be
stopped by emitting the signal stop and the DegradedMode will be entered. The tram restarts with a delay that
is exponentially distributed with rate restoreRate , an input parameter. The mitigation is notiﬁed with signal
restoreOBC , and the initial state is reached.
OBCIXLConnectionSupervision this automaton is used for handling the connection with an IXL when ap-
proaching a junction area, and is depicted in Figure 142. The initial state is Disconnect ; when a request for
reading a Virtual Tag is received (signal read ), the state CheckingTV is reached. It is required that IXL!=-1 , that
is, the automaton has not been connected so far. The identiﬁer of the VT is stored in the variable bTVid , whilst the
identiﬁer of the IXLto which the VT belongs is stored in the IXLvariable. The LocationReferencingTagV function
(see Section 5) is guarding the outgoing transitions from state CheckingTV , to check whether or not the position
Fig. 13. TheOBCMitigation automaton
2In the U PPAAL models extracted from the Italian SISTER project’s deliverables, the Italian acronyms TCV and TV are used instead of,
respectively, VTC and VT.

--- Page 13 ---
Analysing an autonomous tramway positioning system 13
Fig. 14. TheOBCIXLConnectionSupervision automaton.
Fig. 15. TheOBCVTautomaton
of the tram is within the VT. If it is not the case, then the automaton returns to its initial state. Otherwise, the VT
has been read and the tram proceeds to connect to the IXL in state Connecting . Each freq time units a signal
connect is sent to the IXL. A clock c2is used to monitor whether the IXL has not replied to the connection request
within TmaxConnect time units. If this is the case, a failure is issued by the signal failureOBC , and the tram will
continue to try to connect to the IXL. When the IXL acknowledges the successful connection (signal connected ),
the automaton moves to state Connected . A signal restoreOBC is issued in case the connection has been restored
after a failure. If there was no failure this signal will be ignored (i.e. not received by any other automaton). In
state Connected , the tram is connected to the IXL and will receive acknowledgement of position reception by
the IXL. In case an acknowledgement from the IXL is not received within TmaxAck time units, a failure is issued
(failureOBC ) and the automaton moves to state ConnectionLost . When the mitigation has been performed the
signal restoreOBC will be received and the automaton will return to state Connected . Finally, when a signal of
disconnection is received ( disconnect ), from state Connected the automaton will return to state Disconnect ,
meaning that the tram has been successfully disconnected from the IXL junction area.
OBCVTthis automaton is used to check periodically if a Virtual Tag has been read and is depicted in Figure 15. The
period is the parameter freq . It takes as parameters the interval [a;b]on the map and the identiﬁer of the IXL
related to the read VT ( IXL), whilst idis its identiﬁer. The invariant and the guard on the loop transitions ensure
that the checking is performed exactly each freq time units. The checking is performed by sending a signal read
toOBCIXLConnectionSupervision .

--- Page 14 ---
14 Basile et al.
Fig. 16. TheIXLConnect automaton
Fig. 17. TheIXLReceivePos automaton
6.3. Interlocking
The IXL automata models the SISTER layer implemented on top of the legacy Interlocking. Its functionalities are
related to receive connection from each tram willing to enter the junction area controlled by the IXL, and to disconnect
each tram that has traversed it. Moreover, the IXL receives periodically the position of each connected tram and
checks the occupancy of the virtual track circuits. Different safety mechanisms have been identiﬁed that are related to
functionalities of the IXL. Among others, in case a position from one of the connected trams is not received within
a certain amount of time, a degraded mode is entered; or in case the uncertainty in a received position is higher than
a given threshold, a failure is triggered. Each IXL has a unique identiﬁer, that is a parameter of the automata whose
composition builds the IXL module. The automata are:
IXLConnect this automaton is used for serving the connection request from a tram, and is depicted in Figure 16.
Initially, the counter of connected trams is initialised to zero, and the IXL is in state Waiting . Upon reception of a
connection request (in case the communication succeeded), this automaton sends a signal IXLCheckConnection
toIXLTmaxsafe Supervision for notifying the connection of a new tram, and switches to state Connecting .
Finally, with a certain delay the successful connection is notiﬁed to the tram through signal IXLconnected , and
the counter of tram ( connectedCounter ) is updated.
IXLReceivePos this automaton is used to collect the positions of trams and update the IXL status, and is de-
picted in Figure 17. The automaton is initially waiting for a location in state WaitingLoc . A successful re-
ception of a location by means of the loc signal is notiﬁed to the automaton IXLTmaxsafe Supervision ,
IXLLsafemargin Supervision and the virtual track circuits of competence through the (broadcast) channel
checkloc , and the state ReceivedLoc is reached. After a stochastic delay the acknowledgement is sent to the
tram by means of the signal ack, and the automaton returns back to state WaitingLoc .
IXLTmaxsafe Supervision this automaton is used to supervise the trams connected to this IXL, and is depicted
in Figure 18. It is similar to the supervision performed by OCCSupervision . In particular, each time a new tram
is connected ( IXLCheckConnection ) the stopwatch is reset. If all positions of connected trams are not received
within TmaxSafe time units a failure is issued and state FailSafe is reached. Normal conditions are restored upon
reception of the signal restoreIXL .
IXLLsafemargin Supervision this automaton is used to check if PLexceeds the maximum limit allowed (pa-
rameter Lsafemargin ), and is depicted in Figure 19. In particular, the automaton starts in state NormalOperation

--- Page 15 ---
Analysing an autonomous tramway positioning system 15
Fig. 18. TheIXLTmaxsafe Supervision automaton
Fig. 19. TheIXLLsafemargin Supervision automaton
and after a reception of a location of a tram, it is checked whether its protection level PLis lower than Lsafemargin .
If this is not the case a failure is issued ( failureIXL ) and state FailSafe is reached. Normal operations are re-
stored after the message restoreIXL is received.
IXLMitigation this automaton is used to trigger mitigations in case of failures, and is depicted in Figure 20.
Basically, it has two states NormalOperation andDegradedMode . Initially, the system is in normal operation
conditions. Upon reception of a failure failureIXL a degraded mode is entered. The mitigation takes place within
a certain stochastic time, modelled as an exponential distributed delay with rate restoreRate (an input parameter).
The successful mitigation is notiﬁed to the other components through the signal restoreIXL .
IXLDisconnect this automaton is used for disconnecting a tram once it has traversed the junction area con-
trolled by the IXL and is depicted in Figure 21. It takes the identiﬁer of the last VTC to be traversed as input
parameter for disconnecting the tram ( idtcv ), and a boolean ﬂag ( releaseOccupied ) stating whether the dis-
connection occurs when the corresponding VTC is occupied or when it is freed (in the legacy system these are
called release conditions ). Initially, the system is in state Waiting . In case of release condition set to occupied
Fig. 20. TheIXLMitigation automaton

--- Page 16 ---
16 Basile et al.
Fig. 21. TheIXLDisconnect automaton
Fig. 22. TheIXLVTCautomaton.
(i.e. disconnection happens when the last VTC involved is occupied, releaseOccupied==true ), upon reception
of a signal of occupation ( occupied ) from one of the virtual track circuits the check is performed. Otherwise
(releaseOccupied==false ) the check is performed upon reception of signal freed from one of the VTC. Af-
ter that, in state checkU , if the received signal does not concern the last VTC controlled by the IXL (i.e. TVCid
!= idtcv ) the automaton returns to state Waiting . Otherwise in case the VTC is indeed used to disconnect the
tram (i.e. TVCid == idtcv ), state Disconnecting is reached. From this state, a signal IXLCheckConnection
is sent to IXLTmaxsafe Supervision and a signal of successful disconnection is sent to the tram tid which
has traversed the last VTC involved ( disconnect ). Finally, the number of connected trams is decreased (i.e.
connectedCounter[id]-- ), and the automaton returns to state Waiting .
IXLVTC this automaton implements the logic described in Section 5 and is depicted in Figure 22. This automaton

--- Page 17 ---
Analysing an autonomous tramway positioning system 17
takes in input a unique identiﬁer id, a unique idixl IXL identiﬁer, two integers a, b which identify the track
section where the VTC is positioned. The VTC has two main states Free andOccupied that intuitively identify
the occupation and release status of the VTC. The initial transition assigns the respective parameters to globally
shared variables. Note that initially the VTC is in state Free . Indeed, no tram is assumed to be inside a junction
area at start-up and in normal operation conditions. We did not modelled degraded operation conditions and recall
that the responsibility is left to the driver. From initial state Free , a transition is triggered by the reception of a
signal on the channel checkloc , a signal coming from the relevant IXL to check the position received by a tram
against the VTC.
Thetidvariable stores the unique tram identiﬁer for which the occupation is to be controlled. Likewise, the vari-
able poswill contain the position of the tram tid. This transition is divided into two possible behaviours through
the intermediate urgent state. In particular, it goes back to the Free state in the event that LocationRe f erencingV TC
evaluates to false (conditions expressed in the transition guards). Otherwise, two operations are performed: ﬁrst a
signal is sent to the interlocking to acknowledge the occupation of the VTC via occupied , then the tram identiﬁer
is stored in a temporary variable and both VTC and tram identiﬁers are written to the output buffer, to be used
for further operations, and the status reached is Occupied . Recall that in the urgent state no time passes: these
operations are considered as one atomic operation.
From state Occupied a transition is triggered similarly to the transition that exits the Free state. However, there are
three different conditions allowing to leave the urgent state. In the case where LocationRe f erencingV TC evaluates
to true, the target state remains Occupied : the tram has not yet freed the VTC. In this case the temporary identiﬁer
of the last tram entered is updated. In the event that LocationReferencing evaluates to false, there are two
possibilities. If the tram that has freed the VTC is the same stored in the temporary variable, this means that it was
the last tram to have occupied the VTC. The VTC goes to the Free state. Otherwise, some other trams are still
potentially occupying the VTC(this is possible due to uncertainty), so the VTC remains in the Occupied state.
Note that all the IXL components we modelled are part of the SISTER layer shown in Figure 1. Indeed, we do not
model nor analyse the legacy system, but only the SISTER layer. Thus we abstract from, e.g., how route requests are
managed by the IXL.
7. Formal analysis and experiments
In this section, the formal analysis of the model presented in the previous section will be addressed. We will analyse
series of properties of interest aimed at verifying the absence of errors in the various models composing the system.
The properties are expressed in the U PPAAL syntax (see Section 2), and discussed. Almost all formulae represent
the probability of occurrence of a speciﬁc hazard, with only one exception. The properties are expressed on speciﬁc
instances of templates, and as such must be replicated for all possible OBCs and IXLs present in the speciﬁc scenario
under analysis. To improve readability, Table 1 contains for each instance the corresponding template automaton.
The veriﬁcation results obtained with U PPAAL SMC report probabilities close to zero for reaching a failure state
(occurrence of a hazard), and probabilities close to one for the properties that the system must satisfy. The results
therefore conﬁrm that the model satisﬁes the analysed properties. We also recall that, in order to efﬁciently verify
these properties, both the probability of communications failure and the protection level will be artiﬁcially increased
in the experiments. Basically, worse conditions are injected, to measure the effectiveness of the mitigation under
analysis. Realistically, the probability of communication failure would be lower and the protection level would be
tighter and a large number of simulations would be needed to be able to encounter one of these rare events.
7.1. Analysing the OCC
We start by discussing the analysis of the Operational Control Centre, where each property targets a speciﬁc component
of the OCC. We list the identiﬁed hazards and the formulation of the corresponding properties for each component.
OCC CONNECT We identiﬁed two hazards related to the functionality of connection of the OCC:
HAZ 1: OCC has received a connection request and has not replied in less then ttime units.
HAZ 2: OCC has connected to a tram that was already connected.

--- Page 18 ---
18 Basile et al.
Table 1. Names of instances of templates (indexed by i, on the left) and names of corresponding templates (on the right).
Instance Template
OCCC OCC Connect
OCCR OCC ReceivePos
OCCD OCC Disconnect
OCCS OCC Supervision
OCCM OCC Mitigation
IXLC i IXLConnect
IXLR i IXLReceivePos
IXLS i IXLTmaxsafe Supervision
IXLS2 i IXLLsafemargin Supervision
IXLD i IXLDisconnect
IXLM i IXLMitigation
TCV i IXLTCV
OBCC i OBCCommOCC
OBCE i OBCPL
OBCR i OBCSendPosIXL
OBCD i OBCDrive
OBCS i OBCIXLConnectionSupervision
OBCM i OBCMitigation
To measure the probability of occurrence of, respectively, HAZ 1 and HAZ 2, the following properties are analysed
(from now on, to avoid repetitions, properties are related to the corresponding hazards by their indexes):
f1=Pr(<>[0,bound]([][0,t]OCCC.Connecting && !failOBC[0]))
f2=Pr[<= bound](OCCC.Connecting && ((OCCC.tid==0 && !OBCC 0.Connecting))))
Basically, f1measures the probability that (within bound time units) a conﬁguration is reached where the module
OCCConnecting (whose instantiation is called OCCC ) in state Connecting for exactly ttime units. This will be the
minimum amount of time needed for such hazard to occur. Note that (see Figure 4) the automaton has reached such
state only if it has received a connection request. Moreover, it is required that the system has not failed. Property
f2measures the probability to reach a conﬁguration where the OCC is connecting a train OCCC.Connecting (with
identiﬁer 0 in this case OCCC.tid==0 ) but the corresponding tram is not connecting ( !OBCC 0.Connecting ). Note
that this formula is instantiated to a speciﬁc tram (here OBCC 0is an instantiation of module OBCCommOCC ), and must
be replicated for all trams considered in the experiments. To avoid repetitions, all properties veriﬁed in this model are
related to measuring the probability of reaching a speciﬁc conﬁguration within a given bound.
OCC RECEIVE POS Concerning the component for receiving the location of a train, we identiﬁed one hazard:
HAZ 3: OCC has not received a position of one tram within TmaxSafeOCC time units.
f3=Pr(<> [0,bound] ([][0,TmaxSafeOCC] OCCconnectedCounter>0 && OCCR.WaitingLoc &&
(forall (tid:int[0,nTram-1]) !failOBC[tid])))
Property f3measures the probability that the OCC module for receiving the position (instantiated as OCCR )
is in state WaitingLoc (see Figure 5) and there is some connected tram (i.e. OCCConnectedCounter>0 ) for an
amount of time TmaxSafeOCC+1 . Moreover, no tram is in degraded mode (i.e. (forall (tid:int[0,nTram-1])
!failOBC[tid]) ).
OCC SUPERVISION One hazard has been identiﬁed for the supervision component of the OCC
HAZ 4: all positions of connected trams are not received within TmaxSafeOCC but the OCC is not in failsafe mode.
f4=Pr[<= bound](<> (OCCS.c1>OCCS.TmaxSafeOCC && OCCconnectedCounter!=0 && !OCCS.FailSafe))
This property states that the maximum time in which a position must be received (i.e. TmaxSafeOCC ) has been
exceeded and there are connected trams (i.e. OCCconnectedCounter!=0 ) but the module has not entered a degraded
mode (i.e. !OCCS.FailSafe ).

--- Page 19 ---
Analysing an autonomous tramway positioning system 19
OCC MITIGATION For the mitigation module, we have identiﬁed one hazard:
HAZ 5: The OCC enters a degraded mode.
f5=Pr[<= bound](<> OCCM.DegradadedMode)
The property measures the probability that the instantiation of OCC Mitigation module ( OCCM ) has reached a
degraded mode.
7.2. Analysing the OBC
After having discussed the hazards related to the OCC, we move to the On-Board Computer hazards. Note that there
could be different instantiations of the OBC. The property listed below are instantiated to a speciﬁc OBC and must be
replicated (or quantiﬁed) in case of several instances of OBC.
OBC VT Concerning the Virtual Tag reader module, one hazard has been identiﬁed:
HAZ 6: the OBC has not checked if a virtual tag has been read within the given time interval.
f6=Pr(<> [0,bound]([][0,freq+1]OBCS 0.Disconnect&&OBCS 0.IXL!=-1&&!failOBC[0]))
This property checks if the OBC Supervision module (instantiated as OBCS 0) remains in state Disconnect for at least
freq+1 consecutive time units. Indeed, each freq time units the virtual tag module shall send a read request to the
supervision module (signal read ) that shall react, meaning that the virtual tag has been correctly read (see Figure 15
and Figure 14). Moreover, it is required that the system has not been disconnected already, i.e. OBCS 0.IXL!=-1 , and
it is not in degraded mode, i.e. !failOBC[0] .
OBC IXL ConnectionSupervision The OBC IXL Connection Supervision module, being one of the main modules
of the OBC, has 5 hazards that are described below:
HAZ 7: OBC connects to the corresponding IXL and the corresponding TV has not been read yet.
HAZ 8: OBC is trying to connect for more than TmaxConnect time but the degraded mode has not been entered.
HAZ 9: A TV has been read but the OBC is not connecting to the corresponding IXL.
HAZ 10: The connection between IXL and OBC has been lost, but the tram has not entered a degraded mode.
HAZ 11: The tram has entered a degraded mode but it has not stopped.
f7=Pr(<> [0,bound] ((Lv[0]+PL[0]+(l[0]/2) < TVa[0]) && OBCS 0.Connecting && !failOBC[0]))
f8=Pr(<> [0,bound]([][0,TmaxConnect+1] OBCS 0.Connecting && OBCM 0.NormalOperation))
f9=Pr(<> [0,bound] ([][0,t] (TVa[0] < Lv[0]-PL[0]-(l[0]/2) )&&
(OBCS 0.Disconnect || OBCS 0.CheckingTV)&& OBCS 0.IXL!=-1 ))
f10=Pr[<= bound](<> OBCS 0.ConnectionLost && OBCM 0.NormalOperation )
f11=Pr[<= bound] (<> OBCM 0.DegradadedMode && OBCD 0.Moving )
Property f7checks if a bad conﬁguration is reached where the tag has not been read yet but the connecting
state is reached in OBCS 0(instantiation of the supervision module). The event “the tag has not been read” is ren-
dered as (Lv[0]+PL[0]+(l[0]/2) < TVa[0]) , that correspond to stating that LocationReferencingTagV evaluates
to false. The system is required to be in normal operation. Property f8checks whether OBC is trying to connect (is in
state OBCS 0.Connecting ) for TmaxConnect+1 time units, but OBC mitigation module is still in normal mode (i.e.
OBCM 0.NormalOperation ).
Property f9models the following scenario: the virtual tag has been read (the train has passed over it), but the
train does not try to connect within a certain amount of time t(because connection does not happen instantaneously).
This property is modeled as: for tconsecutive time units ( [][0,t] ),(TVa[0] < Lv[0]-PL[0]-(l[0]/2)) , i.e.,
the tag has been read. and the supervision module is still waiting to start a connection (OBCS 0.Disconnect ||
OBCS 0.CheckingTV) . The last condition OBCS 0.IXL!=-1 is used to ensure that train has not already connected and
disconnected from that IXL. Property f10checks whether OBCS 0.ConnectionLost && OBCM 0.NormalOperation ,
i.e. the connection has been lost by the supervision module but the mitigation module has not entered a degraded mode.
Property f11checks if a conﬁguration is reached where OBCM 0.DegradadedMode && OBCD 0.Moving , that is the
mitigation module is in degraded mode, but the driving module (instantiated as OBCD 0) is not in a stopped state.

--- Page 20 ---
20 Basile et al.
OBC Mitigation The hazard for the mitigation module is similar to the one for the OCC.
HAZ 12: the OBC has entered a degraded mode.
f12=Pr[<= bound](<> (!OBCM 0.NormalOperation))
This property measures the probability to reach a state in which normal operation conditions do not hold anymore (i.e.
!OBCM 0.NormalOperation )
OBC COMM OCC The module of the OBC responsible of communicating with the OCC has two hazards:
HAZ 13: the OBC has not connected to the OCC within NmaxOCC time units, but the OBC is not in degraded mode.
HAZ 14: the OBC is connected to the OCC but has not sent its position within NmaxPosOCC time units and the OBC
has not entered in a degraded mode.
f13=Pr(<> [0,bound]([][0,NmaxOCC+1] OBCC 0.Connecting && OBCM 0.NormalOperation))
f14=Pr(<> [0,bound]([][0,NmaxPosOCC+1] OBCC 0.Connected && OBCM 0.NormalOperation))
Property f13checks whether the model stays in state OBCC 0.Connecting forNmaxOCC+1 consecutive time units
and OBC is in normal operation condition mode (i.e. OBCM 0.NormalOperation ). Here OBCC 0is the instantiation
of the communication with OCC module. Property f14is similar to the previous one and it checks if after a given
amount of failed send position attempts NmaxPosOCC (note that here it is in state Connected rather than Connecting ),
OBC is in normal operation condition mode.
7.3. Analysing the IXL module
We ﬁnally report the properties aimed at verifying the IXL module. Below we list for each automata composing the
IXL the relevant properties. Similar to the OBC, there could be several instances of the IXL, one for each separate
junction. Here we report the properties to verify a speciﬁc instance of the IXL.
IXL Connect There are two hazards related to the module responsible for connecting to trams.
HAZ 15: IXL is not ready to serve a connection request within ttime units.
HAZ 16: IXL is connecting a tram that has not required to be connected.
f15=Pr(<> [0,bound]([][0,t]!IXLC 0.Waiting))
f16=Pr[<=bound](<> (IXLC 0.Connecting && ((IXLC 0.tid==0 && !OBCS 0.Connecting))))
The property f15expresses that the instantiation IXLC of the connection module is not in state Waiting for more
than ttime units. The property f16tests whether IXLC is in state Connecting but the corresponding tram (whose id is
identiﬁed by IXLC 0.tid==0 , tram 0 in this case) is not connecting (i.e. !OBCS 0.Connecting ).
IXL Disconnect The module responsible of disconnecting a tram has three hazards:
HAZ 17: IXL is disconnecting a tram that is not connected.
HAZ 18: IXL is disconnecting a connected tram before it has traversed the last TCV involved in its route.
HAZ 19: IXL is disconnecting a tram that has release (resp.occupied) the last VTC in a route whereas the release
condition is occupied (resp.free).
f17=Pr[Lv[0]<= spacebound](<> (IXLD 0.Disconnecting && ((IXLC 0.tid==0 && !OBCS 0.Connected))))
f18=Pr(<> [0,bound](IXLD 0.Disconnecting && (Lv[0]+PL[0]+l[0]/2<TCVa[1])))
f19=Pr[<= bound](<> ( ((IXLD 0.releaseOccupied==true)&&(IXLD 0.Disconnecting && TCV 1.Free))
|| ((IXLD 0.releaseOccupied==false)&&(IXLD 0.Disconnecting && TCV 1.Occupied))))
Similar to the previous module, these properties are instantiated on a speciﬁc scenario of one IXL and one tram. In
case of different scenarios, to cover the hazards different instantiations of the properties are needed. The property f17is
veriﬁed on simulations bounded by variable Lv[0] whose value must be less or equal to spacebound . It states that the
instantiation IXLD 0of the disconnect module is in state Disconnecting but the tram (i.e. tram with id 0 in this sce-
nario, i.e. IXLC 0.tid==0 ) is not connected (i.e. !OBCS 0.Connected ). The property f18states that the instantiation

--- Page 21 ---
Analysing an autonomous tramway positioning system 21
IXLD 0of the disconnect module is in state Disconnecting but the tram (i.e. tram with id 0 in this scenario) has not
yet reached the last virtual track circuit involved in its route (VTC with identiﬁer 1 in this scenario). This is rendered as
Lv[0]+PL[0]+l[0]/2<TCVa[1] . The property f19follows the scenario of the previous properties. It is a disjunction of
two sub-formulae differentiating whether IXLD 0.releaseOccupied==true orIXLD 0.releaseOccupied==false
(i.e. the release condition is either true or false). The ﬁrst case checks whether the corresponding virtual track circuit
is free but the IXL is disconnecting the tram (it should be occupied). The second case is when the virtual track circuit
is occupied but the IXL is disconnecting the tram (it should be free).
IXL Receive Pos This is the module of IXL in charge of receiving the positions sent by the trams. It has three hazards:
HAZ 20: IXL has not received a position of a connected tram within the maximum allowed time ( maxfreq ).
HAZ 21: IXL has checked a virtual track circuit not belonging to the junction of its responsibility.
HAZ 22: IXL has not checked a virtual track circuit belonging to the junction of its responsibility.
f20=Pr(<> [0,bound] ([][0,maxfreq+1] connectedCounter[0]>0 && IXLR 0.WaitingLoc && (forall
(tid:int[0,nTram-1]) !failOBC[tid])))
f21=Pr[<= bound](<> IXLR 0.ReceivedLoc && (TCV 2.checkU1 || TCV 2.checkU2))
f22=Pr(<> [0,bound] (IXLR 0.ReceivedLoc && (TCV 0.checkU1 || TCV 0.checkU2) && (TCV 1.checkU1
|| TCV 1.checkU2)))
The property f20checks whether for maxfreq consecutive time units there are connected trams (i.e. the condition
that is veriﬁed is connectedCounter[0]>0 ) but none of them has sent a position (i.e. IXLR 0.WaitingLoc ) and all of
them are not in degraded mode. Here IXLR 0is the instance of the receive position module. The property f21refers to
a scenario where the only virtual track circuits of its responsibility are TCV0andTCV1, whilst TCV2is not. Indeed, in
this property the IXL has received a position (i.e. IXLR 0.ReceivedLoc ), but TCV2is being checked (see the module
VTC below). The property f22is verifying the negated version of the corresponding hazards, that is, that all virtual
track circuits under responsibility (i.e. TCV1andTCV2) are being veriﬁed (are either in state checkU1 or in state
checkU2 ). Since this is the negation of the hazard, this property must hold with probability closer to 1 (it is the only
one in our analysis).
IXL TmaxSafe Supervision This is the module of the IXL responsible of monitoring whether all positions of
connected trams are received within TmaxSafe time units. One hazard has been identiﬁed:
HAZ 23: all connected tram positions are not received within a given amount of time but IXL has not entered a
degraded mode.
f23=Pr[<= bound](<> (IXLS 0.c1>IXLS 0.TmaxSafe && connectedCounter[0]!=0&&!IXLS 0.FailSafe))
This property checks whether the maximum time limit has been exceeded (i.e. IXLS 0.c1>IXLS 0.TmaxSafe )
and there are connected trams (i.e. connectedCounter[0]!=0 ) and the system is not in a degraded mode (i.e.
!IXLS 0.FailSafe ). Here, IXLS 0is the instantiation of this supervision module.
IXL Lsafemargin Supervision This is the dual IXL module of the position reception module. It is used for monitor-
ing whether the protection level ( PL) of the received position has exceeded its maximum allowed value ( Lsafemargin ).
HAZ 24: the protection level maximum value has been exceeded but the system has not entered a degraded mode.
f24=Pr(<>[0,bound]([][0,t]!IXLM 0.DegradadedMode&&connectedCounter[0]>0&&PL[0]>=Lsafemargin))
The property f24checks whether within a sufﬁcient amount of time ( ttime units) the IXL is not in degraded mode
(i.e.!IXLM 0.DegradadedMode ) and there are connected trams (i.e. connectedCounter[0]>0 ) and the maximum
allowed value for the protection level has been exceeded (i.e. PL[0]>=Lsafemargin ). Here, IXLM 0is the instantiation
of this mitigation module and the property is instantiated for a scenario with one train.
IXL TCV This is the module related to the functionalities of the virtual track circuits monitored by an IXL.
HAZ 25: a virtual track circuit is set to occupied but no tram is occupying it.
HAZ 26: a virtual track circuit is set to free but at least a tram is occupying it.

--- Page 22 ---
22 Basile et al.
Fig. 23. A critical scenario where a tram is derailed if the protection level PLis ignored
f25=Pr(<> [0,bound] ([][0,t] forall (tid:int[0,nTram-1]) !(TCV 0.a-PL[tid]-(l[tid]/2) <=
TCV0.pos && TCV 0.pos <= TCV 0.b+PL[tid]+(l[tid]/2) ) && TCV 0.Occupied))
f26=Pr(<> [0,bound] ([][0,t] exists (tid:int[0,nTram-1]) (TCV 0.a-PL[tid]-(l[tid]/2) <=
TCV0.pos && TCV 0.pos <= TCV 0.b+PL[tid]+(l[tid]/2)) && TCV 0.Free))
The property f25checks whether the function LocationReferencingVTC is false for all trams but the corresponding
virtual track circuit is in state occupied. This property is expressed for TCV0and is replicated for all virtual track
circuits in the experiments. The property f26checks the converse situation: LocationReferencingVTC is true for some
tram but the virtual track circuit is free. Note that for both formulae it is required that the module remains in this
conﬁguration for tconsecutive time units (i.e. to be sure that this is not due to short delays in communications). Of
course, tcan be ﬁne-tuned to the speciﬁc conﬁguration of the system.
IXL Mitigation The mitigation module is similar to those of the other entities in the system and it has one hazard:
HAZ 27: the IXL has entered a degraded mode.
f27=Pr[<= bound](<> IXLM 0.DegradadedMode)
The property f27checks the probability for the IXL to enter a degraded mode.
7.4. Experiments
In this section we perform an evaluation of the properties described in the previous section, using different set-ups
of parameters. The experiments were performed on a machine with a processor Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-8500Y CPU at
1.50GHz, 1601Mhz, 2 cores, and 4 logical processors with 16GB of RAM, running 64bit Windows 10. We used aca-
demic version of Uppaal 4.1.19 (rev. 5649), from September 2014. In all experiments, the probability of false negatives
isa=0:005 and probability uncertainty is e=0:05. Moreover, when explicitly stated in Table 3 the probability un-
certainty is set to e=0:005. For reproducibility of the experiments, all models with the different set-up of parameters,
as well as logs of the outcomes of each experiment are available at [Bas21].
Scenario and set-up of experiments These experiments are performed on a speciﬁc scenario, depicted in Figure 23.
As stated in Section 3, this scenario is stemming from activities carried out jointly by the consortium members of
the SISTER project. For a comprehensive veriﬁcation, a full catalogue of possible scenarios complementing the one
shown in Figure 23 would need to be considered, and its completeness veriﬁed, we leave this as future work. In this
scenario one junction area (i.e. one IXL) is composed of two VTCs, and there is one tram outside the junction area
and one tram inside the junction area. Tram 2 is traversing its assigned route whilst Tram 1 is waiting at a red signal
for its route to be assigned after reading the virtual tag VT. VTC 0 is used to detect the occupation of a route, whilst
VTC 1 is used to detect the release of a route. VTC 2 belongs to another junction area, controlled by another IXL (not
modelled in this scenario). It is assumed that a tram is disconnected instantaneously from the IXL when it has released
its assigned route, hence the events route release and disconnection are coupled. Of course, there is only one OCC in
the model. Moreover, we only instantiate IXL 0 (responsible of the considered junction area), and we only instantiate
one OBC (with id 0) that is the OBC of Tram 2. Indeed, in our experiments Tram 1 is stuck waiting for the signal to
open, and thus could only increase the state space without introducing any behaviour. Furthermore, the second IXL to
whom VTC 2 belongs is out of reach by the trams and thus is not depicted in Figure 23, and VTC 2 is only used to
testf21.

--- Page 23 ---
Analysing an autonomous tramway positioning system 23
Table 2. Set-up of Constant Integer Parameters
Constant Value
freq 5
maxfreq 7
msgRate 2
Pmsg 1061
failRate 2
restoreRate 3
TmaxSafeOCC 45
freqOCCconnection 15
NmaxOCC 45
NmaxPosOCC 15
PLrefreshRate 2
PLprob 1091
minPL 0
maxPL 10
worstCasePL 20
TmaxAck 15
TmaxConnect 15
TmaxSafe 15
Lsafemargin 500
VTC 0 has interval TCV0.a=250 ,TCV0.b=350 (meters) and belongs to IXL 0. VTC 1 has interval TCV1.a=450 ,
TCV1.b=550 and belongs to IXL 0. VTC 2 has interval TCV2.a=650 ,TCV2.b=750 and belongs to another IXL 1.
Note that this junction area is modelled as rather short to improve veriﬁcation speed. The condition for releasing the
route, which are the parameters of instantiation of IXLDisconnect , isreleaseOccupied=false , and VTC 1 is the
one to be traversed for releasing the route. The virtual tag for entering the junction area managed by the interlocking is
placed in the interval TV0.a=100 ,TV0.b=150 . We note that these values are experimental as no real implementation
of this system exists yet.
The time upper bound is of 150 (i.e. bound=150 seconds that is enough for the tram to cover 750 meters (the space
upper bound, i.e. spacebound=750 ) and traverse the whole junction area. In all the experiments discussed in this
section, it will be assumed that trams are travelling at a constant speed of 5 m/s (18km/h), i.e. OBCDrive.speed=5 ,
with length of 50 meters (i.e. l=50 ). We note that the model accounts also for the possibility of having trams with
different length and different speed.
First set-up The ﬁrst set-up is summarised in Table 2, and is related to normal conditions, with no inﬂation. More
importantly, the system is assumed to be working in nominal operation conditions in the sense of Stanford Dia-
gram [ESA18, LBC+15] (i.e. the alert limit is considered to be greater than the protection level and the protection
level greater than the position error), so excluding unavailability conditions and/or misleading information provision.
Note that these are all constant parameters (apart from those described above), and they have been validated by our
industrial partner. We refer to Section 6 for their meaning. Finally, the formulae introduced in the previous section are
designed to detect hazards, hence their value is expected to be close to zero (with the only exception of f22whose
value is expected to be close to one).
A summary of the results and performances of the experiments for all formulae described in the previous section,
using parameters in Table 2, is reported in Table 3. Note that some formulae have been evaluated with a lower prob-
ability uncertainty eto increase the number of simulations performed by the tool. All results meet the expectations,
thus conﬁrming that the model satisﬁes the given requirements. Recall that the probability is given as an interval (see
Section 2).
Second set-up We now proceed by inﬂating some parameters to observe occurrence of rare events and mitigation in
action. Indeed, in Table 2 it is reported that there is a low probability of losing messages and having worse values of
protection level (106and 109). Since statistical model checking is not based on full state space exploration, with
the current parameter set-up of the model checker such rare events are not observed. Instead of tuning the model
checker parameters (which would result in an unfeasible number of simulations), we will simply proceed by making
the rare events more probable. Moreover, to avoid disturbances, the system will not be restored once a degraded mode
is entered. In particular, we proceed with Pmsg=1,minPL=0,maxPL=100 . Thus, now the probability of losing messages
is high and the values for PL are not reliable. Table 4 reports the experiments performed with this second “inﬂated”

--- Page 24 ---
24 Basile et al.
Table 3. Evaluation of Properties and Performances (* evaluation performed with probability uncertainty e=0:005)
Runs Evaluation Veriﬁcation/kernel/elapsed time used Resident/virtual memory usage peaks
f1 1199 [0,0.0575063] 20.234s / 0.14s / 20.467s 9,160KB / 30,264KB
f2 597* [0,0.00998576] 20.454s / 0.266s / 23.346s 10,132KB / 32,212KB
f3 1199 [0,0.05] 20.125s / 0.953s / 26.373s 9,124KB / 30,156KB
f4 597* [0,0.00998576] 24.625s / 0.672s / 30.981s 9,396KB / 30,704KB
f5 597* [0,0.00998576] 23.765s / 0.25s / 24.122s 10,596KB / 33,296KB
f6 1199 [0,0.05] 16.844s / 0.203s / 17.175s 9,936KB / 31,580KB
f7 1199 [0,0.05] 13.25s / 0.172s / 13.519s 10,648KB / 33,004KB
f8 1199 [0,0.05] 12.625s / 0.234s / 14.211s 11,408KB / 34,524KB
f9 1199 [0,0.05] 13.297s / 0.156s / 14.167s 10,392KB / 32,764KB
f10 597* [0,0.00998576] 5.234s / 0.172s / 5.874s 11,524KB / 35,228KB
f11 597* [0,0.00998576] 5.266s / 0.125s / 5.697s 11,500KB / 35,164KB
f12 597* [0,0.00998576] 4.219s / 0.172s / 5.316s 10,560KB / 33,408KB
f13 1199 [0,0.05] 14s / 0.25s / 14.891s 9,996KB / 31,696KB
f14 1199 [0,0.05] 28.547s / 0.391s / 32.759s 9,192KB / 30,040KB
f15 1199 [0,0.05] 13.828s / 0.156s / 14.265s 9,076KB / 29,908KB
f16 597* [0,0.00998576] 4.688s / 0.25s / 5.072s 10,244KB / 32,332KB
f17 597* [0,0.00998576] 2.875s / 0.203s / 3.087s 10,080KB / 32,164KB
f18 1199 [0,0.05] 12.516s / 0.266s / 12.821s 9,012KB / 29,864KB
f19 597* [0,0.00998576] 4.375s / 0.234s / 4.67s 9,276KB / 30,376KB
f20 1199 [0,0.05] 19.062s / 0.047s / 19.172s 10,864KB / 33,684KB
f21 597* [0,0.00998576] 4.5s / 0.234s / 4.751s 11,964KB / 36,240KB
f22 1199 [0,95, 1] 1.234s / 0.188s / 1.43s 9,092KB / 30,136KB
f23 597* [0,0.00998576] 4.547s / 0.156s / 4.696s 10,408KB / 32,804KB
f24 1199 [0,0.05] 12.547s / 0.094s / 12.7s 9,072KB / 30,108KB
f25 1199 [0,0.05] 14.922s / 0.203s / 15.222s 9,064KB / 30,104KB
f26 1199 [0,0.05] 11.891s / 0.157s / 12.173s 9,976KB / 31,848KB.
f27 597* [0,0.00998576] 4.782s / 0.203s / 5.074s 11,020KB / 34,120KB
set-up. As expected now the probability of entering a degraded mode is high in all components of the model (i.e.
properties f5,f12andf27), whilst all other properties, except for f7, are still within the values in Table 3.
We now show the functionalities provided by U PPAAL for analysing a trace on which the evaluated hazard occurs.
Figure 24 displays the concrete simulator functionality of U PPAAL . Basically, once the property f7has been veriﬁed, a
trace is stored showing a simulation where f7holds true. This is indeed one of the main advantages of model checking:
the stored trace is composed of around 30 discrete steps (that are displayed in the bottom left box of Figure 24). The
generation of such trace is completely automatised, and no manual simulation is required, which would be very hard
to perform considering the high number of involved steps and the high number of hazards to evaluate. The trace is also
depicted using a Message Sequence Chart (MSC), and by clicking on a speciﬁc conﬁguration on the MSC it is possible
to see the values of the variables for that conﬁguration. In particular, in the conﬁguration in Figure 24 (emphasised by
a horizontal line in the MSC) the tram has position Lv[0]=26 , protection level PL[0]=74 , thus OBCS 0detects to have
reached the ﬁrst virtual tag, issues the connection request to the IXL, and moves to location Connecting . Continuing
the analysis of the trace, we note that two consecutive connection requests communications fail, and IXLC 0remains
in state Waiting . Finally, in Figure 25, it is possible to see that after some step, a new protection level is computed
with value 24. At this point, the hazard modelled by property f7is detected to hold, because Lv[0]+PL[0]+(l[0]/2)
< TVa[0] (i.e. the tram has not reached the virtual tag), failOBC[0]=0 (i.e., the tram has not failed) and it is in state
Connecting . Basically, this hazard was triggered by an inﬂated protection level leading the on-board computer to try
to connect to the IXL before the virtual tag was reached. This is indeed a further evidence indicating how, although
the property being a negation of the modelled logic should trivially not hold in the model, this is not the case due to
the complexity of the interactions between various automata.
Continuing the analysis of this scenario, Figure 26 displays the probability distribution of f7for this experiment.
Indeed, once the property has been veriﬁed, U PPAAL allows to visualize plots concerning the evaluated probability,
for a ﬁne-grained analysis. In the plot it is possible to observe that the peaks are at time 5 and 10, which are exactly
the instants where OBCTVemits a signal to read a virtual tag that is received by OBCIXLConnectionSupervision
instance. At time TmaxConnect , 15 seconds in the experiment, the system fails due to the high probability of message
loss. We will comment more on these results after having shown the next experimental set-ups.

--- Page 25 ---
Analysing an autonomous tramway positioning system 25
Fig. 24. Snapshot of U PPAAL showcasing a trace generated from the evaluation of f7for the second set-up with both inﬂated protection level and
probability of losing messages, in a conﬁguration triggering the connection request of the tram.
Table 4. Evaluation of Properties and Performances with inﬂated probability of losing messages and protection level
Runs Evaluation Veriﬁcation/kernel/elapsed time used Resident/virtual memory usage peaks
f5 784 [0.529807,0.629746] 3.703s / 0.203s / 3.969s 12,324KB / 36,600KB
f7 1199 [0.445413,0.545413] 10.078s / 0.156s / 11.015s 19,744KB / 51,616KB
f12 57 [0.900222,1] 0.125s / 0.062s / 0.193s 12,392KB / 36,708KB
f27 36 [0.902606,1] 0.156s / 0.046s / 0.211s 8,760KB / 29,568KB
Third set-up The result of the second set-up suggests that more hazards may occur in case only the protection level is
degraded, whilst communications are reliable. Indeed, when there is a high probability of losing messages, the system
will automatically enter a degraded mode after the timeout has expired, thus preventing to observe hazards that may
occur after this expiration event. In the third set-up, only the protection level is inﬂated (as in the second set-up), whilst
the probability of losing messages is low (as in the ﬁrst set-up). Table 5 conﬁrms our hypothesis: more hazards are
observable by only inﬂating the protection level. In particular, properties f7;f18;f25andf26(and the corresponding
hazards) now have a non-negligible probability of occurrence.
Fourth set-up We now change the condition in which a tram releases a route once it has traversed the junction.
In particular, we set the condition for releasing the route to releaseOccupied=true (see Figure 21), which is the
tram is disconnected as soon as the last VTC involved in the route is occupied. In this fourth set-up we will only
consider a slightly inﬂated protection level, i.e. minPL=0,maxPL=40 , whilst the probability of losing messages is low.

--- Page 26 ---
26 Basile et al.
Fig. 25. Snapshot of U PPAAL showcasing a trace generated from the evaluation of f7for the second set-up with both inﬂated protection level and
probability of losing messages, in a conﬁguration where f7holds.
Fig. 26. The probability distribution for f7in the degraded scenario

--- Page 27 ---
Analysing an autonomous tramway positioning system 27
Table 5. Evaluation of Properties and Performances with inﬂated protection level only
Runs Evaluation Veriﬁcation/kernel/elapsed time used Resident/virtual memory usage peaks
f7 1199 [0.248582,0.348582] 17.625s / 1.062s / 22.148s 19,488KB / 51,348KB
f18 1199 [0.196872,0.296872] 20.782s / 0.078s / 22.766s 15,732KB / 49,136KB
f25 1199 [0.00254379,0.102544] 24.297s / 0.687s / 28.522s 16,592KB / 50,868KB
f26 1199 [0.0701001,0.1701] 24.859s / 0.11s / 27.309s 17,268KB / 52,264KB
By changing the release condition we observe that the value of f18switches from a value similar to the one reported in
Table 3 (with releaseOccupied=false ) to being evaluated in the interval [0.00921601,0.109216] with conﬁdence
0.995 using 1199 runs (with releaseOccupied=true ).
Hence, in the original speciﬁcation HAZ18 can happen when the release condition is set to occupied. Note that the
violation of such hazard may result in a derailment. Indeed, in Figure 23, once Tram 2 has been disconnected, the IXL
will proceed to create the route to be assigned to Tram 1. Creating a route involves moving the switch (that Tram 2
is actually traversing) and setting signals. Since Tram 2 could be still traversing the junction, it could derail. The
misalignment between physical position and virtual position is represented by depicting in grey the virtual positions
of the trams and in black their real one. In particular, in Figure 23 Tram 2 is behind its virtual position, but inside PL,
a situation that would result in a derailment.
Fixing the speciﬁcation An intuitive explanation of the causes of the hazards above follows: due to the introduction
ofPLinLocationRe f erencing (see Formula 1), the tram is “stretched” and “shrinked” in such a way that a virtual
track circuit or virtual tag may be occupied and released even before the tram actually reaches it.
A ﬁrst mitigation to the speciﬁcation is to release a route only after the last VTC involved (in this case VTC 1)
is completely traversed, and remove this scenario (i.e. releaseOccupied is always false). Note that this mitigation
violates the assumption made by the initial speciﬁcation (see Section 4), and in particular that the conﬁguration param-
eters of the legacy system should remain unchanged in the new system. Indeed, all VTC must have release condition
set to free. Concerning the hazards occurring when the releaseOccupied is always false, they are all related to a
non-reliable protection level, i.e. in the interval [0,100] in our experiments, and we propose different alternative miti-
gations. First, occurrences of such hazards may be mitigated by pairing the satellite positioning with other positioning
sensors, in such a way that the satellite position is ignored in case it is over a certain threshold (i.e. the alert limit).
Indeed, when the protection level has exceeded the alert limit the position is ignored and a degraded mode is entered.
In the ﬁrst set-up, with a protection level in the interval [0,10] all properties were satisﬁed. A safe value for the alert
limit in this example could be 10(in previous experiments instead the alert limit was always greater than the protection
level). A second alternative mitigation is to modify the speciﬁcation of the location referencing function such that it
also takes into account the direction of a tram, i.e. a virtual track circuit/virtual tag cannot be occupied and released
from the same side. A third alternative mitigation is to substitute the alert limit with the protection level in the loca-
tion referencing function (in automata OBCIXLConnectionSupervision andIXLTCV). Indeed, whilst the protection
level PLvaries dynamically (and this variation may potentially lead to hazards), the alert limit is ﬁxed. Moreover, in
case PLexceeds the alert limit the system will enter a degraded mode, where due operations will take place to restore
normal conditions.
We have evaluated this third mitigation that has been implemented in the model using the third set-up (only inﬂated
protection level). We used 100as alert limit value. Moreover, ALhas been substituted to PL[0] in properties f7;f25and
f26. These three properties and f18are now evaluated to be close to zero, i.e., all hazards are successfully mitigated.
7.4.1. Remarks
The analysis described in this section has proved that the adoption of formal methods (in this particular case statistical
model checking) may be of help for detecting in the early design phase of a system potentially critical bugs in the
speciﬁcation. By inﬂating the probability of losing connections and protection level we have been able to detect
occurrences of some of the identiﬁed hazards. We also have evaluated a mitigation that has been proven to be effective.
It is important to note that a conventional model checking approach could not scale-up (as the state space of our
model is very large) contrary to a statistical model checker that does not need to exhaustively visit the complete state
space, but requires a probabilistic, stochastic model. Indeed, our aim was not a quantitative evaluation of dependability
attributes of the proposed system but a qualitative, scalable veriﬁcation. We used U PPAAL SMC as a fast tool to
enlighten possible hazards in the design of a safety-critical system affected by uncertainty: the obtained probability

--- Page 28 ---
28 Basile et al.
values for the hazards are not accurate because are obtained using inﬂated probabilities of occurrence for rare events
such as communication failures. This was necessary to drive the statistical model checker towards those sensible
scenario where hazards could be observed. However, a further, more accurate quantitative evaluation could be used to
demonstrate that their probability of occurrence is well below any reasonable risk level, and for a possible reﬁnement
of the system speciﬁcation. By simply using realistic set-ups and scenarios, our model can be used to provide a more
costly reliable quantitative analysis of the measures of interest object of the analysis.
The adoption of a state-machine formalism has also been of help in sharing results with the industrial partners
of this project. The automata modelling software components have a straightforward translation into state machines
dialects used in Model-based Software Engineering tools, and can be ultimately reﬁned to generate source code and
tests for the pieces of software that have been modelled and analysed.
The studied hazards were related to the substitution of the track circuits with autonomous positioning, and did not
include malfunctioning of legacy components, such as the IXL system, whose safety is considered already assessed.
Indeed, the substitution principles studied on an example junction are actually quite independent from the junction
itself and from its size. If deemed necessary, the experiments can be independently repeated for each junction of a
line, with an execution time growing linearly with the number of junctions (e.g., let tbe the worst time needed for
verifying a junction, in case of kjunctions one needs kttime to verify all of them). An approach similar to [GH21]
for a network of distributed reconﬁgurable interlockings could also be adopted to separately verify each junction.
8. Related work
UPPAAL Statistical Model Checker has been applied to various industrial case studies [LLN18], as for exam-
ple [BFRM19, BtBFL19], and has also been used to verify the reliability of railway interlocking systems [CLS+17,
HLF+20, LTH20], to verify railway timetables [HH19], and message protocols [LYZ20]. U PPAAL STRATEGO , an ex-
tension of SMC with strategy synthesis and optimization, has been applied to a few other case studies belonging to the
transport domain, such as trafﬁc light controllers [TKR19], cruise control [LMT15], railway scheduling [KLFS19],
autonomous driving [BtBL20] and navigation of maritime autonomous systems [SMVW20].
One of the main drawback of statistical model checking is the presence of rare events, i.e. events with small
probability of occurrence. A technique called importance sampling [GI89] consists in modifying the model to reduce
the variance of Monte Carlo estimator for rare event simulation. This technique has been applied to stochastic timed
automata [JLL+16] for modiﬁcations performed on-the-ﬂy during simulations; the algorithm in [BHP12] provides a
conﬁdence interval for the estimated property whilst [PFG18] uses a reinforcement learning technique for guiding
simulations. Here we change the probability weights in the model to increase the occurrence of rare events (that are
related to the possibility of loss of communications and interference in estimation of position), so to observe how the
modeled mitigation behaves in presence of rare events, for a qualitative, quick veriﬁcation.
Within the SISTER project [CBB+19], prior to this work, an Integer Linear Programming (ILP) model has
been proposed for addressing route planning at run-time [BGG17], in the style of geographical interlocking sys-
tems [PKHP19]. Routes of all vehicles are guaranteeing safety against track disruptions and optimising the overall
time-schedule. In the European Horizon 2020 Shift2Rail project ASTRail (SAtellite-based Signalling and Automa-
tion SysTems on Railways along with Formal Method and Moving Block Validation), U PPAAL SMC has been used
to model and analyse the ASTRail speciﬁcation [BtBC18, BtBFL19]. Finally, other hybrid signalling systems us-
ing virtual ﬁxed blocks with similarities to the one discussed in this paper have recently been modelled and analysed
in [NGB+16, AKJ20, BLW18, CM20, MFTL20, DDPS20, HLK+20, BJL+18] with Promela/Spin, mCRL2, Electrum,
and Event-B.
9. Conclusion and future work
In this paper a formal analysis of the system speciﬁcation provided by the SISTER project has been carried out.
The goal of the SISTER project is the substitution of physical positioning devices with virtual ones in tramway lines.
Such devices are safety-critical, and the new system calls for a rigorous analysis with state-of-the-art techniques.
Starting from natural language requirements and operational scenarios provided by the industrial partners, we
formalised the functioning of the SISTER system through stochastic timed automata and U PPAAL SMC. The result is

--- Page 29 ---
Analysing an autonomous tramway positioning system 29
a parametric formal model for a generic application , to be instantiated with parameters of a speciﬁc application . Such
model is thus highly reusable and different operational scenarios can be evaluated.
Through the formal analysis it has been possible to detect problems in the original speciﬁcation that have been
ﬁxed. The output of the analysis is a reﬁned speciﬁcation where proper mitigation are in place. Moreover, the new
speciﬁcation is described through a state-machine formalism, and it is ready to be used in the ﬁrst stage of development
of the system.
Future work This paper describes models of the informal speciﬁcation that are partially translatable into software
modules. We would like to explore the possibility of translating such models into some formalism amenable to auto-
matic code generation. We are currently investigating the RT-UML and Papyrus [HDB17] framework and translation
to UML-B and Event-B framework, in the style of [SMTVW20].
The approach in [A VW20] may be used in the future to generate code directly from the provided U PPAAL models,
and to type-check the generated code using [KDPG16]. A further direction of research is investigating the possibility
of having autonomously connected trains as described in [Fan19] and coupling our approach with tunnel control
systems [OH19]. Finally, reﬁning the automaton used for generating PL, which is now non-deterministic, into an
automaton that computes PLstarting from the error distribution j0;s2would allow to analyse realistic values of the
alert limit. The synthesis capabilities of U PPAAL Stratego could be applied to automatically compute such alert limit
to enforce safety whilst maximising the capacity of the railway network.
Acknowledgements This work has been funded by the Tuscany Region project POR FESR 2014-2020 SISTER
“SIgnaling & Sensing Technologies in Railway application”.
References
[AKJ20] P. Arcaini, J. Kofro ˇn, and P. Je ˇzek. Validation of the hybrid ERTMS/ETCS level 3 using SPIN .Int. J. Softw. Tools Technol. Transf. ,
22(3):265–279, 2020.
[AP18] G. Agha and K. Palmskog. A Survey of Statistical Model Checking. ACM Transactions on Modeling and Computer Simulation ,
28(1):6:1–6:39, 2018.
[A VW20] S.F. Arenis, M. Vujinovic, and B. Westphal. On implementable timed automata. In Formal Techniques for Distributed Objects,
Components, and Systems - 40th IFIP WG 6.1 International Conference, FORTE 2020, Held as Part of the 15th International
Federated Conference on Distributed Computing Techniques, DisCoTec 2020, Valletta, Malta, June 15-19, 2020, Proceedings , pages
78–95, 2020.
[Bas21] D. Basile. Repository for reproducing the experiments, 2021. https://github.com/davidebasile/faoc2020 .
[BDL+06] G. Behrmann, A. David, K.G. Larsen, J. H ˚akansson, P. Pettersson, W. Yi, and M. Hendriks. UPPAAL 4.0. In Proceedings of the 3rd
International Conference on the Quantitative Evaluation of SysTems (QEST’06) , pages 125–126. IEEE, 2006.
[BDL+13] P. Bulychev, A. David, K.G. Larsen, A. Legay, G. Li, and D.B. Poulsen. Rewrite-Based Statistical Model Checking of WMTL. In
S. Qadeer and S. Tasiran, editors, Runtime Veriﬁcation — Revised Selected Papers of the 3rd International Conference on Runtime
Veriﬁcation (RV’12) , volume 7687 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 260–275. Springer, 2013.
[BFRM19] D. Basile, A. Fantechi, L. Rucher, and G. Mand `o. Statistical model checking of hazards in an autonomous tramway positioning sys-
tem. In Reliability, Safety, and Security of Railway Systems. Modelling, Analysis, Veriﬁcation, and Certiﬁcation - Third International
Conference, RSSRail 2019, Lille, France, June 4-6, 2019, Proceedings , pages 41–58, 2019.
[BGG17] D. Basile, F. Di Giandomenico, and S. Gnesi. Dependable dynamic routing for urban transport systems through integer linear
programming. In A. Fantechi, Thierry Lecomte, and Alexander B. Romanovsky, editors, Reliability, Safety, and Security of Rail-
way Systems. Modelling, Analysis, Veriﬁcation, and Certiﬁcation - Second International Conference, RSSRail 2017, Pistoia, Italy,
November 14-16, 2017, Proceedings , volume 10598 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 221–237. Springer, 2017.
[BHP12] B. Barbot, S. Haddad, and C. Picaronny. Coupling and importance sampling for statistical model checking. In C. Flanagan and
B. K ¨onig, editors, Tools and Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis of Systems , volume 7214 of LNCS , pages 331–346.
Springer, 2012.
[BJL+18] U. Berger, P. James, A. Lawrence, M. Roggenbach, and M. Seisenberger. Veriﬁcation of the European Rail Trafﬁc Management
System in Real-Time Maude. Sci. Comput. Program. , 154:61–88, 2018.
[BLW18] M. Bartholomeus, B. Luttik, and T. Willemse. Modelling and Analysing ERTMS Hybrid Level 3 with the mCRL2 toolset. In
F. Howar and J. Barnat, editors, Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on Formal Methods for Industrial Critical Systems
(FMICS’18) , volume 11119 of LNCS . Springer, 2018.
[BM12] J. Beugin and J. Marais. Simulation-based evaluation of dependability and safety properties of satellite technologies for railway
localization. Transport. Res. C-Emer. , 22:42–57, 2012.
[Bou15] J.L. Boulanger. Tool Qualiﬁcation. In CENELEC 50128 and IEC 62279 Standards , chapter 9, pages 287–308. John Wiley & Sons,
2015.
[BtBC18] D. Basile, M.H. ter Beek, and V . Ciancia. Statistical model checking of a moving block railway signalling scenario with UPPAAL
SMC - experience and outlook. In Leveraging Applications of Formal Methods, Veriﬁcation and Validation. Veriﬁcation - 8th
International Symposium, ISoLA 2018, Limassol, Cyprus, November 5-9, 2018, Proceedings, Part II , pages 372–391, 2018.
[BtBFL19] D. Basile, M.H. ter Beek, A. Ferrari, and A. Legay. Modelling and analysing ERTMS L3 moving block railway signalling with

--- Page 30 ---
30 Basile et al.
simulink and UPPAAL SMC. In Formal Methods for Industrial Critical Systems - 24th International Conference, FMICS 2019,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands, August 30-31, 2019, Proceedings , pages 1–21, 2019.
[BtBL20] D. Basile, M.H. ter Beek, and A. Legay. Strategy synthesis for autonomous driving in a moving block railway system with UPPAAL
stratego. In Formal Techniques for Distributed Objects, Components, and Systems - 40th IFIP WG 6.1 International Conference,
FORTE 2020, Held as Part of the 15th International Federated Conference on Distributed Computing Techniques, DisCoTec 2020,
Valletta, Malta, June 15-19, 2020, Proceedings , pages 3–21, 2020.
[CBB+19] A. Ceccarelli, D. Basile, A. Bondavalli, L. Falai, A. Fantechi, S. Ferrari, G. Mand `o, N. Nostro, and L. Rucher. The SISTER approach
for veriﬁcation and validation: A lightweight process for reusable results. In Computer Safety, Reliability, and Security - SAFECOMP
2019 Workshops, ASSURE, DECSoS, SASSUR, STRIVE, and WAISE, Turku, Finland, September 10, 2019, Proceedings , pages 185–
197, 2019.
[CLS+17] Q. Cappart, C. Limbr ´ee, P. Schaus, J. Quilbeuf, L.-M. Traonouez, and A. Legay. Veriﬁcation of Interlocking Systems Using Statistical
Model Checking. In HASE , pages 61–68. IEEE, 2017.
[CM20] A. Cunha and N. Macedo. Validating the hybrid ERTMS/ETCS level 3 concept with Electrum. Int. J. Softw. Tools Technol. Transf. ,
22(3):281–296, 2020.
[DDPS20] D. Dghaym, M. Dalvandi, M. Poppleton, and C. Snook. Formalising the hybrid ERTMS level 3 speciﬁcation in iUML-B and Event-B.
Int. J. Softw. Tools Technol. Transf. , 22(3):297–313, 2020.
[DLL+15] A. David, K.G. Larsen, A. Legay, M. Miku ˇcionis, and D.B. Poulsen. U PPAAL SMC tutorial. International Journal on Software Tools
for Technology Transfer , 17(4):397–415, 2015.
[E+15] C.A. Ericson et al. Hazard analysis techniques for system safety . John Wiley & Sons, 2015.
[ERAMK18] S. El-Rahman, A. Attiya, H. Mamoud, and H. Kader. Passive rﬁd tag for railway application. Open Journal of Antennas and
Propagation , 06:15–24, 01 2018.
[ESA18] ESA. Navipedia - Integrity. https://gssc.esa.int/navipedia/index.php/Integrity#Protection_Level , page last edited
July, 2018.
[Eur10] European Committee for Electrotechnical Standardization. CENELEC EN 50159 – Railway applications – Communication, sig-
nalling and processing systems – Safety-related communication in transmission systems, 2010.
[Eur11] European Committee for Electrotechnical Standardization. CENELEC EN 50128 — Railway applications – Communication, sig-
nalling and processing systems – Software for railway control and protection systems, 01 06 2011.
[Eur17a] European Committee for Electrotechnical Standardization. CENELEC EN 50126-1 — Railway applications – The speciﬁcation and
demonstration of Reliability, Availability, Maintainability and Safety (RAMS) – Part 1: Generic RAMS process, 01 10 2017.
[Eur17b] European Committee for Electrotechnical Standardization. CENELEC EN 50126-2 — Railway applications – The speciﬁcation and
demonstration of Reliability, Availability, Maintainability and Safety (RAMS) – Part 2: Systems approach to safety, 01 10 2017.
[Fan19] A. Fantechi. Connected or autonomous trains? In Reliability, Safety, and Security of Railway Systems. Modelling, Analysis, Veriﬁ-
cation, and Certiﬁcation - Third International Conference, RSSRail 2019, Lille, France, June 4-6, 2019, Proceedings , pages 3–19,
2019.
[FNF18] G. Falco, M. Nicola, and E. Falletti. An HW-In-the-Loop Approach for the Assessment of GNSS Local Channel Effects in the
Railway Environment. In Proceedings of the 31st International Technical Meeting of the Satellite Division of The Institute of
Navigation (ION GNSS+ 2018) , pages 3463–3477. Institute of Navigation, 2018.
[GH21] S. Geisler and A.E. Haxthausen. Stepwise development and model checking of a distributed interlocking system using raise. Formal
Aspects of Computing , 33(1):87–125, 2021.
[GI89] P. W. Glynn and D. L. Iglehart. Importance sampling for stochastic simulations. Management Science , 35(11):1367–1392, 1989.
[GJRS13] P.D. Groves, Z. Jiang, M. Rudi, and P. Strode. A Portfolio Approach to NLOS and Multipath Mitigation in Dense Urban Areas. In
Proceedings of the 26th International Technical Meeting of the Satellite Division of The Institute of Navigation (ION GNSS+ 2013) ,
pages 3231–3247. Institute of Navigation, 2013.
[GtBvdP20] H. Garavel, M.H. ter Beek, and J. van de Pol. The 2020 Expert Survey on Formal Methods. In M.H. ter Beek and D. Ni ˇckovi ´c,
editors, Proceedings of the 25th International Conference on Formal Methods for Industrial Critical Systems (FMICS’20) , volume
12327 of LNCS , pages 3–69. Springer, 2020.
[HDB17] N. Hili, J. Dingel, and A. Beaulieu. Modelling and code generation for real-time embedded systems with uml-rt and papyrus-rt. In
Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Software Engineering Companion , ICSE-C ’17, page 509–510. IEEE Press,
2017.
[HEPGP21] Tomas Hotzel E., Ken P., D. Golightly, and R. Palacin. Modelling train driver behaviour in railway co-simulations. In L. Cleophas
and M. Massink, editors, Software Engineering and Formal Methods. SEFM 2020 Collocated Workshops , pages 249–262, Cham,
2021. Springer International Publishing.
[HH19] A.E. Haxthausen and K. Hede. Formal Veriﬁcation of Railway Timetables - Using the UPPAAL Model Checker. In From Software
Engineering to Formal Methods and Tools, and Back , volume 11865 of LNCS , pages 433–448, 2019.
[HLF+20] J. Huang, J. Lv, Y . Feng, Z. Luo, H. Liu, and M. Chai. A novel method on probability evaluation of zc handover scenario based on
smc. In Jianhua Qian, Honghai Liu, Jiangtao Cao, and Dalin Zhou, editors, Robotics and Rehabilitation Intelligence , pages 319–333,
Singapore, 2020. Springer Singapore.
[HLK+20] D. Hansen, M. Leuschel, P. K ¨orner, S. Krings, T. Naulin, N. Nayeri, D. Schneider, and F. Skowron. Validation and real-life demon-
stration of ETCS hybrid level 3 principles using a formal B model. Int. J. Softw. Tools Technol. Transf. , 22(3):315–332, 2020.
[JLL+16] C. Jegourel, K.G. Larsen, A. Legay, M. Miku ˇcionis, D.B. Poulsen, and S. Sedwards. Importance sampling for stochastic timed
automata. In M. Fr ¨anzle, D. Kapur, and N. Zhan, editors, Dependable Software Engineering: Theories, Tools, and Applications ,
pages 163–178, Cham, 2016. Springer International Publishing.
[KDPG16] D. Kouzapas, O. Dardha, R. Perera, and S.J. Gay. Typechecking protocols with mungo and stmungo. In Proceedings of the 18th
International Symposium on Principles and Practice of Declarative Programming , PPDP ’16, page 146–159, New York, NY , USA,
2016. Association for Computing Machinery.
[KLFS19] S.L. Karra, K.G. Larsen, F.L., and J. Srba. Safe and Time-Optimal Control for Railway Games. In RSSRail , volume 11495 of LNCS ,
pages 106–122, 2019.

--- Page 31 ---
Analysing an autonomous tramway positioning system 31
[LBC+15] C. Legrand, J. Beugin, B. Conrard, J. Marais, M. Berbineau, and E. El-Miloudi. Approach for evaluating the safety of a satellite-based
train localisation system through the extended integrity concept. In Proceedings of ESREL 2015 - European safety and reliability
conference , 2015.
[LLN18] K.G. Larsen, F. Lorber, and B. Nielsen. 20 years of UPPAAL enabled industrial model-based validation and beyond. In Leverag-
ing Applications of Formal Methods, Veriﬁcation and Validation. Industrial Practice - 8th International Symposium, ISoLA 2018,
Limassol, Cyprus, November 5-9, 2018, Proceedings, Part IV , pages 212–229, 2018.
[LLT+19] A. Legay, A. Lukina, L.M. Traonouez, J. Yang, S.A. Smolka, and R. Grosu. Statistical model checking. In Bernhard Steffen and
Gerhard J. Woeginger, editors, Computing and Software Science: State of the Art and Perspectives , volume 10000 of LNCS , pages
478–504. Springer, 2019.
[LMT15] K.H. Larsen, M. Mikucionis, and J.H. Taankvist. Safe and Optimal Adaptive Cruise Control. In Correct System Design , volume
9360 of LNCS , pages 260–277, 2015.
[LTH20] Per Lange Laursen, V .A.T. Trinh, and A.E. Haxthausen. Formal modelling and veriﬁcation of a distributed railway interlocking
system using uppaal. In T. Margaria and B. Steffen, editors, Leveraging Applications of Formal Methods, Veriﬁcation and Validation:
Applications , pages 415–433, Cham, 2020. Springer International Publishing.
[LYZ20] R. Li, J. Yin, and H. Zhu. Modeling and analysis of rabbitmq using uppaal. In 2020 IEEE 19th International Conference on Trust,
Security and Privacy in Computing and Communications (TrustCom) , pages 79–86, 2020.
[MFTL20] A. Mammar, M. Frappier, S.J. Tueno Fotso, and R. Laleau. A formal reﬁnement-based analysis of the hybrid ERTMS/ETCS level 3
standard. Int. J. Softw. Tools Technol. Transf. , 22(3):333–347, 2020.
[NGB+16] R. Nardone, U. Gentile, M. Benerecetti, A. Peron, V . Vittorini, S. Marrone, and N. Mazzocca. Modeling Railway Control Systems
in Promela. In C. Artho and P. C. ¨Olveczky, editors, Formal Techniques for Safety-Critical Systems — Revised Selected Papers of
the 4th International Workshop on Formal Techniques for Safety-Critical Systems (FTSCS’15) , volume 596 of Communications in
Computer and Information Science , pages 121–136. Springer, 2016.
[OH19] W. Oortwijn and M. Huisman. Formal veriﬁcation of an industrial safety-critical trafﬁc tunnel control system. In W. Ahrendt and
S.L. Tapia Tarifa, editors, Integrated Formal Methods , pages 418–436. Springer International Publishing, 2019.
[PFG18] S. Puch, M. Fr ¨anzle, and S. Gerwinn. Quantitative risk assessment of safety-critical systems via guided simulation for rare events.
In T. Margaria and B. Steffen, editors, Leveraging Applications of Formal Methods, Veriﬁcation and Validation. Veriﬁcation , pages
305–321, Cham, 2018. Springer International Publishing.
[PKHP19] J. Peleska, N. Krafczyk, A.E. Haxthausen, and R. Pinger. Efﬁcient data validation for geographical interlocking systems. In Relia-
bility, Safety, and Security of Railway Systems. Modelling, Analysis, Veriﬁcation, and Certiﬁcation - Third International Conference,
RSSRail 2019, Lille, France, June 4-6, 2019, Proceedings , pages 142–158, 2019.
[RCN+13] F. Rispoli, M. Castorina, A. Neri, A. Filip, G. Di Mambro, and F. Senesi. Recent Progress in Application of GNSS and Advanced
Communications for Railway Signaling. In Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference Radioelektronika (RADIOELEKTRON-
IKA 2013) , pages 13–22. IEEE, 2013.
[Shi15] Shift2Rail Joint Undertaking. Multi-Annual Action Plan, 26 November 2015. http://ec.europa.eu/research/participants/
data/ref/h2020/other/wp/jtis/h2020-maap-shift2rail_en.pdf .
[SMTVW20] F. Shokri-Manninen, L. Tsiopoulos, J. Vain, and M. Wald ´en. Integration of iUML-B and UPPAAL timed automata for development
of real-time systems with concurrent processes. In A. Raschke, D. M ´ery, and F. Houdek, editors, Rigorous State-Based Methods ,
pages 186–202. Springer International Publishing, 2020.
[SMVW20] F. Shokri-Manninen, J. Vain, and M. Wald ´en. Formal veriﬁcation of colreg-based navigation of maritime autonomous systems. In
F. de Boer and A. Cerone, editors, Software Engineering and Formal Methods , pages 41–59, Cham, 2020. Springer International
Publishing.
[tBGK18] M.H. ter Beek, S. Gnesi, and A. Knapp. Formal methods for transport systems. International Journal on Software Tools for
Technology Transfer , 20(3), 2018.
[TKR19] B. Thamilselvam, S. Kalyanasundaram, and M.V . Panduranga Rao. Coordinated Intelligent Trafﬁc Lights using UPPAAL Stratego.
InCOMSNETS , pages 789–794. IEEE, 2019.
