--- Page 1 ---
Using UPPAAL to Model and Verify
a Clock Synchronization Protocol
for the Controller Area Network
Guillermo Rodr ´ıguez-Navas, Juli ´an Proenza
Systems, Robotics and Vision Group
Departament de Matem `atiques i Inform `atica
Universitat de les Illes Balears, Spain
E-mail: guillermo.rodriguez-navas@uib.es, julian.proenza@uib.esHans Hansson
MRTC
Department of Computer Science and Electronics
M¨alardalen University, Sweden
E-mail: hans.hansson@mdh.se
Abstract — A reported liability of the Controller Area Network
protocol is that it does not provide a clock synchronization
service. Therefore, whenever a CAN-based distributed embedded
system requires its nodes to have a common time base, clock
synchronization has to be implemented by means of an externalmechanism. In a previous work, we proposed a fault-tolerantand high-precision clock synchronization protocol for CAN. Thispaper shows the ﬁrst steps towards the formal veri ﬁcation of this
protocol. In particular, it presents a formal model that has beenbuilt with the UPPAAL model checker and discusses how clockdrift and clock correction can be modeled with this tool.
I. I NTRODUCTION
The Controller Area Network (CAN) ﬁeld bus [1] is
nowadays extensively used for the implementation of dis-
tributed embedded systems. In fact, although it was initially
designed for in-vehicle communications, it has been adoptedin a broad range of applications, such as factory automation,
medical equipment and building automation, among others.
One reported liability of the Controller Area Network protocolis its lack of a clock synchronization service [2]. Due to this,
this service is usually implemented by means of an external
mechanism, typically a software application executed by the
nodes.
The existence of a system-wide synchronized clock is fre-
quently assumed when designing distributed applications, and
hence mechanisms are designed which rely on this assumption.
For these mechanisms to work properly it is very important
to guarantee that the clock synchronization service is reliableenough. In a previous work, some of the authors proposed
a solution for clock synchronization in CAN networks [3],
which is intended to provide the system with a clock of goodprecision despite the occurrence of a wide range of channel
and nodes’ faults.
This paper presents the ﬁrst steps towards the formal
veriﬁcation of this protocol by means of model checking [4].
The UPPAAL model checker [5] has been chosen for thisveriﬁcation as it has been successfully used to verify other
real-time communication protocols, e.g. in [6], [7]. In partic-
ular, this paper includes a thorough description of the formal
model that has been built to specify our clock synchronizationprotocol. An additional contribution of this work is to show
how clocks of variable drift can be modeled with UPPAAL.
To the authors’ best knowledge, this has not been describedbefore.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II
introduces the basic features of the UPPAAL model checker.In Section III, the system model is presented and discussed,whereas the fault model is presented in Section IV. Section V
is devoted to describing the main characteristics of our clock
synchronization protocol. Section VI focuses on the descrip-tion of the veri ﬁcation model, paying special attention to the
mechanisms that we have proposed to model clock drift andclock correction. Finally, Section VII summarizes the paper
and gives some insight for further improvement.
II. UPPAAL
BACKGROUND
UPPAAL is a model checker that allows de ﬁnition of the
system behavior by means of a network of timed automata.
Atimed automaton is a ﬁnite state machine extended with
clock variables, which are used to measure time progress. The
theory of timed automata allows clocks to be evaluated to a
real number, but UPPAAL restricts those evaluations to integernumbers.
An UPPAAL timed automaton is made up of a number
oflocations and a number of transitions (also known as
edges ) between them. A transition usually causes an update
of the system’s variables. In particular, as a consequence of
a transition, integer and boolean variables can be assigned a
new value, whereas clock variables can only be restarted.
Synchronous actions (i.e. actions that are simultaneously
performed by several automata) can be modeled by means of
synchronous channels . Such transitions lead to a new state
of the system in which the involved automata may all have
stepped into a new location. A transition (either synchronous
or not) is enabled as long as its corresponding guard condition
holds. Guard conditions can use integer, boolean and clockvariables, yet with some restrictions.
There is a particular kind of locations, the so-called commit-
ted locations , which help to model atomic actions. These loca-
0-7803-9402-X/05/$20.00 © 2005 IEEE

--- Page 2 ---
CAN node
Local
oscillatorProcessor
Virtual clock
CAN controllerClock synch’n
algorithmApplication
CAN interface
Tx medium
Fig. 1. Structure of a CAN node
tions are always left immediately and can interleave only with
other commited locations. Additionally, UPPAAL incorporates
three mechanisms to model urgency, namely invariants ,urgent
channels and urgent locations , making it possible to force
certain transitions to be ﬁred as soon as they are enabled.
Whenever these mechanisms are not used, a transition may
take place at an undetermined instant.
A fundamental characteristic of a network of timed au-
tomata is that clocks progress at the same rate. Nevertheless, in
this work some techniques have been developed which allow
us to model clocks of different rates as well. These techniques
are described in Section VI.
III. S YSTEM MODEL
This paper addresses the problem of clock synchronization
in CAN-based distributed embedded systems. Such systems
are composed by a number of so-called CAN nodes, whichexecute a coordinated function and use a broadcast network
to exchange messages. In this work it is also assumed that the
CAN nodes require a common time base in order to carry out
such coordinated function.
A. Node structure
The structure of a CAN node is depicted in Figure 1. The
CAN node is made up of two basic elements: a processor ,
which executes both the application software and the clocksynchronization algorithm and a CAN controller , which pro-
vides the processor with the CAN communication capabilities.
The processor and the CAN controller communicate throughthe so-called CAN interface .
Note that the processor is clocked by a local oscillator.
This local oscillator is used to measure time, by means of
a software counter which simply acts as a frequency divider.
This software-implemented counter is called the virtual clock .
In order to guarantee that the virtual clocks of the various
CAN nodes do not drift apart, each node executes a clock
synchronization algorithm. The function of this algorithm isto compare the value of the local virtual clock with a valid
reference and, if needed, make the appropriate corrections tothe virtual clock. The valid reference is obtained through the
CAN network.
B. CAN interface
The interface of the CAN controller includes four primi-
tives to handle message transmission and reception, namely
Tx.request ,Tx.con ﬁrm,Rx.indication andAbort.request . The
ﬁrst three primitives are supported by any commercial CAN
controller. The last primitive is not part of the CAN standard
but it is supported by many available CAN controllers [8].
The actual implementation of each primitive may vary from
one CAN controller to another, but their function and required
parameters are the following:
TheTx.request(msg id, msg data) primitive is used by the
processor to request the transmission of message msg id.
This transmission may not take place immediately as it
depends on the channel conditions.
The Tx.con ﬁrm(msg id)primitive is used by the CAN
controller to indicate that message msg id, whose trans-
mission was previously requested, has been actuallytransmitted.
TheRx.indication(msg id, msg data) primitive is used by
the CAN controller to indicate that message msg idhas
been received.
TheAbort.request(msg id)primitive allows the processor
to request the CAN controller to abort the transmission of
the message msg id(whose transmission was requested
previously by the processor itself). It is important toremark that when a message transmission has started it
cannot be aborted.
C. Relevant properties of the CAN controller
The clock synchronization algorithm that is presented in this
paper relies on a number of properties that are to be provided
by the CAN controller:
(i)Prioritized medium access . The CAN protocol speci ﬁ-
cation de ﬁnes a distributed bitwise algorithm to arbitrate
the bus access. It guarantees that, whenever two or more
nodes attempt to simultaneously send a frame, the node
that succeeds is the one that sends the frame with the
highest priority (i.e. the lowest identi ﬁer).
(ii)Bounded response time . Thanks to the priority-based
access to the medium, and as long as there is a bounded
number of channel errors, the worst-case response time
of a CAN message is bounded and can be calculated [9],[10].
(iii) Inconsistent broadcast . In a CAN network, any trans-
mitted message is expected to be received by all of thenon-faulty nodes in the system. However, it has been
reported that certain fault scenarios exist in which this
property does not hold [11], [12]. The consequencesof these scenarios can be either inconsistent message
omissions or inconsistent message duplicates, as de ﬁned
in [11].
(iv) Start of frame signaling . Our solution for clock syn-
chronization requires the CAN controller to be able to

--- Page 3 ---
signal the ﬁrst bit (the Start of Frame bit) of any frame
so the virtual clock can be accurately sampled at that
precise instant. Similar mechanisms have been suggestedin the literature [13], [14] to improve the precision of
the clock synchronization.
(v)On-the- ﬂy message timestamp . The CAN controller
must be able to overwrite the data ﬁeld of a frame while
it is being transmitted. In this way, the data ﬁeld of a
frame can convey a timestamp that indicates the value
that the virtual clock of the transmitter exhibited when
theStart of Frame bit of such frame was signaled.
It is important to remark that Properties (i) to (iii) are part
of the standard CAN speci ﬁcation and thus they are supported
by commercial CAN controllers. The mechanisms to provideProperties (iv) and (v) can be implemented with the help
of programmable logic devices (PLDs). As explained in [3],
we have used a Field-Programmable Gate Array (FPGA) to
implement a modi ﬁed CAN controller which ful ﬁlls both
properties.
IV . F
AULT MODEL
The system may suffer from three types of faults: software
faults, physical faults of the nodes and physical faults of the
channel. Due to the simplicity of our clock synchronizationprotocol, software faults are not included in the fault model.
Concerning physical faults of the nodes, the fault model
includes arbitrary faults that can be either transient or perma-
nent. However, an important assumption is that there is at leastone non-faulty node in the system which can provide a clock
of good quality.
Permanent physical faults of the channel, such as bus parti-
tion or stuck-at-dominant, are not included in the fault model.
These faults can be addressed independently, for instance asproposed in [15].
Regarding transient channel faults, our fault model only
includes those channel faults that lead to frame errors de-
tectable by the error-detection mechanisms of CAN, since the
probability of having a channel fault which is not detected bythe CAN controllers is very low and can be neglected [16].
It is also assumed that the number of channel faults within
a given time interval is bounded. In this way, it is possible
to assume a bounded response time for every CAN message.
Moreover, although our fault model includes channel faults
that can lead to inconsistent frame receptions, the probability
of such faults is low enough so as to assume that only abounded number of consecutive resynchronization rounds can
be affected by these faults.
V. P
ROTOCOL DESCRIPTION
In this section the basics of our proposal for clock synchro-
nization in CAN networks are described.
A. Protocol basics
Our protocol adopts a master/slave approach, as there is
one node (the master) that imposes its time view to the rest
of nodes of the system (the slaves). The master is assumed tobe synchronized to an external time source which supplies the
desired accuracy. The master’s time view is spread throughout
the network by means of a speci ﬁc message: the Time Message
(TM), which the master periodically broadcasts.
The aim of the Time Message is twofold. On the one hand,
the master uses it to indicate the resynchronization event,
which is the sample point of the Start of Frame bit of this
particular message. On the grounds of Property (iv), everyslave samples its virtual clock at this instant and keeps the
value in a variable called lt
ref. On the other hand, thanks to
Property (v), the TM’s data ﬁeld contains the timestamp that
the master took precisely at that instant, so each slave reads
the TM and keeps the master’s timestamp in a variable called
rtref.
In this way, after reception of the TM each slave compares
its virtual clock to the master’s one and makes the required
corrections. In particular, two corrections are carried out.
One aims at correcting the offset error , which is calculated
according to Equation 1, whereas the other aims at correcting
thedrift error , which is caused by the rate difference between
the local virtual clock and the remote virtual clock, as shownin Equation 2.
offset
error =rtref−ltref (1)
drift error =localrate
remote rate=ltref−rtrefprev
rtref−rtrefprev(2)
These corrections are not performed instantly, but they
are progressively carried out [3]. This is often called clock
amortization and is more advisable than instant corrections
because it does not cause time leaps. Both offset correction
and drift correction are never perfectly performed, since thereis always some residual error caused by small system latencies
or by the imprecision of the arithmetical operations. However,
in our system the residual error of the offset correction is
small, mainly because of Property (iv), and can be neglected.
In contrast, the drift error (though being small) causes clocksto drift apart as time passes by, so it may have greater
effect on the clock synchronization protocol and cannot be
neglected. The residual drift error is denoted γ
min hereafter.
The maximum drift error between any pair of slaves that have
synchronized to the same master is 2×γmin.
The instant at which the master attempts to transmit the
TM is called the release time . Even though the release time is
periodical, the instant at which the TM is actually broadcastmay vary depending on the network conditions. For instance,
channel errors may cause frame retransmissions and therefore
a signi ﬁcant delay.
Despite its simplicity, our protocol has several advantages.
Thanks to the master/slave approach it is not expensive interms of bandwidth consumption nor processor utilization. Due
to this, and in contrast to solutions previously suggested [17],
it adapts very well to the asymmetric nature of many dis-tributed embedded systems, where nodes with bad quality
clocks as well as scarce processing capabilities may exist. A

--- Page 4 ---
master/slave approach has been also adopted by the IEEE 1588
standard for clock synchronization in distributed systems [18].
B. Master replication
The main drawback of adopting a master/slave scheme is
that the master represents a single point of failure since any
failure of this node might cause a failure of the whole clocksynchronization service. In our proposal, this single point of
failure is eliminated by means of master replication . Basically,
a number of master replicas or backup masters are de ﬁned,
which supervise the so-called active master so one of them
can take over in case this master is faulty.
In order to simplify the management of the master repli-
cation, the failure semantics of the masters (either active or
backup) has been restricted to crash failure semantics , which
means that upon a physical fault the node becomes silent.
This failure semantics can be enforced by means of internal
duplication and comparison, as explained in [3].
Owing to the restricted failure semantics of the masters,
the faulty master detection and replacement mechanism isimplemented by just de ﬁning the release time of the backup
masters a short time after the release time of the active master.
This short delay is different at each backup master, and is
greater for those backup masters with lower priority. In this
way, if the active master was faulty and did not broadcast itsTM, the system would recover a short time later, as soon as
the next backup master succeeded in broadcasting its own TM.
This prioritized mechanism for master replacement implicitlyassumes that masters’ clocks are synchronized to a given
precision Π. In particular, letting Γbe the separation between
master iand master i+1, it assumes that Π≤
Γ
2.
Since channel conditions can delay the transmission of a
TM, it is possible for one or more backup masters to reachtheir release time even if the active master is not actually
faulty. Due to this, the TM identi ﬁers are assigned in such
a way that in case more than one masters attempt to send theTM simultaneously, the TM with highest priority is always
broadcast ﬁrst. After reception of a higher priority TM, each
lower priority master requests its own CAN controller to abortthe TM transmission. Nevertheless, the abort operation has
some latency and it is not likely to be performed before the
corresponding CAN controller starts the transmission of the
following TM.
This implies that it is possible to receive two TMs from
different masters within the same resynchronization round.
In case of a consistent broadcast this fact would not be aproblem because nodes only resynchronize to the ﬁrst TM they
receive. But in case of an inconsistent broadcast this might
cause some nodes to resynchronize to a master whereas therest resynchronize to another one. The consequences of these
inconsistency scenarios are further explained in Section V-C
A drawback of enforcing crash failure semantics in the
masters by means of internal duplication and comparison
is that any transient fault turns into a permanent failure ofthe master, and this may cause fast redundancy attrition .
This problem could be overcome by providing the masterswith some internal check and recovery mechanisms, and by
designing a proper policy for master reintegration. This issue
has not been addressed in this work, but it seems that asuitable policy would be to allow any just-recovered master
to reintegrate ﬁrstly as a slave (a sort of passive mode) and
then, after a few correct resynchronization rounds, allow it toact again as a backup master.
C. Scenarios of inconsistent clock resynchronization
As it was stated in Section IV, certain channel faults may
cause inconsistent omissions or inconsistent duplicates of the
TM. Inconsistent TM duplicates do not have any impact on
the clock precision because they do not cause any inconsistentresynchronization. In contrast, inconsistent omissions of the
TM can have a negative impact on the clock synchronization,
particularly when TMs from two different masters are broad-
cast. These potential inconsistency scenarios and their effect
on the clock parameters are explained next:
A backup master may not receive the TM sent by the
active master nor any other TM of higher priority than
its own. In such a case, the master would not correct itsoffset error with respect to the active master’s clock. If the
drift error of this backup master after the last successful
resynchronization was γthen the accumulated offset error
would be at most equal to γtimes the elapsed time since
that resynchronization. The drift error would be neither
corrected, but the effect would not be too important sinceclock drift tend to change smoothly and therefore, for a
time short enough, the drift error can be considered as
being constant.
A set of slaves may not receive the TM sent by the
active master nor any other subsequent TM within one
resynchronization round. The effect on the clock wouldbe exactly the same as in the previous case as neither the
offset error nor the drift error would be corrected.
A set of nodes (including backup masters and slaves)may not receive the TM sent by the active master but
do receive a subsequent TM from a backup master. Insuch a case, these nodes correct their clock according
to that backup master, and notaccording to the active
master. Due to this, they actually ”inherit” both the offseterror and the drift error of this backup master, which
might be even greater than the errors these nodes had
before resynchronization. Moreover, the drift error ofthese nodes may increase due to the residual drift error.
For instance, if γis the drift error (w.r.t. the active
master) of the backup master that transmitted the secondTM, then after resynchronization the drift error of the
resynchronizing nodes may be γ+γ
min.
D. Protocol implementation
Figure 2 shows the clock synchronization algorithm as
implemented by a generic master i. Every master (either active
or backup) executes the same procedure, the only differencebeing the value of the release time. A Master can be in one
of four states: Idle1, Queue, Abort and Idle2.

--- Page 5 ---
Idle1 Queue
Idle2 AbortRx.indication && 
(msg_id < i)/
Correct_clock
Tx.confirm/Rx.indication && 
(msg_id < i)/
Correct_clockvc == release_time/
Tx.request
vc == end_round_time/ /Abort.request
Fig. 2. Master i’sﬁnite state machine
Idle1 is the state at the beginning of the resynchronization
round. In this state only two events may happen: either a
TM is received or the release time is reached. If a TM is
received and it has higher priority than the master itself (a
Rx.indication is received with ( msgid < i )) then master i
performs the corresponding clock correction and steps into
state Idle2. Idle2 represents the state at the end of the resyn-
chronization round, when the master has already corrected itsclock. While being in state Idle2, any other message reception
is ignored.
Whenever master iis in state Idle1 and the release
time
is reached (i.e. vc==release time ), the master requests
the transmission of its TM ( Tx.request ) and steps into state
Queue. This means that master iis a candidate to become the
active master. In state Queue only two events may happen:
either the TM is successfully transmitted or a TM is received.If master isends its TM (primitive Tx.confirm ) before
receiving any TM of higher priority then it considers itself
as being the master of highest priority and steps into state
Idle2 without performing any clock correction. In contrast,
if master ireceives a TM of higher priority ( Rx.indication
with ( msg
id < i )) then it corrects its clock and moves to
state Abort.
In state Abort, master iperforms a request to abort the
queued TM (primitive Abort.request ) and proceeds into
state Idle2 regardless of the result of the abort operation.As soon as the end
round time time mark is reached (i.e.
vc==endround time ), Master isteps into state Idle1 and
a new resynchronization round is started. The value of theend
round time time mark is the same for all of the nodes.
The implementation of the slaves is not shown because it
is very simple, and can moreover be derived easily from the
master’s state machine. Slaves only have two states (Idle1 and
Idle2) and the two transitions between them that appear in
Figure 2.
VI. UPPAAL VERIFICATION MODEL
This section describes the veri ﬁcation model that has been
built in order to model our clock synchronization protocol.
First, we discuss the techniques we have developed to model
variable clock drift in UPPAAL. After that, an overview ofthe veri ﬁcation model is provided. Finally, and due to space
limitations, only the main features of this model are discussed.A more detailed description of the model features can be found
in [19].
A. How to model variable clock drift in UPPAAL
In order to understand the technique for modeling clock drift
that has been used in this work it is necessary to examine
the effects of having unsynchronized clocks in a distributed
system. Imagine a set of nodes, in which every node isprovided with a virtual clock and has to trigger an action when
this virtual clock reaches the instant t0. These actions will
be triggered simultaneously only in the ideal case of havingperfectly synchronized clocks. In a realistic case, with clocks
of slightly different rates, each node triggers the action at a
different instant, i.e. those nodes with faster clocks trigger theaction sooner than those with slower clocks. Moreover, this
temporal uncertainty on the time-triggered actions is the only
effect of having unsynchronized clocks. Note that temporaluncertainty is proportional to t0since, in the absence of clock
resynchronization, clocks tend to drift apart as time passes by.
Although it is impossible to determine the exact drift of
a speci ﬁc clock, it is possible to bound, up to a certain
probability, the maximum drift that a clock may exhibit
1.
From this information, the earliest and the latest possible
time of an event occurrence can be deduced. Using these
extreme occurrence times the possible clock drifts can in
UPPAAL be modeled as a time interval. This is illustrated
in Figure 3, in which the transition from location L1 to
location L2 can only happen if clock xis within the interval
[t0−epsilon,t 0+epsilon ].
By giving the appropriate values to epsilon it is possible
to model clock drifts, as the following example illustrates.
Imagine that two automata (Master and Slave) exist which
behave like the automaton in Figure 3, and that have restarted
their local clocks xsimultaneously. Master’s clock is assumed
to be the time reference whereas Slave’s clock has a drift error
equal to the residual drift error γmin. Therefore, at instant
t0the value of epsilon in the Slave automaton is equal to
t0×γminwhereas the value of epsilon in the Master is 0,a s
it does not drift with respect to itself.
Assuming these values, it can be deduced that automaton
Slave may ﬁre its transition from L1 to L2 within a time
interval that is centered at t0and has a length equal to
2×t0×γmin. Since the transition from L1 to L2 is used to
restart each local clock x, the consequence of this uncertainty
is that the offset difference between Master’s clock and Slave’s
clock (when both Master and Slave are in location L2) variesin the range [−t0×γ
min,t0×γmin].
This mechanism can be adapted to our model because there
are only two time-triggered actions, the broadcast of the TMand the end of the round, and both are periodical. Therefore, it
is possible to determine a priori when they are going to take
place, and hence, epsilon can be calculated as long as the drift
error ( γ) of each clock is known. Since the value of γchanges
1In our system, this assumption is also enforced by the duplication with
comparison structure of the masters as long as two clocks are used

--- Page 6 ---
L1
x <= t0 + epsilonL2 x >= t0 - epsilon
x:= 0
Fig. 3. Example of automaton
according to the resynchronization actions that are performed,
it has to be calculated after every resynchronization in the way
that is described in Section VI-C.
It is important to remark that by modeling clock drift in
this manner, not only the extreme drift values are considered,
but also all of the intermediate drifts. This represents a great
advantage in front of simulation techniques, in which only aﬁnite set of drifts can be evaluated. A similar approach, yet
not applied to clock drift, has been proposed to model hybrid
systems with timed automata [20].
B. Model overview
The model presented in this paper does not include any
automaton to model the slaves’ behavior. This means that only
clock resynchronization among masters can be veri ﬁed. This
is due to the fact that it was decided that masters’ behavior hadto be addressed ﬁrst as it is the most complex part of the clock
synchronization protocol. Once masters’ resynchronization has
been modeled and veri ﬁed, it seems that slaves can be easily
incorporated into the model. In fact, and according to what is
said in Section V-D, the slave automaton is a subset of the
master’s one.
Our clock synchronization model includes the following
automata:
One Master automaton (Figure 4) for each master in the
system. This automaton models the clock resynchroniza-
tion protocol itself.
One Clkctrlautomaton (Figure 5) for each master in the
system. This automaton helps to model clocks of variable
drift.
One Chan ctrlautomaton (Figure 6), which models part
of the CAN communication.
One Round ctrl automaton (Figure 7), which is used
mainly to restart the system variables at the end of each
resynchronization round.
The automaton in Figure 4 is actually a simpli ﬁed model
of the Master automaton since, for the sake of clarity, the
following features have been deliberately omitted: inconsistent
reception of messages, the possibility of having TMs whosetransmission is not timely aborted, and master crash. The way
to add all of these features to our model is described in [19].
Notice that the simpli ﬁed Master automaton includes a
location for each of the states that appear in Figure 2, though
a number of additional locations have been incorporated in
order to model the interaction with the rest of the system.
Our model includes Nmasters. Each master is given a
unique identi ﬁermy
idin the range [0,N−1]. The identi ﬁer is
used to indicate the priority of the master and therefore the pri-ority of the TM it broadcasts. A lower identi ﬁer means higher
priority, which is the usual convention in CAN networks.
Furthermore, each master is provided with its own virtual
clock. This is modeled with an array of clocks vcof size N,
such that vc[myid]refers to the virtual clock of the myid-
est master. The array vcis a global variable, so every master
can read the virtual clock of any other master. This is very
useful in order to model clock correction.
The model also includes a number of constants and variables
that are related to the clock correction procedure. On the one
hand, the array of integers gamma , which has size N, keeps
the current drift error of each master ( γ). This drift error is
measured with respect to the active master, so gamma [myid]
equals to 0 only if Master myidis the current active master.
The value of gamma [myid]is calculated right after every
clock correction, and is always an integer multiple of γmin
(constant gamma min in the model). Due to this, and in
order to reduce the memory requirements of the model, onlythe integer value is kept. On the other hand, the constant
gamma
step represents the effect that a drift equal to γmin
causes after R1+delta time units. It is calculated as follows:
gamma step=(R1+delta)×gamma min,s oi th a sa
different value for each master.
C. Main model features
These are the main features our model includes.
1) Uncertainty of the release time: As said in Section V-B,
each master has a different release time, which depends on themaster’s priority. In the model, each Master automaton uses a
local integer variable delta to represent its delay with respect
to the release time of Master 0. The release time of Master0i sR1time units after the end of the last resynchronization
round, so every master reaches its release time when its virtual
clock measures R1+delta time units.
However, due to the drift with respect to the active mas-
ter’s clock, the release time of a master can occur within
a time interval, whose length depends on the current drifterror. As shown in Figure 4, this time interval is centered
atR1+delta[my
id]and its boundaries are proportional
togamma [myid], which represents the drift error between
clockvc[myid]and the active master’s virtual clock after the
last resynchronization. The constant gamma step is propor-
tional to R1+delta[myid]and models the fact that time
uncertainty increases for larger time values.
Since the value of gamma [myid]is calculated in each
resynchronization round, the boundaries of the release timeinterval may change in every round, depending on the actions
performed by the nodes. This is a very important property of
the model as it allows us to study how the resynchronizationactions affect the node’s clock drift and vice versa. The way
of calculating the value of gamma [my
id]is explained later
on in this section.
2) Prioritized medium access: This property is modeled by
means of a global integer variable called msgid. This variable
indicates the identi ﬁer of the highest priority TM among all
the TMs that are waiting for transmission. A msgidvalue

--- Page 7 ---
Idle1vc[my_id] <= R1 + delta
+ gamma[my_id]*gamma_stepQueue
Idle2Aux1
Idle3
my_aux_clk <= R1Abort
Aux3vc[my_id] >= R1 + delta
- gamma[my_id]*gamma_step
msg_id:= my_id <? msg_id
vc[my_id]:= 0,
num_clk++my_aux_clk >= R1my_id > msg_id
tx_msg?ref_clock:= recv_id,
(time_ref == N)?(new_gamma[my_id]:= min_gamma):(new_gamma[my_id]:= min_gamma+ gamma[ref_clock]+ gamma[time_ref])my_id > msg_id
tx_msg?ref_clock:= recv_id,
(time_ref == N)?(new_gamma[my_id]:= min_gamma):(new_gamma[my_id]:= min_gamma+ gamma[ref_clock]+ gamma[time_ref])
recv_id:= 0,(time_ref == N)?(time_ref:= my_id):(time_ref:= time_ref)tx_msg?
(time_ref == N)?
(new_gamma[my_id]:= 0):(new_gamma[my_id]:= gamma[my_id]+ gamma[time_ref])my_id == msg_id
end_round[ref_clock]?
my_aux_clk:= 0,
ref_clock:= my_id
Fig. 4. Simpli ﬁed Master automaton
vc[clock_id] <= R2
+ gamma[clock_id]*gamma_step
vc[clock_id] >= R2 - gamma[clock_id]*gamma_step
end_round[clock_id]!
all_end_round?
Fig. 5. Clk ctrl automaton
no_pending_tx
pending_txx <= WCRTmsg_id < N
x:= 0aux_chan!tx_msg!
x:= 0,
recv_id:= msg_id,msg_id:= N
Fig. 6. Chan ctrl automaton
num_clk == N
all_end_round!num_clk:= 0,
eomission:= not (eomission and reg_omission),reg_omission:= false,gamma[0]:= new_gamma[0], gamma[1]:= new_gamma[1],gamma[2]:= new_gamma[2],new_gamma[0]:= 0, new_gamma[1]:= 0,new_gamma[2]:= 0,time_ref:= N
Fig. 7. Round ctrl automatonequal to N means that no message is waiting for transmission
(the bus is idle).
Whenever a master wants to broadcast its TM (transition
from Idle1 to Queue), it checks the current value of msgid,
and only if its own identi ﬁer (local integer variable myid)i s
lower than msgidthen it overwrites msgidwith its identi ﬁer
(the C-like assignment msgid:=myid <?msgidmodels
this behavior). In this way, if a master of higher priority hadpreviously requested a TM transmission then the master could
not overwrite the variable msg
id, which in fact would be
equivalent to losing the arbitration.
3) Clock correction: The set of Clk ctrl automata are
intended to signal the end of the round, as seen by the
various masters in the system. Every Clk ctrl automaton is
identi ﬁed by its own clock id, so Clk ctrl automaton indi-
cates the end of the round as measured by the virtual clock
of Master clock id. This is signaled through the broadcast
channel endround [clock id]. This event can occur within a
time interval the length of which depends on both the drift of
Master clock id(kept in gamma [clock id]) and the variable
gamma step[clock id].
Moreover, every Master automaton is provided with a
local integer variable called refclock , which is used in
the following way to model clock correction. Whenever one
master resynchronizes to a received TM, the master makesref
clock :=recvid. After that, this master does not use its
own clock to measure the end of the round, but the virtual
clock of the master to which it has resynchronized. This ismodeled with the broadcast channel end
round [refclock].
Thanks to this, all of the masters that resynchronized to the
active master leave location Idle2 simultaneously. In contrast,and due to what was explained above about the Clk
ctrl
automaton, those masters that resynchronized to a different
master may leave location Idle2 sooner or later than the activemaster.
When leaving location Idle2, each master resets a local

--- Page 8 ---
clockauxclock . As soon as this clock reaches R1 time units,
the local virtual clock of the master (vc[myid])is reset. In
this way, the offset error is corrected only in those mastersthat resynchronized to the active master, whereas the rest of
masters keep their offset for the next resynchronization round.
Note that this is coherent to what is explained in Section V-C.
The new drift error of each master is calculated whenever
one of the transitions leading to Idle2 that imply clock correc-tion is taken. It is calculated taking into account whether the
master resynchronizes to the active master (which is kwown
thanks to variable time
ref) or not. The new drift value is
kept by the variable newgamma [myid]until the end of the
round. At the end of the resynchronization round, automaton
Round ctrl assigns the value of newgamma togamma ,s o
the new drift error can be taken into account for the next
resynchronization round.
VII. C ONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
In a previous work, we have proposed a solution for clock
synchronization over CAN. This paper describes the ﬁrst
steps towards the formal veri ﬁcation of this solution with
the UPPAAL model checker. UPPAAL is very well suited
for the formal veri ﬁcation of real-time systems as it includes
the notion of time. However, this tool is based on the timedautomata theory, which assumes already synchronized clocks,
and is thereby usually applied to systems with this kind of
clocks. Nevertheless, we have shown that UPPAAL can beused also to model systems with clocks of variable drift. This
has been a signi ﬁcant contribution of this work.
Moreover, our veri ﬁcation model includes a number of
common characteristics of the CAN communication, such as
arbitration, bounded response time and broadcast. We believethat the artifacts presented in this paper to model these features
with UPPAAL might help researchers that aim at formally
verifying their own CAN-based protocols. Even though someof these artifacts are not thoroughly described in this paper, a
more detailed description can be found in [19].
Our veri ﬁcation model has been successfully used to verify
certain properties of our clock synchronization protocol. In
particular, some results concerning the correctness of thefaulty master detection and replacement mechanism have been
obtained, but they have not been presented in this paper as
they are still preliminary. From this experience, we believethat our UPPAAL model is an excellent starting point so as to
understand the complex relationship that there exists between
the fault conditions and the best achievable clock precision.
A few additional features could still be included into the
model. One of them is to allow an unbounded number ofchannel errors within a resynchronization round. In this way,
it would be possible to study the effect of large error bursts
on the clock service. Furthermore, a similar model could bedesigned in which the on-the- ﬂy timestamping is not assumed
for the CAN controllers. This would require the transmission
of two messages: one to indicate the resynchronization instantand another one to carry the timestamp of such event. Al-
though eliminating this requirement would make our solutionmuch more generic, it is not clear how inconsistent omissions
may affect the achievable precision.
A
CKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work has been partially supported by the Spanish
MCYT grant DPI2001-2311-C03-02, which is partially funded
by the European Union FEDER programme.
REFERENCES
[1] ISO, “ISO11898. Road vehicles - Interchange of digital information -
Controller area network (CAN) for high-speed communication,” 1993.
[2] M. T ¨orngren, “A perspective to the Design of Distributed Real-time
Control Applications based on CAN,” Proceedings of 2nd International
CAN Conference, London-Heathrow, United Kingdom , 1995.
[3] G. Rodr ´ıguez-Navas, J. Bosch, and J. Proenza, “Hardware Design of a
High-precision and Fault-tolerant Clock Subsystem for CAN Networks,”Proceedings of the 5th IFAC International Conference on FieldbusSystems and their Applications (FeT 2003), Aveiro, Portugal , 2003.
[4] E. M. Clarke, O. Grumberg, and D. A. Peled, Model Checking . Cam-
bridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press, 2001.
[5] G. Behrmann, A. David, and K. G. Larsen, “A tutorial on
UPPAAL ,” in
Formal Methods for the Design of Real-Time Systems: 4th International
School on Formal Methods for the Design of Computer, Communication,and Software Systems, SFM-RT 2004 , ser. LNCS, M. Bernardo and
F. Corradini, Eds., no. 3185. Springer–Verlag, September 2004, pp.
200–236.
[6] H.L ¨onn and P. Pettersson, “Formal Veri ﬁcation of a TDMA Protocol
Startup Mechanism,” in Proceedings of the
Paciﬁc Rim Int. Symposium
on Fault-Tolerant Systems , 1997, pp. 235–242.
[7] A. David and W. Yi, “Modelling and analysis of a commercial ﬁeld bus
protocol,” Proceedings of the 12th Euromicro Conference on Real Time
Systems , pp. 165–172, 2000.
[8] K. Etschberger, Controller Area Network . Weingarten: IXXAT Press,
2001.
[9] K. Tindell, A. Burns, and A. J. Wellings, “Calculating controller area
network (CAN) message response time,” Control Engineering Practice ,
vol. 3(8), pp. 1163–1169, 1995.
[10] I. Broster, A. Burns, and G. Rodr ´ıguez-Navas, “Probabilistic analysis of
CAN with faults,” Proceedings of the 23rd Real-time Systems Sympo-
sium, 2002.
[11] J. Ru ﬁno, P. Ver ´ıssimo, G. Arroz, C. Almeida, and L. Rodrigues, “Fault-
tolerant broadcasts in CAN,” Digest of papers, The 28th IEEE Inter-
national Symposium on Fault-Tolerant Computing, Munich, Germany ,
1998.
[12] J. Proenza and J. Miro-Julia, “MajorCAN: A modi ﬁcation to the Con-
troller Area Network to achieve Atomic Broadcast,” IEEE Int. Workshop
on Group Communication and Computations. Taipei, Taiwan , 2000.
[13] K. Turski, “A global time system for CAN,” Proceedings of the 1st
International CAN Conference, Mainz, Germany , 1994.
[14] T. F ¨uhrer, B. M ¨uller, W. Dieterle, F. Hartwich, R. Hugel, M. Walther, and
R. B. GmbH, “Time Triggered Communication on CAN,” Proceedings
of the 7th Int. CAN Conference, Amsterdam, The Netherlands , 2000.
[15] J. Ru ﬁno, P. Ver ´ıssimo, and G. Arroz, “A Columbus’ egg idea for CAN
media redundancy,” Digest of Papers, The 29th International Symposium
on Fault-Tolerant Computing Systems , 1999.
[16] J. Charzinski, “Performance of the error detection mechanisms in CAN,”
Proceedings of the First International CAN Conference (ICC94),Mainz,Germany , 1994.
[17] L. Rodrigues, M. Guimaraes, and J. Ru ﬁno, “Fault-tolerant Clock
Synchronization in CAN,” Proceedings of the 19th IEEE Real-Time
Systems Symposium, Madrid, Spain , 1998.
[18] IEEE-1588, Standard for a Precision Clock Synchronization Protocol for
Networked Measurement and Control Systems . IEEE Instrumentation
and Measurement Society, 2002.
[19] G. Rodr ´ıguez-Navas, J. Proenza, and H. Hansson, “An UPPAAL Model
for Formal Veri ﬁcation of Clock Synchronization over CAN,” Universitat
de les Illes Balears, Tech. Rep. A-2-2005, 2005.
[20] A. Olivero, J. Sifakis, and S. Yovine, “Using abstractions for the veri ﬁca-
tion of linear hybrid systems,” in Proceedings of the 6th Int. Conference
on Computer Aided Veri ﬁcation , ser. LNCS, no. 818. Springer–Verlag,
June 1994.
