--- Page 1 ---
Automated Closed-Loop Model Checking of
Implantable Pacemakers using Abstraction Trees
Zhihao Jiang1, Houssam Abbas1, Pieter J. Mosterman2, and Rahul Mangharam1
1Department of Electrical & System Engineering, University of Pennsylvania
2School of Computer Science, McGill University, Canada and MathWorks, USA
ABSTRACT
Autonomous medical devices such as implantable cardiac
pacemakers are capable of diagnosing the patient condition
and delivering therapy without human intervention. Their
ability to autonomously aect the physiological state of the
patient makes them safety-critical. Sucient evidence for
the safety and ecacy of the device software, which makes
these autonomous decisions, should be provided before these
devices can be released on the market. Formal methods
like model checking can provide safety evidence that the de-
vices can safely operate under a large variety of physiological
conditions. The challenge is to develop physiological mod-
els that are general enough to cover the large variability of
human physiology, and also expressive enough to provide
physiological contexts to counter-examples returned by the
model checker. In this paper, the authors develop a set of
physiological abstraction rules that introduce physiological
constraints to heart models. By applying these abstraction
rules to a initial set of heart models, an abstraction tree is
created. The root model covers all possible inputs to a pace-
maker and derived models cover inputs from dierent heart
conditions. If a counter-example is returned by the model
checker, the abstraction tree is traversed so that the most
concrete counter-example(s) with physiological contexts can
be returned to the domain experts for validity check. The
abstraction tree framework replaces the manual abstraction
and renement framework, which reduced the amount of
domain knowledge required to perform closed-loop model
checking. It encourages the use of model checking during
the development of autonomous medical devices, and iden-
ties safety risks earlier in the design process.1
1. INTRODUCTION
1This work was supported in part by the TerraSwarm Re-
search Center, one of six centers supported by the STAR-
net phase of the Focus Center Research Program (FCRP)
a Semiconductor Research Corporation program sponsored
by MARCO and DARPA.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full cita-
tion on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or re-
publish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
c2016 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-2138-9.
DOI: 10.1145/1235Medical devices are developed for diagnostic ortherapeutic
applications to infer and treat specic health issues. For in-
stance, an X-ray machine takes images of dense tissue in the
body, which is useful for diagnostic purposes. An infusion
pump delivers a pre-programmed amount of uid into the
patient for treatment. There is an emerging category of med-
ical devices that have both the diagnostic and therapeutic
functionality which are capable of operating autonomously
without intervention from medical professionals. We refer to
these devices as Autonomous Medical Devices . For instance,
an implantable cardiac pacemaker monitors the electrical
activities of the heart with two leads and delivers electrical
pacing to manage the heart rate (Fig. 1).
1.1 Challenges for Safe Autonomous Medical
Devices
Developing safe and eective autonomous medical devices
has the following challenges:
1.Physiological Complexity: Human physiology is
complex and only partially understood. For instance,
the functionality of the heart can be interpreted from
multiple perspectives : from its electrical activity, me-
chanical contractions of the heart muscles, and dynam-
ics of blood ow. The physiology of the heart can also
be analyzed with multiple scales : from the molecular
level to cellular level all the way to the organ and sys-
tem level. It is impossible to encode all these con-
texts into the device, hence inappropriate diagnosis
and therapy are observed due to the lack of physio-
logical contexts [16, 5].
Atrial lead signalVentricularlead signalEvents detectedin pacemakerASVSAPVS
Right Ventricle LeadRight Atrium LeadPacemaker PulseGenerator
Right AtriumLeft AtriumLeft VentricleRight VentricleSensingPacing
Figure 1: A dual chamber pacemaker has one lead in
the right atrium and the other in the right ventricle.
It thresholds local electrical activities into sensed events
(AS,VS) and delivers electrical pacing (AP,VP) when the
heart rate is low.

--- Page 2 ---
AVI
VSAS AS AS
VP VP VPAVI AVIPVCInappropriate
A channel
V channel
A channel
V channelEvents
Appropriate
Figure 2: Two event traces of a dual chamber pacemaker. In the "appropriate" case, heart rate is controlled by the
natural pacemaker of the heart in the right atrium. Electrical signals are traveling from the atria to the ventricles
(indicated by the purple arrows). The pacemaker paces the ventricle (VP) after each sensed atrial contraction (AS) to
maintain appropriate timing (AVI) between atrial and ventricular contraction. In the "inappropriate"case, a Premature
Ventricular Contraction (PVC) triggers retrograde conduction from the ventricles to the atria (indicated by the orange
arrows), triggering a sensed event (AS) in the pacemaker. The pacemaker paces the ventricle with the same AVI delay
(VP). The pace triggers another retrograde conduction and the feedback loop continues without interruption. The
two cases may look exactly the same to a pacemaker, as highlighted by the gray region, causing ambiguity. In the
appropriate case the heart rate is changing according to physiological needs, while in the inappropriate case the heart
is xed to a fast rate.
2.Physiological Variability: Physiological conditions
and parameters demonstrate dierent levels of variabil-
ity both within the individual at dierent times, lev-
els of exertion and under the inuence of medication
and also across individuals. For instance, a segment of
the population may have additional conduction path-
ways within their heart, which makes them vulnerable
to certain heart diseases. Consequently, autonomous
medical devices should be able to safely operate un-
der a large variety of physiological conditions. This
is dicult to guarantee, as the device designer must
consider all possible physiological conditions (includ-
ing rare conditions) during the design of the device.
3.Limited Observability: Autonomous medical de-
vices normally rely on minimally invasive measure-
ment of the physiological parameters in order to al-
low the patients to live their normal life. For example,
implantable pacemakers and debrillators commonly
have just two leads and therefore two points of obser-
vation for the whole heart. The limited observability
inevitably leads to ambiguities as dierent physiologi-
cal conditions can map to the same input sequence to
the device, resulting in inaccurate diagnosis.
Consider the example in Fig. 2. The middle trace
shows the events detected by the pacemaker: (a) Ven-
tricular Sense (VS) indicates the pacemaker has de-
tected a depolarization of the ventricles; (b) Atrial
Sense (AS) indicates the pacemaker has detected a de-
polarization of the atria; (c) Ventricular Pacing (VP)
indicates the pacemaker has paced the heart in re-
sponse to a perceived missing beat. This event trace
can be generated in two dierent ways, one of which
is healthy and the other unhealthy. The lower trace
shows a healthy situation in which the electrical depo-larizations originate from the right atrium (detected
as an AS by the pacemaker) but do not make it to
the ventricles. The pacemaker paces the ventricles
(indicated as VPs) after a programmed delay to main-
tain heart rate. The heart rate in this situation is
the normal one (e.g. 60bpm) as set by the heart's
own pacemaker in the right atrium. The upper trace
shows an unhealthy situation: a Premature Ventricu-
lar Contraction (PVC) is transmitted to the atria via
ventricle-to-atrium conduction and triggers an atrial
contraction (AS). Even though the heart was oper-
ating within the normal heart rate and does not re-
quire pacing , the pacemaker paces the ventricles after
a programmed delay, which again triggers ventricle-to-
atrium conduction. This AS-VP pattern persists at a
rate set by the implanted pacemaker itself and is higher
than the normal heart rate. This condition is known
as Endless Loop Tachycardia (ELT). As can be seen,
the pacemaker cannot distinguish these two situations,
causing inappropriate therapy.
The capability of cardiac pacemakers to autonomously af-
fect the physiological state of the patient makes it safety-
critical, and sucient evidence for the software's safety and
ecacy should be provided before these devices can be re-
leased on the market. In particular, they are classied as a
High Risk Device by the Food and Drug Administration in
the U.S. Such autonomous medical devices increasingly rely
on software, and device function and clinical performance
can be aected by seemingly minor changes to software. The
current form of closed-loop validation of medical devices is
clinical trials, in which the devices are evaluated on a small
group of patients before they can be released to the mar-
ket. Clinical trials are costly to perform and revising device
design at this late stage is very expensive.

--- Page 3 ---
1.2 Evaluating the Device Design with Formal
Methods
Formal methods such as model checking explore the en-
tire state space of a model for property violations. Model
checking can be used to evaluate the device design early
in the development process. The safety and ecacy of au-
tonomous medical devices have to be evaluated within their
physiological context. We identify three challenges for devel-
oping physiological models for closed-loop model checking of
autonomous medical devices:
1.Model Interpretability: How much detail should
the physiological models have in order to unambigu-
ously describe a physiological behavior? In particu-
lar, if the model checker returns an execution trace as
counter-example, how much detail should the physio-
logical model have so that the execution traces can be
interpreted by medical domain experts?
2.Behavior Coverage: What approach must we use
for physiological models to cover the large variability
of human physiology? How can these models cover
rare physiological cases and those that are unknown
to us?
3.Model Ambiguity: As seen in the ELT example,
multiple physiological conditions can map to the same
event trace due to the limited observability of the de-
vice. How can we eliminate only the healthy execution
from the model so that it would not cause a false-
positive?
1.3 The need for Domain Expertise with CE-
GAR
In previous work [10], we performed closed-loop model
checking of an implantable pacemaker design in order to
tackle the 3 challenges mentioned above.
First, based on clinical electrophysiology, we developed a
timed-automata [1] heart structure which models the electri-
cal conduction and propagation. The model structure pro-
vides sucient complexity to represent a variety of heart
conditions, and the executions of the model output signals
which are interpretable by medical domain experts.
Next, over-approximation and non-determinism are used
to create a Random Heart Model (RHM) that is able to pro-
duce all possible input sequences to the pacemaker. Prop-
erties satised under the RHM are satised under all heart
conditions. However, the RHM also contains behaviors that
are physiologically invalid which should not be considered
as safety violations. For instance, in the ELT case, with
the RHM the healthy execution is not distinguishable from
ELT, which can potentially be returned as counter-example,
causing a false-positive, or spurious counter-example .
In order to eliminate behaviors which are not physiologi-
cally relevant, a Counter-Example Guided Abstraction Re-
nement (CEGAR) framework [3] was adopted. The closed-
loop system including the RHM and the pacemaker model is
rst veried against physiological properties in model checker
UPPAAL. If the property is satised, the pacemaker model
satises the property under all heart conditions. If a prop-
erty is violated, an abstract counter-example is returned by
the model checker. The counter-example is manually ex-
amined for potential physiological invalid behaviors, and
Heart
Condition 2Heart
Condition 3Heart
Condition 1Abstraction 
1.2Abstraction 
1.1Abstraction 
2.1
Heart
Condition x𝑅1𝑅1
𝑅2Abstraction Tree of Heart Models
Closed -loop
Model Checking
Abstraction
Refinement
Concretized counter -examples with 
Physiological contextPhysicianBugs
Pacemaker1 2
3Figure 3: Automated Closed-loop Model Checking with
Abstraction Tree
all possible physiological conditions that can produce the
counter-example to avoid false-positives.
If ambiguities or invalid behaviors exist, the user must cre-
ate a more rened heart model so that these false-positive
behaviors are eliminated in the new model. The property
is then veried again with the rened model and the pace-
maker model, till there is no counter-example and the system
is considered safe, or the counter-example is both physiolog-
ically valid and unambiguously representing a safety viola-
tion.
For instance, in the ELT example in Fig. 2, the input-
output sequence is returned as counter-example from the
RHM. The distinction between the healthy execution and
ELT is the direction of electrical conduction. By adding a
conduction direction into the heart model, the ambiguity is
resolved.
Note also that in this process, domain expertise is required
during 1) heart modeling, 2) manual model renement, and
3) checking the physiological validity of counter-examples
returned by the model checker. While domain expertise
will always be required when building a model of any phe-
nomenon, it is desirable to minimize the need for it in the
verication process itself as this opens up opportunities for
future automation.
Thus the previous work left the following questions open:
How can a variety of cardiac conditions be modeled in
an ecient manner and yet not require manual rene-
ment and analysis of counter-examples?
How can heart models be built in such a way that the
subsequent model checking procedure does not require
domain expertise?
1.4 Automated Model Checking with Abstrac-
tion Tree
The contributions of this eort are to automate the man-
ual counter-example analysis and model renement approach.
The details of the method are provided in the following sec-
tions while a brief overview is presented here.
We start out with a set of heart models covering dierent
conditions such as atrial utter, bradycardia, etc. However,
having multiple models is not sucient to cover all relevant
behaviors that might be produced by a heart, not to men-
tion possible combinations of several conditions. Thus, we
develop abstraction rules that automatically add new be-
havior to a given model. The key point is that the rules
are designed such that the new behavior is mostly physi-
ologically valid, that is, it might actually be produced by
a human heart. Thus a counter-example found only in an

--- Page 4 ---
Figure 4: Electrical signal generated by the sino-atrial
(SA) node which propagates throughout the heart. Note
the dierent signal morphology and conduction delays
between dierent locations of the heart [6]
abstracted model (but not in the more concrete one) is not
automatically considered to be \spurious" the way it is in
traditional abstraction/renement frameworks. By apply-
ing these rules to the various initial models and in dierent
sequences, a tree of models is obtained, each of which are
related by abstraction/renement relations. This is referred
to as an Abstraction Tree (see Fig. 7 for an illustration).
Model checking proceeds from the root of the tree (which
is the most abstract model) to its leaves. If the pacemaker
model is found to satisfy the physiological property, model
checking stops. If a counter-example is found, verication
proceeds to the model's children and so on, till it reaches
the leaves or a child-model is found to satisfy the property.
See Fig. 3. This constitutes a form of automatic renement,
but over a tree of models. The most concrete model still
evidence a counter-example is then analyzed to determine
whether the counter-example is physiologically valid or not.
In this procedure, domain expertise is needed only when
building the initial set of models and physiological abstrac-
tion rules. Constructing the more abstract and behavior-rich
models, model checking, and renement are automated.
The abstraction tree approach achieves the following im-
provements over the manual CEGAR framework in [10]:
Property specication: In previous work [10], fairly
constrained properties have to be specied that de-
scribed specic ways in which an unhealthy condition
might develop. This was done to avoid a large num-
ber of spurious or irrelevant counter-examples. In the
abstraction tree approach, this is no longer a concern
since ambiguities can be resolved by automatically re-
ning the counter-examples. Therefore the properties
can be more general, which increases the probability
to identify unknown safety violations.
Counter-example Analysis : Counter-examples re-
turned from an abstract model are dicult to analyze
because of the lack of physiological context. In this
case, the abstraction tree provides the most concrete
counter-example as guidance for checking validity and
possible renements, which is a huge improvement over
the manual process in [10].
The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 introduces a
dual chamber pacemaker design and the physiological prop-
erties that should be satised. Section 3 introduces the
timed-automata heart model structure that can be used to



Figure 5: Basic timers for a dual chamber pacemaker.
AS: Atrial Sense, VS: Ventricular Sense, AP: Atrial Pac-
ing, VP: Ventricular Pacing.
model dierent heart conditions. Section 4 discusses the
construction of an abstraction tree by applying a set of phys-
iological rules on an initial set of heart models. Section 5
is a case study in which the abstraction tree of heart mod-
els is used for automated closed-loop model checking of an
implantable pacemaker design.
2. IMPLANTABLE PACEMAKER
This section rst introduces a physiological basis for im-
plantable pacemakers. Next, a dual chamber pacemaker de-
sign is provided that is to be validated with model checking.
2.1 Electrophysiology Basics
A healthy heart generates periodic electrical impulses with
specialized tissue called SA node to control heart rates ac-
cording to physiological needs. These impulses propagate
through the heart, triggering coordinated muscle contrac-
tions, and pump blood to the rest of the body. Fig. 4 shows
how electrical impulse generated by the SA node propagates
throughout the heart and triggers electrical activities at dif-
ferent locations of the heart. The underlying pattern and
timing of these impulses determine the heart's rhythm and
are the key to proper heart functions. Derangements in
this rhythm are referred to as arrhythmia , which impair the
heart's ability to pump blood and compromise the patients'
health. Arrhythmias are categorized into so-called Tachy-
cardia and Bradycardia. Tachycardia features undesirable
fast heart rate which results in inecient blood pumping.
Bradycardia features slow heart rate which results in in-
sucient blood supply. Dierent heart conditions can be
distinguished by the timing of the electrical conduction and
thetopology of the electrical conduction system of the heart,
which are researched in clinical setting referred to as Elec-
trophysiology (EP) [11].
2.2 Model of a Dual Chamber Pacemaker
A dual chamber pacemaker has two leads, one anchored to
right atrium and the other to the right ventricle. The leads
are able to sense electrical activities of local tissue, which
is referred to as intra-cadiac electrogram (EGM). When the
voltage exceed a pre-programmed threshold, the pacemaker
will register a sensed event (AS, VS). Heart conditions are in-
ferred from the temporal relationship between sensed events,
and the pacemaker can deliver electrical pacing (AP, VP)
through the leads to trigger heart contraction if the heart
rate is low.

--- Page 5 ---
A dual chamber pacemaker has several basic timers that
are shown in Fig. 5:
Atrial Escape Interval (AEI) denes the maximum in-
terval between the most recent ventricular event (VS,VP) to
an atrial event (AS,AP). If no AS happened before the AEI
timer expires, atrial pacing (AP) is delivered to the heart
(Marker 1 in Fig. 5).
Atrio-Ventricular Interval (AVI) denes the maximum
interval between the most recent atrial event (AS,AP) to a
ventricular event (VS,VP). If no VS happened before the
AVI timer expires, and the time since the most recent ven-
tricular event (VS,VP) is no less than URI, ventricular pac-
ing (VP) is delivered to the heart (Marker 3 in Fig. 5).
Post-Ventricular Atrial Refractory Period (PVARP)
and Ventricular Refractory Period (VRP) dene the
minimum period that an AS or VS can happen since the
most recent ventricular event (VS,VP).
The pacemaker operates according to the timing among
discrete events, therefore can be intuitively modeled as timed
automata [1]. The detailed UPPAAL timed automata im-
plementation of the pacemaker design can be found in [10].
2.3 Physiological Requirements
A dual chamber pacemaker is designed to increase the
heart rate during bradycardia, but it should also not increase
the heart rate inappropriately. Inappropriate increase of
heart rate by the pacemaker is referred to as Pacemaker Me-
diated Tachycardia (PMT) . Previous work [10] used model
checking to identify two known PMT conditions. However,
in order to avoid ambiguities in the counter-examples, the
properties for the two PMTs were specied very specically,
which abandoned the advantage of model checking to nd
unknown safety violations.
With the abstraction tree approach, the ambiguities can
potentially be resolved since the abstraction tree consid-
ers all known heart conditions. Therefore the property for
PMTs can be specied more generally. In this paper, we
specify a property such that
Property 1: The interval between ventricular events (Vget,
VP) should not be shorter than TURI for 30 consecutive
beats
which means that the ventricular rate should not be faster
than the upper rate interval (TURI) for too long, either
intrinsically or because of pacemaker interaction. Counter-
example because of intrinsic fast ventricular rates can be re-
moved from results after analysis from the abstraction tree.
A UPPAAL monitor Mconfor the property is shown in
Fig. 6, and the TCTL property is specied as:
A[] not Mcon.err
Figure 6: UPPAAL monitor for Property 13. HEART MODELING FOR CLOSED-LOOP
MODEL-CHECKING OF IMPLANTABLE
PACEMAKER
A pacemaker design should be able to satisfy safety prop-
erties under all possible heart conditions. In closed-loop
model checking of implantable pacemaker, behaviors of these
heart conditions must be covered by models of the heart.
3.1 Related Works
Electrical properties of the heart have been studied and
models have been developed at dierent levels. Cellular
models ([15]) have been developed and by combining these
cellular models with the structural models, the electrical ac-
tivities of the whole heart are studied, especially the mecha-
nism of dierent arrhythmia ([17], [4], [13]). Intrinsic heart
rate variability has been modeled to synthesize optimal con-
trol of pacemaker pacing. ([2]) Abstraction of the electri-
cal cellular model has also been attempted by [7] to reduce
model complexity without sacricing accuracy. The electri-
cal properties and the mechanical properties of the heart are
closely coupled. Models combining both of these aspects are
also developed to study the eects of dierent arrhythmia
on cardiac outputs ([17], [14]).
The aforementioned models were developed for under-
standing the physiological behaviors. In the application of
closed-loop model checking of implantable pacemakers, the
heart models should not only provide behavior coverage in
terms of device inputs, but also be able to provide physio-
logical context to the execution. The physiological context
will not only resolve ambiguities caused by abstract counter-
examples, but also provide interpretability for domain ex-
perts.
3.2 Electro-Physiology Heart Model Structure
The pacemaker under study only has two leads into the
heart and only uses onset of electrical activities for decision
making. The limited observability can be exploited and su-
peruous detail ignored during modeling. In previous work
[10] a timed automata heart model structure has been devel-
oped that models the generation and conduction of electrical
events throughout the heart. With non-determinism , the
heart models can cover behaviors of large varieties of heart
conditions. By doing so the heart models sacrice accuracy
for coverage, and may include behaviors that are physiolog-
ically invalid. Fortunately, these invalid behaviors are only
relevant when they are returned as counter-examples to cer-
tain property. The physicians are the nal judges for the
validity of the counter-examples.
At cellular level, heart tissue can be activated by an ex-
ternal voltage. Certain tissues also has the capability to
self-activate, which contributes to natural heart beats. Once
activated (Marker 1 in Fig. 7), the voltage outside the tissue
changes over time, which is referred to as Action Potential
(Fig. 7(a)). The action potential can be divided into two
functional timing periods: The Eective Refractory Period
(ERP) , during which the tissue cannot be triggered by an-
other activation; and the Rest period, during which the tis-
sue can be activated and at the end of which the tissue will
self-activate. The timing behaviors of the action potential
are modeled as node automaton (Fig. 7(b)).
Anode automaton initializes with the Rest state. From
theRest state, the node can either self-activate or be acti-

--- Page 6 ---
Retro
t<=Tcond_maxAnte
t<=Tcond_maxIdle
t>Tcond_min
Act_node_1!t>Tcond_min
Act_node_2!Act_path_1? Act_path_2?Act_path_2?
t=0Act_path_1?
t=0ERP
t<=Terp_maxtempRest
t<=Trest_maxt>Trest_min
t=0
t>Terp_min
t=0
Act_path!Act_node?
t=0Refractory  
Time Vout 
ERP   Rest Rest  
ERP   Rest Rest  (b) Node Automaton N0
(c) Path Automaton P0SALA
(d) Graph of timed automata
(a)12
RAAVHis
RV
RVALVALVFigure 7: Node and Path Automata which models the
timing properties of the heart tissue. A network of node
and path automata models the generation and conduc-
tion of electrical activities of a heart
vated by external activations (indicated by Act node). Upon
activation the node transitions to the ERP state and acti-
vates all the paths connecting to the node (indicated by
Actpath). In the ERP state the node does not respond to
external activations. At the end of the ERP state the node
transition to the Rest state. The duration a node automa-
ton can stay in the Rest state is in the range [ Trest min;
Trest max], and the duration it can stay in ERP is in the
range [ Terp min; Terp max]. For heart tissue without the
capability to self-activate, the parameters Trest min and
Trest max are set to1.Trest andTerp are referred to as
parameters of the node automaton.
The voltage change of the heart tissue will activate the
tissue nearby with certain delay (Marker 2 in Fig. 7). This
timing delay between heart tissue is modeled using path au-
tomata Ae(Fig. 7(c)). The initial state of a path automa-
tonisIdle, which corresponds to no conduction. A path has
two conduction directions, forward and backward. These are
represented by the states Ante andRetro , named after their
standard physiological terms Antegrade and Retrograde. If
Actpath event is received from one of the nodes (1 or 2) con-
nected to the path, the transition to Ante orRetro will occur
in the path automaton. At the end of Ante andRetro the
path will transition to Idleand send Act node signal to the
node automaton connected to the other end of the path (2
or 1). The spatial and temporal properties of a given human
heart condition can be modeled by a network of node and
path automata with dierent parameters (i.e., Fig. 7(d)).
To interact with the pacemaker, the Act path events in
node SA and RVA correspond to the inputs to the atrial
and ventricular channel, respectively. The atrial and ven-
tricular pacing (AP and VP) from the pacemaker will trigger
Actnode events in node SA and RVA.
4. ABSTRACTION TREE OF HEART MOD-
ELS
The ideal heart model for closed-loop model checking of
an implantable pacemaker not only covers all possible inputs
to the pacemaker, but also has physiological explanations to
all known heart conditions. However, no single heart model
can satisfy both requirements. Therefore, a set of heart mod-
els must be employed where the dierent abstraction levels
of the models strike a balance between coverage and expres-
siveness. More importantly, the heart models should have
rigorous relationships among each other to provide formalguarantees.
In this section we present the abstraction tree framework
that maintains formal Timed Simulation relationships be-
tween heart models and enables automated closed-loop model
checking of implantable pacemaker.
4.1 Initial Set of Heart Models
The heart model structure described in the previous sec-
tion is based on clinical electrophysiology, with state vari-
ables and parameters directly corresponding to physiological
parameters. Therefore, domain experts from clinical electro-
physiology can construct models of dierent heart conditions
with their domain expertise and literature.
An example set of initial heart models is shown in Fig. 8.
The dierent topologies of node and path automata repre-
sent the mechanism of dierent heart diseases. These heart
models represent the current knowledge for heart condition
variability, thus the set is inherintly incomplete, meaning
there is no guarantee for 100% safety even if a property is
satised in all of these models. These models are mostly used
for providing physiological contexts for counter-examples re-
turned by the model checker. Domain experts can always
expand the set with knowledge of new heart conditions.
Normal Sinus
RhythmBradycardiaAtrial
FlutterAVNRT
Atrial
FibrillationPVCVentricular
TachycardiaVentricular
Fibrillation
Figure 8: Examples of the initial set of heart mod-
els. The models are dierent in node and path topology
and/or timing parameters.
4.2 Physiological Abstraction Rules
The initial set of heart models only represents a subset of
all possible conditions. There always exists conditions that
beyond our knowledge or that are combinations of known
conditions. By using over-approximation , heart models can
be created that cover the observable behaviors of the initial
set and that introduce behaviors that were not captured in
the initial set. Inevitably, some of the introduced behaviors
will be physiologically invalid. This problem can be alle-
viated by carefully designing the abstraction rules so that
behaviors introduced are mostly physiologically valid. The
physiologically invalid behaviors can be eliminated during a
validity check in the abstraction tree.
Physiological abstraction rules are developed to cover ob-
servable behaviors of heart models. Applying one abstrac-
tion rule to heart model(s) H1; Hi: : : H n; n1 yields an
abstract heart model H0such that all observable behaviors
ofHiare covered by H0. For each heart model Hi,H0is a
timed simulation ofHi. To illustrate, a subset of abstraction
rules is described intuitively. The complete set of abstrac-
tion rules and the proofs of timed simulation relationship
can be found in the tech report [8].

--- Page 7 ---
4.2.1 Rule R1: Convert Reentry Circuits to Activa-
tion Nodes
Within the conduction network of the heart, there can
be multiple pathways between two locations, forming con-
duction loops. If the timing parameters of the tissue along
the loop satisfy certain properties, there can be scenarios in
which a depolarization wave circling along the circuit. The
circuits are referred to as Reentry Circuits . Since the time
interval for an activation wave to circle a reentry circuit is
usually less than the intrinsic heart cycle length, the heart
rate will be "`hijacked"' by the reentry circuit once the cy-
cling is triggered, causing tachycardia. Reentry is the most
common mechanism for tachycardia, which can be captured
by our heart models that are used in [9].
The eect of reentry tachycardia is that activation signals
coming out of the circuit with a given cycle length equal
the sum of conduction delays along the circuit. It is there-
fore reasonable to model a reentry circuit as a self-activation
node with the self-activation range equal to the sum of con-
duction delays.
Applicable Condition: The rule only aects the topol-
ogy of the model, and therefore can be applied without pre-
liminaries.
Output model: The "essential structure" of a heart model
is the shortest paths (in terms of conduction delay) connect-
ing self-activation nodes and/or sensing nodes. First detect
all circles in the input graph. For each circle with nodes
Ni; i2[1: : : n] and paths Pj; j2[1: : : m ], remove all "non-
essential" nodes and paths, create a node automaton Nsand
connect to the nearest sensing node with a path automaton
Ps.
Eect on parameters: For the new node automaton Ns,
the minimum of the Trest parameter is set to the minimum
of the sum of the conduction delays within the reentry cir-
cuit, and the maximum is set to innity
Eect on behaviors: The new model captures the behav-
ior of the original model when the reentry circuit is active
and inactive. Additionally, the new model captures the be-
haviors of other heart conditions in which the rate of the
reentry circuit is lower.
Fig. 9 shows an example in which a circle is replaced by a
self-activation node.
R1
Figure 9: Rule 1: Remove reentry circuits from the
model
4.2.2 Rule R2: Remove Irrelevant Structures
After the circles within the topology are removed, the
topology of the heart model is in the form of a tree. Since
the "non-essential"structures do not aect the activation sig-
nals from and/or to the sensing nodes, all the "non-essential"
structures can be removed.
Applicable Conditions: The rule can only be applied af-
ter Rule 1 has been applied.
Output model: Trimmed topology with only the essen-
tial structure remaining.
Eects on parameters: There are no eects on param-
eters of the node and path automata.
Eects on behaviors: Applying this rule does not aect
the observable behaviors of the model.Fig. 11 shows an example in which non-essential structures
are removed.
R2
Figure 11: Rule 2: Remove non-essential structures
4.2.3 Rule R4: Merge Parameter Ranges
Timing periods of heart tissue, such as Rest and ERP, are
modeled as locations in the node and path automata. The
minimum and maximum time an automaton can remain in
a location is governed by the parameters in the guards and
invariants. By merging and expanding these periods, new
behaviors are introduced where a heart model may remain
longer in Rest, activate or self-activate a node faster, and-
soforth.
Applicable Conditions: This rule applies to heart mod-
els with the same node and path topology but possibly with
dierent parameters.
Output Model: The abstract model has the same topol-
ogy as the original models.
Eects on parameters: The parameter ranges in the new
model are a super-set of the parameter ranges in the old
models.
Eects on behaviors: The abstract model captures all
behaviors of the original models. In addition, heart condi-
tions with parameters outside of the ranges of the original
models are covered.
SA.Trest =[a1,b1]
SA.Trest =[a2,b2]
SA.Trest =[a3,b3]SA.Trest =[min(a1,a2,a3),max(b1,b2,b3)]
R4
Figure 12: Rule 4: Merging parameter ranges
4.3 Abstraction Tree
By applying the abstraction rules to the initial set of heart
models, an abstraction tree is created. Fig. 10 shows an
example of an abstraction tree with the root model cap-
turing all possible input sequences to the pacemaker. Self-
activating nodes are marked as red and the Trest parameters
are specied next to them. Note that this abstraction tree
is not unique. With a dierent initial set of heart mod-
els and/or dierent rule application orders the abstraction
tree can be very dierent. The abstraction tree can also
be extended at any time if new heart conditions are spec-
ied. The following section demonstrates the use of this
abstraction tree during the closed-loop model checking of
the pacemaker design.
5. CASE STUDY: CLOSED-LOOP MODEL
CHECKING OF IMPLANTABLE PACE-
MAKER

--- Page 8 ---
H0[20,2000]
[20,2000]
H1[200,2000]
[200,2000][200,300]
[1000,2000][1000,2000]
[1000,2000]
[200,2000][200,300]
[1000,2000][1000,2000]
[1000,2000]
[200,2000]
[1000,2000]
[200,2000]H2_1
H2_2
H2_3
H2_4H3_1
H3_2
H3_3
H3_4 H4_4R7R4
R4
R4
R4R3
R3
R5 R3
[400,2000] [400,2000]
H2_5 H3_5R3R4[1000,2000]
[200,2000]
[1000,2000]
H5_4
[400,2000]
H4_5[1000,2000]
H4_1
[200,300]
H4_2[1000,2000]
[200,300]
H5_2[1000,2000]
[1000,2000]
[200,2000]R3R2
R2
R2
R2
R2R5R5 [1000,2000]
R1
[1000,2000]
R1
H4_3 H5_3H6_2
H6_3Normal
Sinus
Rhythm
Atrial
Flutter
Ventricular
Tachycardia
Premature
Ventricular
Contraction
Sinus
TachycardiaFigure 10: One example of abstraction tree of heart models
The model checker UPPAAL[12] was used to check Prop-
erty 1 on the pacemaker model using the abstraction tree
of heart models. The property is violated in H0jjPM, thus
thus the abstraction tree is followed to select pair H1 with
the pacemaker model and Property 1 is veried again. The
process continues till either the leaves of the tree are reached
of the property is satised. The result is shown in Fig. 13,
which demonstrates 5 dierent scenarios that can happen
when using the abstraction tree. The shaded area marks
the heart models with counter-examples.
Case 1: Property 1 is violated in H21jjPM but is sat-
ised in its children H31jjPM. Careful examination of the
counterexample nds it to be spurious and so it is success-
fully eliminated by model renement.
Case 2: CE afis returned by H32jjPM and corresponds
to intrinsic atrial tachycardia with fast atrial rate, which is
a sub-optimal but non-lethal condition. The AV node of the
heart will block a subset of the electrical events and maintain
a normal ventricular rate. However, despite the lters in the
pacemaker, the pacemaker still paces the ventricle for every
3 atrial activations, which extends fast atrial rate to more
dangerous fast ventricular rate. The condition is referred
to as Atrial Tachycardia Response in which the ventricular
rate is increased inappropriately, thus requires revision of
the pacemaker design.
Case 3: CE vtis returned by H33jjPM and corresponds
to intrinsic ventricular tachycardia with fast ventricular rate.
The counter-example is physiologically valid but the fast
ventricular rate is due to the heart itself and is beyond
pacemaker functionality. Therefore this scenario demands
no revision of the pacemaker design.
Case 4: CE stis returned by H35jjPM and corresponds
to sinus tachycardia, for instance, when the patient is exer-
cising. The pacemaker improved the open-loop heart con-
dition by pacing the ventricles AV I after each atrial event,
which is a correct operation of the pacemaker despite the
requirement violation.Case 5: CE pvcis returned by H44jjPM and has a very
similar input-output relationship to CE n. However, the ac-
tivations of the atrial node are triggered by retrograde con-
duction from ventricular paces (marker cond). The atrial ac-
tivations trigger another ventricular pace after AV I, which
will trigger another retrograde conduction. In this case the
heart rate is inappropriately high, which corresponds to a
dangerous closed-loop behavior referred to as Endless Loop
Tachycardia .
From the above result, it can be seen that abstraction
tree is able to 1) rene a heart model to eliminate spurious
counter-examples as in Case 1; 2) provide (multiple) phys-
iological explanations to a counter-example as in Case 2-5;
and 3) resolve ambiguities caused by abstraction as in Case
4 and 5.
6. CONCLUSION
This paper demonstrated the use of an abstraction tree
to automate the abstraction and renement of heart models
during closed-loop model checking of implantable pacemak-
ers. Similar approaches can potentially be used for other
autonomous medical devices to promote the use of model
checking and formal methods during the development and
certication of medical devices.
References
[1] R. Alur and D. L. Dill. A Theory of Timed Automata.
Theoretical Computer Science , 126:183{235, 1994.
[2] P. Bogdan, S. Jain, and R. Marculescu. Pacemaker con-
trol of heart rate variability: A cyber physical system
perspective. ACM Transactions on Embedded Comput-
ing Systems , 12(1s):50:1{50:22, 2013.
[3] E. Clarke, O. Grumberg, S. Jha, Y. Lu, and H. Veith.
Counter Example-Guided Abstraction Renement for
Symbolic Model Checking. J. ACM , 50(5):752{794,
2003.

--- Page 9 ---
H0[20,2000]
[20,2000]
H1[200,2000]
[200,2000][200,300]
[1000,2000]
[1000,2000][1000,2000]
[1000,2000]
[200,2000][200,300]
[1000,2000]
[1000,2000][1000,2000]
[1000,2000]
[200,2000]
[1000,2000]
[200,2000]AVI AVI AVI
VP VP VP<500
𝐂𝐄𝐚𝐟Heart
Pacemaker
PVCAV
IAVI AVI AVI
<500
VP VP VPcond cond cond
𝐂𝐄𝑷𝑽𝑪Heart
PacemakerVS𝐂𝐄𝒗𝒕Heart
Pacemaker
VSVSVSVSVSH2_1
H2_2
H2_3
H2_4H3_1
H3_2
H3_3
H3_4 H4_4R7R4
R4
R4
R4R3
R3
R3
R5 R3
AV
IAVI AVI AVI
<500
VP VP VP 𝐂𝐄𝒔𝒕Heart
Pacemaker[400,2000 ] [400,2000 ]
H2_5 H3_5R3R4Figure 13: Four dierent physiological conditions in which Property 1 is violated. In CEafthe pacemaker extends
a fast atrial rate to a dangerously fast ventricular rate; in CEvtthe ventricular rate is intrinsically fast; in CEstthe
pacemaker appropriately maintained A-V conduction delay; in CEpvcthe pacemaker inappropriately increased the
ventricular rate, causing Endless Loop Tachycardia
[4] R. Grosu, G. Batt, F. H. Fenton, J. Glimm, C. Le Guer-
nic, S. Smolka, and E. Bartocci. From cardiac cells to
genetic regulatory networks. In Computer Aided Veri-
cation , volume 6806 of Lecture Notes in Computer Sci-
ence, pages 396{411. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2011.
[5] R. G. Hauser and B. J. Maron. "lessons from the
failure and recall of an implantable cardioverter-
debrillator". "American Heart Association, Circula-
tion" , pages 2040{2042, 2005.
[6] Ihor Gussak and Charles Antzelevitch and Arthur A.M.
Wilde and Brian D. Powell and Michael J. Ackerman
and Win-Kuang Shen. Electrical Diseases of the Heart:
Volume 1: Basic Foundations and Primary Electrical
Diseases . Springer, 2013.
[7] M. A. Islam, A. Murthy, A. Girard, S. A. Smolka, and
R. Grosu. Compositionality results for cardiac cell dy-
namics. In Proceedings of the 17th International Con-
ference on Hybrid Systems: Computation and Control ,
(HSCC '14), pages 243{252, 2014.
[8] Z. Jiang, H. Abbas, P. Mosterman, and R. Mang-
haram. Abstraction-Tree For Closed-loop Model
Checking of Medical Devices. Tech Report:
http://repository.upenn.edu/mlab papers/73 , 2015.
[9] Z. Jiang, A. Connolly, and R. Mangharam. Using the
Virtual Heart Model to Validate the Mode-Switch Pace-
maker Operation. IEEE Engineering in Medicine and
Biology Society , pages 6690 {6693, 2010.
[10] Z. Jiang, M. Pajic, R. Alur, and R. Mangharam.
Closed-loop verication of medical devices with model
abstraction and renement. International Journal onSoftware Tools for Technology Transfer , pages 1{23,
2013.
[11] M. Josephson. Clinical Cardiac Electrophysiology . Lip-
pincot Williams and Wilkins, 2008.
[12] K. Larsen, P. Pettersson, and W. Yi. Uppaal in a Nut-
shell. International Journal on Software Tools for Tech-
nology Transfer (STTT) , 1997.
[13] A. Murthy, E. Bartocci, F. H. Fenton, J. Glimm, R. A.
Gray, E. M. Cherry, S. A. Smolka, and R. Grosu.
Curvature analysis of cardiac excitation wavefronts.
IEEE/ACM Transactions on Computational Biology
and Bioinformatics , 10(2):323{336, 2013.
[14] S. Rossi, R. Ruiz-Baier, L. F. Pavarino, and A. Quar-
teroni. Active strain and activation models in cardiac
electromechanics. Proceedings in Applied Mathematics
and Mechanics (PAMM) , 11(1):119{120, 2011.
[15] F. B. Sachse, A. P. Moreno, and J. A. Abildskov. Elec-
trophysiological modeling of broblasts and their inter-
action with myocytes. Annals of Biomedical Engineer-
ing, 36(1):41{56, 2008.
[16] K. Sandler, L. Ohrstrom, and R. McVay. Killed by
Code: Software Transparency in Implantable Medical
Devices. Software Freedom Law Center , 2010.
[17] N. A. Trayanova and P. M. Boyle. Advances in modeling
ventricular arrhythmias: from mechanisms to the clinic.
Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Systems Biology and
Medicine , 6(2):209{224, 2014.
