--- Page 1 ---
Aalborg Universitet
Controlling Stormwater Detention Ponds under Partial Observability
Kim, Esther Hahyeon; Goorden, Martijn; Larsen, Kim Guldstrand; Nielsen, Thomas Dyhre
Published in:
Journal of Logical and Algebraic Methods in Programming
DOI (link to publication from Publisher):
10.1016/j.jlamp.2024.100979
Creative Commons License
CC BY 4.0
Publication date:
2024
Document Version
Publisher's PDF, also known as Version of record
Link to publication from Aalborg University
Citation for published version (APA):
Kim, E. H., Goorden, M., Larsen, K. G., & Nielsen, T. D. (2024). Controlling Stormwater Detention Ponds under
Partial Observability. Journal of Logical and Algebraic Methods in Programming, 141, 1-19. Article 100979.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jlamp.2024.100979
General rights
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright owners
and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
            - Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the public portal for the purpose of private study or research.
            - You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit-making activity or commercial gain
            - You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the public portal -
Take down policy
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us at vbn@aub.aau.dk providing details, and we will remove access to
the work immediately and investigate your claim.
Downloaded from vbn.aau.dk on: April 01, 2026

--- Page 2 ---
J. Log. Algebraic Methods Program. 141 (2024) 100979
Available online 21 May 2024
2352-2208/© 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ).
Contentslistsavailableat ScienceDirect
Journal  of Logical  and  Algebraic  Methods  in 
Programming
journal  homepage:  www.elsevier.com/locate/jlamp
Controlling  stormwater  detention  ponds  under  partial  
observability
EstherH.Kim∗, MartijnA.Goorden,  KimG.Larsen,  ThomasD.Nielsen
Department  of Computer  Science,  Aalborg  University,  Aalborg  Øst, 9220, Denmark
A R T I C L E I N F O A B S T R A C T
Keywords:
Control  synthesis
Partial observability
Uppaal stratego
Hybrid Markov  decision  process
Gaussian  noise
Continuous  systemsStormwater  detention  ponds play an important  role in urban water management  for collecting  
and conveying  rainfall  runoﬀ from urban catchment  areas to nearby  streams.  Their purpose  is not 
only to avoid ﬂooding  but also to reduce  stream  erosion  and degradation  caused  by the direct 
discharge  of pollutants  to the stream.  We model the problem  of controlling  the discharge  rate of 
water from the ponds as a partially  observable  hybrid  Markov  decision  process  and subsequently  
use UPPAALSTRATEGOfor synthesizing  safe and near optimal  control  strategies.  The generated  
strategies  are based on noisy sensor measurements  of the water height in the pond, hence the 
underlying  system  is only partially  observable.  We present  results analyzing  how sensitive  the 
synthesized  strategies  are with respect  to the accuracy  of the measurement  sensors  in both oﬄine 
and online settings.  These types of analyses  not only provide  insight  into the robustness  of the 
generated  strategies,  but they can also be used for deciding  on which measurement  sensors  to 
use, thereby  balancing  sensor cost and accuracy.
1. Introduction
In urban water management,  stormwater  detention  ponds  play a crucial  role by collecting  and directing  rainfall  runoﬀ  from 
catchment  areas to nearby  streams [1]. Their objective  extends  beyond  preventing  ﬂooding;  it also includes  mitigating  stream  
erosion  and degradation  resulting  from the direct discharge  of pollutants  into the stream[2].
Standard  solutions  for managing  stormwater  detention  ponds  employ  static controllers  to regulate  the discharge  of water [3]. 
These types of controllers  fail to exploit  the full potential  of the water system  as demonstrated  in [4], where  formal  methods  are 
used to synthesize  safe and optimal  control  strategies  using UPPAALSTRATEGO[5]. For synthesizing  control  strategies,  [4]m o d e l s  
the water system  as a hybrid  Markov  decision  process  (HMDP),  based on which  reinforcement  learning  is used to ﬁnd a strategy  that 
minimizes  a cost function  balancing  the consequences  of discharging  pollutants  to the stream  (optimality)  with the consequences  of 
pond overﬂows  (safety).
The control  strategies  synthesized  in[4]rely on full observability  of the system,  including  the actual  water height  in the pond. 
In real-world  settings,  water measurements  are based on noisy and potentially  faulty sensors  leading  to incomplete  and partial  
observability.  In this paper,  we extend  the results  in [4]b y modeling  the stormwater  detention  pond, covering  also catchment  
areas and weather  forecasts,  as a partially  observable  hybrid  Markov  decision  process,  where  sensors  and sensor  noise are explicitly  
represented.  We compare  the synthesized  strategies  with those produced  by [4]a n d we present  analyses  of how sensitive  the 
* Corresponding  author.
E-mail address:hki@cs.aau.dk (E.H.Kim).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jlamp.2024.100979
Received  4 May 2023; Received  in revised  form 10 May 2024; Accepted  14 May 2024

--- Page 3 ---
Journal of Logical and Algebraic Methods in Programming 141 (2024) 100979
2E.H.Kim,M.A.Goorden,K.G.Larsenetal.
Fig. 1.AstormwaterdetentionpondinVilhelmsborgskovnearAarhus,Denmark.
synthesized  strategies  are with respect  to diﬀerent  types of sensor  noise. These analyses  not only provide  insight  into the robustness  
of the control  strategies,  but can also be used for designing  new physical  sensor  systems,  where  one typically  needs to ﬁnd an 
appropriate  balance  between  the cost and accuracy  of the sensors.
This paper is an extended  version  of the conference  paper[6]with  the following  additions.  First, we include  a formal  deﬁnition  of 
the mathematical  modeling  framework  HMDP,  accompanied  by a full model  speciﬁcation  of the stormwater  detention  pond as well 
as its relevant  subsystems,  such as the surrounding  urban catchment  area and the weather  forecast.  Second,  we conduct  analyses  
and experiments  on generating  control  strategies  for the detention  pond under conditions  of partial  observability,  utilizing  only 
water level measurements  through  noisy sensors.  Third,  by utilizing  the STOMPC  framework  [7], where UPPAALSTRATEGOand 
EPA-SWMM[ 8](a domain-speciﬁc  simulator)  are combined,  we expand  our analysis  to include  an online  Model  Predictive  Control  
(MPC)  setting.
This paper is structured  as follows.  In Section2, we give an introduction  to stormwater  detention  ponds  and urban water man-
agement,  and in Section3we introduce  the mathematical  framework  used for modeling  such systems.  In Section4we describe  the 
control  problem  and the system  model,  which  form the basis for the oﬄine  and online  experimental  results  discussed  and analyzed  
in Section5. Finally,  in Section6, we conclude  the paper with discussions  and further  research  challenges.
2. Stormwater  detention  ponds
In urban water management,  a stormwater  detention  pond is a specially  designed  basin or pond for collecting  rainwater  from 
urban areas, such as streets  and parking  lots, before  discharging  the water into streams  (see Fig.1). Stormwater  detention  ponds  
primarily  aim to regulate  and oversee  the discharge  of stormwater  runoﬀ  into downstream  water bodies.  By temporarily  retaining  
the runoﬀ  of urban catchment,  detention  ponds  aid in the elimination  of pollutants  from the stormwater  runoﬀ,  leading  to an 
improvement  in water quality  prior to its discharge  into the nearby  stream.  Moreover,  the detention  ponds  facilitate  a gradual  
drainage  process,  which  helps diminish  the runoﬀ’s  peak ﬂow rate and prevent  downstream  erosion  and ﬂooding.
In the event of heavy  rainfall,  if the volume  of water entering  the detention  pond from the urban area exceeds  its holding  capacity,  
it will cause the pond to overﬂow.  This can subsequently  result in ﬂooding  downstream.  By monitoring  the water level in the pond, 
sensors  can help control  the water ﬂow and prevent  ﬂooding  in advance.  For this reason,  industries  install  sensors  at the site to 
monitor  and control  their manufacturing  processes.  These sensors  can measure  various  parameters  such as temperature,  pressure,  
pH, and water level[9].
Sensor  imperfection  encompasses  any deviation  from optimal  sensor  performance,  which  may include  measurement  errors or 
inaccuracies.  Noise is one of the most common  types of sensor  imperfection,  resulting  from random  signal ﬂuctuations  caused  by 
sources  like thermal  changes  or electrical  interference.  These ﬂuctuations  may challenge  obtaining  precise  signal measurements[ 10,
11]. Sensor  imperfections  can impact  control  strategies  because  precise  sensor  measurements  are essential  for determining  a system’s  
condition  and the most appropriate  control  decisions  in a given situation.  As a result,  sensor  imperfections  can lead to suboptimal  or 
hazardous  control  decisions,  which  can have signiﬁcant  consequences  in safety-critical  ﬁelds.
An example  of a stormwater  detention  pond with a sensor  installed  is schematically  illustrated  in Fig.2. Rainwater  is collected  
from an urban area, which  is a geographic  region  characterized  by a high population  density  and human-made  infrastructures  such 
as buildings,  roads,  transportation  networks,  and other urban amenities.  The rain subsequently  enters  the pond through  inlet 𝑄in
before  being diverted  to a nearby  stream  through  an oriﬁce  that can be used to control  the discharge  rate 𝑄out. The water level in 
the pond is denoted  by 𝑤, and if it reaches  the maximum  water level, denoted  by 𝑊, it will trigger  an emergency  overﬂow  from the 
pond. The pond is equipped  with a sensor  providing  noisy measurements  𝑤obsof the water level, which  can be used to control  the 
oriﬁce  size.
When deﬁning  or synthesizing  a control  strategy  for the oriﬁce,  the main objective  is to prevent  overﬂow,  while at the same time 
allowing  for sedimentation  of pollutant  particles  from the urban runoﬀ  before  discharging  the water into the stream.

--- Page 4 ---
Journal of Logical and Algebraic Methods in Programming 141 (2024) 100979
3E.H.Kim,M.A.Goorden,K.G.Larsenetal.
Fig. 2.Schematicillustrationofawaterpond.Theactualwaterheightismeasuredbya(noisy)sensor.Theoriginalillustrationisin[ 4].
3. Preliminaries
3.1. Hybrid  Markov  decision  process
We model  a control  problem  of stormwater  detention  pond using a hybrid  Markov  decision  process  (HMDP)  in which  the (uncon-
trollable)  state of the environment  changes  probabilistically[ 12,13].
Deﬁnition  1. A hybrid  Markov  decision  process  is a tuple (𝐶, 𝑈, 𝑋, 𝐹, 𝛿), where:
1. The  controller  𝐶is a ﬁnite set of (controllable)  modes  𝐶={𝑐1, … , 𝑐𝑘}.
2. The  uncontrollable  environment  𝑈is a ﬁnite set of (uncontrollable)  modes  𝑈={𝑢1, … , 𝑢𝑙}.
3.𝑋is a ﬁnite set of continuous  (real-valued)  variables  𝑋={𝑥1, … , 𝑥𝑛}.
4.∀𝑚 ∈𝐶×𝑈, function  𝐹𝑚∶ℝ>0×ℝ𝑋→ℝ𝑋describes  the ﬂow-function,  which  is the evolution  of the continuous  variables  over 
time in the mode 𝑚.
5.𝛿is a family  of probability  functions  𝛿𝛾∶ℝ≥0×𝑈→[0, 1], where  𝛾=(𝑐, 𝑢, 𝒙) ∈(𝐶×𝑈×ℝ𝑋) =ℂis a conﬁguration  and vector  
𝒙is a state of the continuous  variables  𝑋. More precisely,  𝛿𝛾(𝜏, 𝑢′)is the probability  that in the global  conﬁguration  𝛾=(𝑐, 𝑢, 𝒙), 
𝑢will change  to 𝑢′after a time delay 𝜏.
As detailed  in Section4, for our particular  domain  the oriﬁce  setting  of the stormwater  detention  pond is represented  by the con-
troller  𝐶, which  can be changed  periodically.  The duration  and the intensity  of the rain events  will be modeled  by the uncontrollable  
environment  variable  𝑈, and the ﬂow function  𝐹will model  the evolution  of the water in the pond as captured  by the real-valued  
state variables  𝑋. The Markov  property  is implicitly  included  in Deﬁnition1, where  the progression  of the system’s  state in the 
composite  mode is solely inﬂuenced  by the present  global  conﬁguration  𝛾=(𝑐, 𝑢, 𝒙)and is independent  of the preceding  sequence  of 
events.  The stochastic  nature  of the weather  is represented  by the probability  function  𝛿and, in the rest of the paper,  the controller  is 
only allowed  to change  mode at a ﬁxed frequency  (corresponding  to period  𝑃∈ℝ≥0), say, every one hour. The general  deﬁnition  of 
an HMDP  allows  for the modeling  of time as a state variable,  and time can be included  among  the continuous  (real-valued)  variables  
𝑋presented  in Deﬁnition1.3.
A runfor an HMDP  is a sequence  𝜋of conﬁgurations  and relative  time-delays:
𝜋=𝛾0∶∶𝜏1∶∶𝛾1∶∶𝜏2∶∶𝛾2∶∶⋯, (1)
where  𝛾𝑖=(𝑐𝑖, 𝑢𝑖, 𝒙𝑖) ∈ℂ, 𝜏𝑖∈ℝ, and for all 𝑖either
•t h e environment  𝑢𝑖changes  to a new state 𝑢𝑖+1in 𝛾𝑖+1, where  𝑐𝑖+1=𝑐𝑖and 𝛿𝛾𝑖(𝜏𝑖+1, 𝑢𝑖+1) >0or
•t h e controller  changes  to a new mode 𝑐𝑖+1in 𝛾𝑖+1at the end of a period,  i.e., ∑
𝑗≤𝑖+1𝜏𝑗=𝑛 ⋅𝑃, for some 𝑛, and 𝑢𝑖=𝑢𝑖+1.
•𝜏𝑖can be any real value and it does not need to be discretized  in any manner.
3.2. HMDP  strategies
A strategyfor an HMDP  is a function  𝜎∶ℂ →2𝐶that given the current  conﬁguration  𝛾=(𝑐, 𝑢, 𝒙)returns  a set of controllable  
modes.  A strategy  is said to be deterministic if only one control  mode is returned  for each conﬁguration  𝛾∈ℂ. Otherwise,  the strategy  
is non-deterministic .
For a given strategy  𝜎, the HMDP  deﬁnes  a stochastic  process  denoted   ↾𝜎. A run of an HMDP  under strategy  𝜎is run 
where  the control  modes  change  at a ﬁxed frequency  (corresponding  to period  𝑃∈ℝ≥0) according  to 𝜎. Formally,  if the controller  
switches  to a new mode 𝑐𝑖+1at the end of a period,  it must hold that 𝑐𝑖+1∈𝜎(𝑐𝑖, 𝑢𝑖, 𝐹(𝑐𝑖,𝑢𝑖)(𝜏𝑖+1, 𝒙𝑖)).
For an objective  function  𝑓∶ℂ →ℝ, we evaluate  the quality  of a strategy  𝜎in terms of the expected  value of 𝑓over the space of 
runs of  ↾𝜎starting  in conﬁguration  𝛾0and with time horizon  𝐻∈ℝ≥0: 𝔼,𝛾
𝜎,𝐻(𝑓). In this paper,  we deﬁne  𝑓to be an accumulative  
reward  (cost) function,  i.e., 𝑓=∫𝐻
0𝑟(𝑡)d𝑡, where  𝑟(𝑡)is the reward  at time 𝑡, so 𝑟(𝑡)needs to be integrable  over the interval  [0, 𝐻]. 
An optimal  strategy𝜎optis a strategy  that maximizes  (or minimizes)  𝔼,𝛾
𝜎,𝐻(𝑓). For the control  problem  modeled  of our domain,  we 
will deﬁne  an objective  function  balancing  sedimentation  and overﬂow  as captured  by conﬁgurations  ℂin Section4.6.

--- Page 5 ---
Journal of Logical and Algebraic Methods in Programming 141 (2024) 100979
4E.H.Kim,M.A.Goorden,K.G.Larsenetal.
Fig. 3.Schematicillustrationsofasimpliﬁeddecisiontreeforrepresentingcontrolstrategies.
Fig. 4.Modeloftheweatherforecast.
3.3. UPPAALSTRATEGO
For synthesizing  a strategy  for controlling  the discharge  amount  of water (𝑄out) from the pond, we rely on the toolUPPAALSTRAT-
EGO[5].UPPAALSTRATEGOprovides  methods  for synthesizing  safe and near-optimal  strategies  for hybrid  Markov  Decision  Processes  
(MDP),  including  both timed automata  and continuous-space  MDPs.  For synthesizing  a strategy, U PPAALSTRATEGOrelies on rein-
forcement  learning  techniques  optimizing  a speciﬁc  optimization  objective.  For synthesizing  control  strategies  for continuous-space  
MDPs,  the tool uses the methods  from[14,15]to partition  a continuous  state-space  into a discrete  one.
Using a tool based on formal  methods  provides  us the advantage  of having  a modeling  language  with formal  semantics.  This 
eases the modeling  step. Furthermore, U PPAALSTRATEGOallows  for synthesizing  a guaranteed  safe shield  used for reinforcement  
learning[16]as well as statistical  model  checking  of the controlled  HMDP.
The strategies  obtained  by UPPAALSTRATEGO, as documented  in[12], can be visualized  as decision  trees, as exempliﬁed  in the 
left-hand  side of Fig.3. When 𝑤 ≤162, the optimal  control  decision  is to open the controller  to the minimum  size. If 𝑤 >162, 
the control  decision  depends  on the variable  𝑡. If 𝑡 ≥270, the optimal  control  decision  is to set the controller  to maximum  size. 
Conversely,  if 𝑤 ≤190, the optimal  control  decision  is to set the controller  to the medium  size. If 𝑤 >190, the optimal  control  
decision  is to set the controller  to the maximum  size. The right-hand  side of Fig.3shows  the state-space  partitioning  of the decision  
tree with decision  variables  𝑡and 𝑤, which  are observed  by the system.  Using the parameter  𝑡on the x-axis and 𝑤on the y-axis,  one 
can quickly  gain an overview  of the decisions  without  going through  the decision  tree.
4. Stormwater  detention  ponds:  system  model
The main (safety)  objective  of the pond controller  is to prevent  the pond from overﬂowing,  which  can have adverse  aﬀects  on 
both the surrounding  environment  and infrastructure.  The secondary  (optimization)  objective  is to sediment  and ﬁlter out urban 
particles  collected  in the pond in order to prevent  contamination  of the water environment  in the stream.  The longer  the water 
stays in the pond before  being discharged,  the higher  the degree  of sedimentation  of water pollutants,  resulting  in a reduction  of 
discharged  pollutants.
The water level in a stormwater  detention  pond, which  is our system’s  control  target,  is primarily  inﬂuenced  by the amount  of 
rainwater  that falls in the surrounding  urban area and ﬂows across  the ground  surface,  known  as the urban catchment.  We therefore  
require  a rain and urban catchment  model  to determine  the inﬂow  to the pond. The pond’s  controller  manages  the outﬂow  by 
adjusting  the oriﬁce  size that carries  water out from the pond to the nearby  stream.  The system  model  therefore  consists  of multiple  
subsystem  components,  which  are described  in the following  sections.
4.1. Rain fall model
Fig.4illustrates  the rain model  proposed  in[4]. The model  generates  an uncontrollable  input rainto the system  that can also be 
seen as a weather  forecast  used during  the learning  process;  the model  1) provides  bounds  on the duration  of dry and rainy periods,  
and 2) incorporates  uncertainty  in the intensity  of the rainfall.  To represent  uncontrollable  transitions,  where  uncontrollable  variables  

--- Page 6 ---
Journal of Logical and Algebraic Methods in Programming 141 (2024) 100979
5E.H.Kim,M.A.Goorden,K.G.Larsenetal.
Fig. 5.Modeloftheoriﬁcecontrollerforthepond,whichcanchangemodesperiodically,regulatingthewaterdischargefromthepond.
𝑢 ∈𝑈are selected,  we use dotted  lines, e.g., for indicating  the transition  between DryandRaining. The clock dtracks  the current  
time duration  and resets when the state changes.  The duration  of the dry and raining  intervals  are chosen  uniformly  at random  
within  the speciﬁed  bounds, dryL,dryU,rainLandrainU. When transitioning  from theDryto theRainingstate during  a speciﬁc  
period  represented  by 𝑖, the rain intensity,  denoted  as rain∈ℝ, is selected  uniformly  at random  within  the range of rain[𝑖] ⋅(1 −𝜖)
to rain[𝑖] ⋅(1 +𝜖), where  𝜖=0.1serves  as the uncertainty  factor.  The rain intensity  is assumed  to remain  constant  throughout  the 
period.  For the experiments,  the duration  and intensity  of the rain events  are based on historical  rain data obtained  from the Danish  
Meteorological  Institute  (DMI).
4.2. Urban  catchment  model
We use the one-layer  linear reservoir  model  (the surface  storage  of the simpliﬁed  ‘Nedbør  Afstrømnings  Model’  (NAM)) [17]to 
describe  the dynamics  of the water in the urban catchment  area. In our model,  we assume  a uniform  distribution  of water across  the 
entire urban catchment  area. We account  for the dynamics  of water volume  𝑆over time 𝑡using Equation(2), where  𝑘denotes  the 
surface  reaction  factor.
d𝑆
d𝑡=𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛−k𝑆. (2)
From Equation (2)w e see that changes  in the water volume  𝑆stored  in the urban catchment  area depends  on the diﬀerence  
between  the amount  of rainfall  in the area and the water dissipating  from it (determined  by the water volume  and the surface  
reaction  factor 𝑘).
4.3. Model of the stormwater  detention  pond
The diﬀerential  equation  in Equation(3)characterizes  the change  in water volume  𝑉over time 𝑡in the pond. This volume  change  
is determined  by the diﬀerence  in the inﬂow  𝑄inand outﬂow  𝑄outof the pond. In our system  model,  we assume  that only the urban 
catchment  area provides  inﬂow  into the pond, denoted  as 𝑄in, and disregard  other potentially  contributing  sources  such as rainwater  
and melted  snow that might enter directly  into the pond[18]. The outﬂow  𝑄outof the pond changes  according  to the dimensions  of 
the opening  and the gravitational  pull exerted  by the water level within  the pond.
d𝑉
d𝑡=⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪⎩0 if(𝑤=0)∧𝑄out≥𝑄in,
0 if(𝑤=𝑊)∧𝑄in≥𝑄out,
𝑄in−𝑄outelse(3)
The ﬁrst boundary  case in Equation(3)occurs  when the outﬂow  is greater  than the inﬂow,  and the water level is zero (represent-
ing an empty  pond).  The second  case describes  an overﬂow  situation  during  which  the inﬂow  is greater  than the outﬂow,  and the 
water level is at the maximum  level. Hence  no additional  water can accumulate  in the pond.
4.4. Controller  model
Fig.5shows  the model  of the controller.  The pond’s  opening  size 𝑗can be changed  periodically  to control  the outﬂow  of the 
pond. The controller  monitors  the current  duration  of the control  period  using a locally  operating  clock t, which  resets periodically  
to 0. While in theWaitinglocation,  the controller  waits for 𝑃time units before  repeating  this process  on an hourly  basis. Due to 
physical  constraints  of the available  outﬂow  control  devices  for stormwater  ponds,  the controller  is only able to choose  from a set 
of 𝐶control  modes  (where  𝐶is typically  1, for static control,  or a low number).  Location Choosingis labeled  as an urgent  location  
(indicated  with U) in which  time cannot  progress.  Hence,  a controller  is forced  to make a control  decision  periodically.  To represent  
controllable  transitions,  where  controllable  modes  𝑐∈𝐶are selected,  we use solid lines, e.g., for the transition  from Choosingto
Waiting.
4.5. Sensor  model
The water level in the pond is measured  at every period  𝑃using a sensor  that provides  a noisy signal of the actual  water level in 
the pond. Speciﬁcally,  we assume  an additive  noise model[9]:
𝑤𝑜𝑏𝑠(𝑡)=𝑤(𝑡)+noise(𝑡), (4)

--- Page 7 ---
Journal of Logical and Algebraic Methods in Programming 141 (2024) 100979
6E.H.Kim,M.A.Goorden,K.G.Larsenetal.
Fig. 6.Modelofasensorprovidingnoisymeasurementsofthewaterlevel.ThesensormeasurementsareupdatedeveryperiodP.
Fig. 7.Model of noisy sensor that retains the most recently  recorded  measurements  in memory.  Similar to the standard  sensor (see Fig.6), the sensor measurements  
are updated  every period 𝑝.
where  the noise is Gaussian  distributed  with mean 0and standard  deviation  𝜎, i.e., noise∼(0, 𝜎2). To avoid confusion  in the 
remainder  of the paper,  𝜎always  refers to the standard  deviation  of the noise, while a strategy  is always  accompanied  with a 
subscript,  like 𝜎opt. Fig.6shows  the sensor  model  capturing  the relationship  between  the actual  water level 𝑤and the observed  
water level 𝑤obs. The constraint  on the arrow  from SensorOntoSensorRead indicates  that this transition  occurs  periodically  when 
𝑡reaches  𝑃. On the other hand, the arrow  from SensorRead toSensorOnrepresents  the observed  value 𝑤𝑜𝑏𝑠as deﬁned  by the 
additive  noise model  above.
4.5.1. Memory  equipped  sensors
Sensors  are becoming  more advanced  and there exist several  types of sensors  that possess  memory  or data storage  capabili-
ties[19]. One example  is data logger  sensors,  which  are capable  of recording  and storing  information  over a speciﬁc  period.  These 
types of sensors  are frequently  employed  in environmental  monitoring  applications  to keep track of factors  such as humidity,  pres-
sure, and water levels.  In addition  to the utilization  of memory  in conjunction  with sensors,  there have been recent  eﬀorts  to optimize  
sensor  memory  management,  as evidenced  by studies  such as[20], which  explore  the use of lossless  memory  to improve  eﬃciency.
The past recordings  stored  in such sensors  may provide  more ﬁne-grained  insight  into the true state of the system  being modeled,  
hence also proving  an opportunity  for improved  control  synthesis.  We extend  the sensor  model  introduced  above  with a memory  
component  operating  as a ﬁxed-size  FIFO queue  (implemented  with the function  memory(𝑤obs)in Fig.7). During  synthesis,  the 
controller  has access  to all 𝑁stored  values.
4.6. Objective  function
The objective  of the control  problem  is to prevent  overﬂow  from the stormwater  detention  pond, while simultaneously  ensuring  
that pollutants  from the urban runoﬀ  area are maximally  sedimented  instead  of being discharged  into the stream.
We model  these two conﬂicting  objectives  using a cost function  𝑐deﬁned  by the diﬀerential  equation:
d𝑐
d𝑡=𝛼×(𝑤
𝑊)𝛽
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏟
Part1:overﬂow+(
1−𝑤
𝑊)
⏟⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏟
Part2:sedimentation. (5)
Equation(5)represents  the cost function  𝑐, which  incorporates  components  to penalize  both pond overﬂow  (Part 1) and water 
accumulation  in the pond based on sedimentation  levels (Part 2). Speciﬁcally,  in Part 1 of Equation(5), we gradually  apply a stronger  
penalty  as the water level approaches  𝑊by exponent  𝛽, rather  than applying  a ﬁxed penalty  when surpassing  𝑊. Therefore,  when 
the water level 𝑤is signiﬁcantly  below  𝑊, Part 2 (Sedimentation)  is dominating,  but as the water level gets closer to 𝑊, the 
penalization  for overﬂow  (Part 1) is progressively  strengthened.  The balance  between  Part 1 and 2 can be tuned by coeﬃcient  𝛼.
The formulation  of the control  problem  can now be deﬁned  as synthesizing  an optimal  strategy  𝜎𝑜𝑝𝑡that minimizes  the expected  
cost:
𝜎𝑜𝑝𝑡=argmin 𝔼,𝛾
𝜎𝑜𝑏𝑠,𝐻(𝑐). (6)
The toolUPPAALSTRATEGOis used for strategy  synthesis,  relying  on sampling-based  approximations  for estimating  the expectations  
together  with reinforcement  learning-based  methods[12].
5. Experimental  results:  sensor-based  control  synthesis
For the model  presented  in Section4, the overall  goal is to synthesize  a control  strategy  that minimizes  the expected  cost as 
deﬁned  by the cost function  in Equation(5). Speciﬁcally,  we analyze  the eﬀect of synthesizing  controllers  under partial  observability  
of the system,  while also considering  the eﬀect of

--- Page 8 ---
Journal of Logical and Algebraic Methods in Programming 141 (2024) 100979
7E.H.Kim,M.A.Goorden,K.G.Larsenetal.
Fig. 8.Comparisonoftheobservedwaterlevel( 𝑤𝑜𝑏𝑠)andtherealwaterlevel( 𝑤)accordingtothelevelsofnoise.
Table 1
The weather  forecast  used for learning  in the experiments.
State Lowerbound Upperbound Rainintensity
[min] [min] [cm/min]
Dry 15 25 0Raining 25 35
0.05973± 𝜖
Dry 230 270 0
Raining 5 15 0.01578± 𝜖
Dry ∞∞ 0
•v a r y i n g  sensor  quality  as encoded  by the sensor  noise,
• having  more elaborate  sensors  with memory  banks containing  previous  water measurements,  and
• having  multiple  low-quality  controllers  as replacement  for a single high quality  controller.
The initial  analyses  are conducted  in an oﬀ-line  setting  that is afterward  extended  to an online  model  predictive  control  sce-
nario. The experiments  are reproducible  using the code package  available  online[21]. This package  comprises  both the model  and 
accompanying  scripts.
5.1. Experimental  setup
The size of the oriﬁce  of the pond has three diﬀerent  discrete  settings  that can be set by the controller:  1/7, 4/7, and 7/7 of 
the fully opened  size. For performing  oﬀ-line  control  synthesis  we consider  a 6-hour  prediction  period,  where  the control  setting  for 
the oriﬁce  can be changed  every hour. The strategies  are synthesized  under partial  observability  of the system:  the only information  
available  is the sensor  readings  and the system  time. In our experiment,  sensor  noise is represented  by 𝜎, and as this value increases,  
the noise aﬀecting  the observed  water level (𝑤𝑜𝑏𝑠) also increases.  As can be seen in Fig.8, 𝜎=5and 𝜎=2 0applied  𝑤𝑜𝑏𝑠are 
presented,  and it is observable  that the noise increases  with the increasing  value of 𝜎.
We utilize  a weather  forecast  incorporating  two major rainfall  events  for the synthesis  of learning  controllers,  as detailed  in 
Table1. This weather  forecast  is generated  using the system  model  (Fig.4) and its values  are derived  from historical  rain data 
obtained  from the Danish  Meteorological  Institute  (DMI).  To model  the inherent  uncertainty  in the weather  forecast,  we introduced  
a random  variability  of up to 10% in the rain intensity  while the duration  of the events  was chosen  uniformly  at random  based on 
upper and lower duration  bounds.  For example,  the duration  of the ﬁrst rainfall  event is randomly  selected  within  a range of 25 to 
35 minutes,  featuring  a rain intensity  of 0.05973  ±𝜖[cm/min].  The second  rainfall  event’s  duration  can range from 5 to 15 minutes,  
with a rain intensity  of 0.01578  +𝜖[cm/min].
For the controller  syntheses,  the objective  function  used for our learning  is based on Equation (5)i n Section4.6. Determining  
appropriate  values  for the weights  𝛼and 𝛽depends  on expert  judgment  and may involve  some trial and error. In our study,  we 
value safety more than sedimentation  and based on preliminary  experiments  we set 𝛼=1000. Our experiments  for deciding  proper  
exponents  𝛽were conducted  for exponents  ranging  from 10 to 100; the eﬀect of varying  𝛽is illustrated  in Fig.9for diﬀerent  values  
of 𝛽. Our objective  was to determine  the value of 𝛽at which  the cost begins  to increase  signiﬁcantly  as 𝑤approaches  𝑊while at the 
same time the cost of overﬂow  should  remain  at a low value when 𝑤 ≪𝑊. We selected  𝛽=70for our objective  function  because,  
with 𝛽=70, the cost starts to gradually  increase  above  0.001once the water level 𝑤exceeds  183 cm.
We set the learning  budget  in UPPAALSTRATEGOsuch that 140,000  total runs were generated,  while for evaluation  purposes,  
only 28,000  runs were conducted,  which  represent  20% of the total runs. All experiments  were run on an AMD Ryzen  7 5700x  with 
33 GB RAM.

--- Page 9 ---
Journal of Logical and Algebraic Methods in Programming 141 (2024) 100979
8E.H.Kim,M.A.Goorden,K.G.Larsenetal.
Fig. 9.Thepartialcost 𝑤∕𝑊withdiﬀerentexponents 𝛽,where𝑊is200cm.
Table 2
Cost and overﬂow  duration  results based on synthesized  con-
trol strategies  for varying  levels of sensor noise. For compar-
ison, results are also included  for a randomizedcontroller  as 
well as three static controllers.
Cost[-] Overﬂow[min]
Nonoise 731.54 ±0.04 ≈0
𝜎=5.0732.48±0.04 ≈0
𝜎=10.0732.55±0.06 ≈0
𝜎=15.0734.93±0.25 ≈0
𝜎=20.0737.21±0.04 ≈0
𝜎=100.0737.72±0.05 ≈0
Random 23,888.10 ±1982.71 2.23 ±0.55
Static-max 748.26 ±0.04 ≈0
Static-med 11,881.70 ±0.23 ≈0
Static-min 202,313.0 ±75.93 53.10 ±0.06
5.2. Control  synthesis  with diﬀerent  sensor types
The synthesized  control  strategies  are based on noisy sensor  readings  of the water level of the pond. Below  we analyze  the eﬀect 
of the quality  of the sensor  on the synthesized  strategy.  In particular,  we consider  sensors  where  the sensor  noise can be modeled  by 
an additive  Gaussian  distributed  noise component  with zero mean and standard  deviations  5, 10, 15, and 20(see Equation(4)). For 
reference,  we also include  results  for a noiseless  sensor  (i.e., corresponding  to the perfect  observation  of the water level) as well as 
an (almost)  uninformative  sensor  encoded  with a noise component  with a standard  deviation  of 100. In addition,  for baselines  we 
include  results  for a fully randomized  control  strategy  (denoted  random), where  the control  options  are selected  uniformly  at random  
as well as three static control  strategies  where  the oriﬁce  size is ﬁxed at the smallest  (static-min), medium  (static-med), or largest  value 
(static-max), respectively.  A fully open oriﬁce  represents  a stable choice  for overﬂow  prevention,  but does not serve the purpose  of 
sedimentation.  On the other hand, the static controller  always  selecting  the least open option  keeps the water level in the pond high 
and thus prioritizes  sedimentation,  but with a higher  risk of overﬂow.
5.2.1. Quantitative  results
The noise levels for the sensor  were selected  in order to analyze  how the quality  of a sensor  aﬀects  the synthesized  strategies  as 
well as the results  obtained  from applying  these strategies.  Table2summarizes  the quantitative  results  of the analysis  in terms of 
overﬂow  duration  (measured  in minutes)  and the cost of the synthesized  strategy  (averaged  over 10 runs), with the latter reﬂecting  
both the degree  of overﬂow  and sedimentation  time (see Equation(5)). From the table, we see that the cost increases  monotonically  
with increasing  sensor  noise, but that the learned  strategies  consistently  outperforms  all static controllers,  irrespectively  of the quality  
of the sensor.  Furthermore,  even with noisy sensors,  overﬂow  can be avoided  when an optimal  strategy  is applied,  whereas  overﬂow  
occurs  for ≈2.2minutes  when using a random  controller  and for ≈53.1minutes  when only the smallest-sized  oriﬁce  is applied.
5.2.2. Qualitative  results
In Fig.10we compare  the control  settings  of the synthesized  strategies  for a ﬁxed weather  scenario  but with diﬀerent  levels of 
sensor  noise. The experiments  were conducted  ten times for the same level of sensor  noise. Figs.10a show the result of applying  the 
synthesized  strategy  using a noiseless  sensor.  While the water level is decreasing,  the synthesized  controller  recognizes  that there is 
little or no risk of overﬂow  and therefore  sets the oriﬁce  size to its medium  setting  in order to ensure  a high sedimentation  rate. In 
comparison,  the strategies  synthesized  using noisy sensors,  as illustrated  in Figs.10b -10f, exhibit  more cautious  control  behaviors  
by generally  having  larger water discharge  rates reﬂecting  the amount  of sensor  noise.

--- Page 10 ---
Journal of Logical and Algebraic Methods in Programming 141 (2024) 100979
9E.H.Kim,M.A.Goorden,K.G.Larsenetal.
Fig. 10.Water level (𝑤) and oriﬁce size (opening  rate (%) based on the synthesized  controller  for diﬀerent  levels of noisy sensors (each experiment  is repeated  10 
times).
In Figs.10d and 10e, we see learned  strategies  produce  diﬀerent  control  settings  for the simulations  due to the uncertainty  in 
the sensor  readings.  The strategy  synthesized  by the uninformative  sensor  (Fig.10f) does not exhibit  such variability  over the runs. 
This is because  the synthesized  strategy  recognizes  that the sensor  provides  little information  about the water level and therefore  
conditions  the synthesized  control  strategy  on the system  time only (eﬀectively  ignoring  the sensor  readings).  This learned  strategies  
are illustrated  in Fig.11as decision  trees and in Fig.12using state space partition’s;  the learned  strategies  are based on a high-
quality  sensor  (noise  𝜎=5), two medium-quality  sensors  (noise  𝜎=10and 𝜎=20), and an uninformative  sensor  (noise  𝜎=100). 
We also see that the strategy  based on the high-quality  sensor  exhibits  some apparent  inconsistencies  in the control  settings  for the 
time interval  [208, 228]. We hypothesize  that this is partly  a consequence  of the underlying  reinforcement  learning  algorithm  not 
being able to suﬃciently  explore  certain  parts of the state space.  Similar  times of apparent  inconsistencies  are also seen in the other 
strategies  being synthesized.  Results  of an additional  oﬄine  experiment  are included  in AppendixA.

--- Page 11 ---
Journal of Logical and Algebraic Methods in Programming 141 (2024) 100979
10E.H.Kim,M.A.Goorden,K.G.Larsenetal.
Table 3
The weather  scenario  utilized  for evalua-
tion. Unlike the weather  forecast  used for 
learning  (see Table1), the duration  of Dry 
and Raining  conditions  remains  constant  in 
this evaluation  and uncertainty  in rainfall 
intensity  is also not considered.
State Duration Rainintensity
[min] [cm/min]
Dry 20 0Raining 30 0.05973Dry 250 0Raining 10 0.01578Dry 50 0
Fig. 11.Decision  tree representations  of the strategies  synthesized  based on a high-quality  sensor (a: 𝜎=5), two medium  quality sensors (b: 𝜎=10) and (c: 𝜎=20), 
and an uninformative  sensor (d: 𝜎=100).
5.3. Online  synthesis  using model predictive  control
All previous  experimental  results  are in the setting  of oﬄine  control  synthesis,  which  uses an algorithm  that takes a mathematical  
model  of the system  and a set of performance  objectives  as inputs  to compute  a control  policy.  The generated  control  policies  are used 

--- Page 12 ---
Journal of Logical and Algebraic Methods in Programming 141 (2024) 100979
11E.H.Kim,M.A.Goorden,K.G.Larsenetal.
Fig. 12.State-space  partitions  of the strategies  synthesized  based on a high quality sensor (a: 𝜎=5), two medium  quality sensors (b: 𝜎=10) and (c: 𝜎=20), and an 
uninformative  sensor (d: 𝜎=100).
over the full time-horizon.  If the system  exhibits  a cyclic behavior,  one can use the synthesized  controller  for inﬁnite-time  horizons.  
This approach  is often used when the system’s  dynamics  and controller  objectives  are well-understood  and well-deﬁned.  Examples  
of such applications  include  manufacturing,  robotics,  and process  control[22].
Furthermore,  online  synthesis  techniques,  such as model  predictive  control  (MPC),  actively  generate  control  policies  in real-time.  
This is achieved  by utilizing  continuously  updated  sensor  readings [23]. The distinct  advantage  of MPC lies in its ability  to adapt:  
the control  strategies  are not static but are revised  in response  to changes  in the system  or its environment.  This dynamic  adaptation  
enables  the control  strategies  to be eﬀective  even under new or changing  conditions.  Such approaches  are particularly  beneﬁcial  
in scenarios  where  the system’s  dynamics  are unpredictable  or subject  to variation,  or when the objectives  of the controller  evolve  
over time[24]. In online  synthesis,  modeling  inaccuracies  have a diminished  impact  on the outcome.  The reason  is that the model  
directing  the controller  synthesis  undergoes  regular  re-calibrations  to accurately  represent  the current  state of the system.  This feature  
is particularly  pertinent  in the context  of our experiment,  which  involves  online  control.  In online  control  synthesis,  the optimization  
time horizon  denotes  the duration  within  which  control  decisions  are formulated,  representing  the period  during  which  the system  
state is observed.  Generally,  this horizon  is deﬁned  as a speciﬁc  𝐻relative  to the current  moment.
Our system  includes  uncontrollable  environmental  components  (e.g., theraincomponent),  so we are extending  our oﬄine  vali-
dated model  based on HMDP  to online  synthesis.  As a substitute  for learning  the complete  strategy  𝜎𝐻
optwith signiﬁcant  computational  
resources,  we utilized U PPAALSTRATEGOperiodically  to conduct  online  strategy  synthesis  for the stormwater  detention  ponds  but 
now using an optimization  time horizon  ℎ <𝐻.
For online  control,  we use the U.S. Environmental  Protection  Agency  Stormwater  Management  Model  (EPA-SWMM)[ 8]to simu-
late the real world.  EPA-SWMM  is an open-source  physics-based  dynamic  rainfall-runoﬀ  model  that has been used for decades  in the 
urban stormwater  management  community.  EPA-SWMM  can precisely  trace the dynamics  of ﬂow conditions  (e.g. stream  ﬂow and 
stormwater  detention  pond water level).  We use pySWMM[25]for the interfacing  of EPA-SWMM  with Python.  Finally,  we combine  
pySWMM  with UPPAALSTRATEGOusing the STOMPC  framework [ 7], which  facilitates  the setup of model-predictive  control  using
UPPAALSTRATEGOand an external  simulator.
In the experiments  of online  control,  we synthesized  strategies  considering  an optimization  time horizon  of ℎ =12hours,  which  
results  in the following  query forUPPAALSTRATEGO.
strategy S = minE (cost) [ <=12*H] {} - >{sensor _w, t}: <>(t==12 *H)
Note that Hin the UPPAALSTRATEGOmodel  represents  1 hour, not to confuse  with 𝐻, which  represents  the synthesis  horizon  for 
oﬄine  control.  At each step in the MPC scheme,  a weather  forecast  was generated  for the optimization  time horizon  ℎusing historical  
data.
5.3.1. Qualitative  results
Fig.13shows  the simulation  results  of online  controller  synthesis.  The left side shows  the results  of all learned  strategies,  ranging  
from having  no noise on the sensor  readings  to the sensor  noise with a standard  deviation  of 100. The right side shows  the results  of 
several  static controllers  (and the no-noise  learned  controller  as a reference).  While the online  control  simulations  have run for the 
full period  of September  5 to 23, 2019, Fig.13only shows  the 7-day interval  during  which  heavy  rain was falling.  This shows  how 
each strategy  deals with the heavy  rain as well as the couple  of days after it.
As can be observed  from the left side of Fig.13, all learned  strategies  are able to prevent  overﬂow  of the pond (the capacity  of 
the pond is 𝑊=200cm), regardless  of the level of sensor  noise. This result is consistent  with the results  from oﬄine  control  from 
the previously  described  events,  so that eﬀect carries  over to the online  control  scenario.  The results  also show that there is a clear 
distinction  after the heavy  rain between  sensors  without  noise and those with noise. The model  without  any sensor  noise keeps the 

--- Page 13 ---
Journal of Logical and Algebraic Methods in Programming 141 (2024) 100979
12E.H.Kim,M.A.Goorden,K.G.Larsenetal.
Fig. 13.Online synthesis  results with 12h optimization  time horizon.  The left ﬁgure shows the result of applying  the learned  strategies  and for comparison,  the right 
ﬁgure shows the results using static and random  controllers.
stormwater  longer  in the detention  pond, hence optimizing  the pollutant  sedimentation.  All noisy sensors  empty  the pond quicker  
than the sensor  without  noise. Unfortunately,  there is no clear distinction  between  the diﬀerent  levels of noise. This could mean that 
the learned  strategies  are somehow  robust  against  noise on the sensor  readings.
The right side of Fig.13eﬀectively  shows  the extremes  within  which  any learned  strategy  lies. A controller  that always  opens 
the oriﬁce  fully has a maximum  water level that is approximately  0.4 m below  the capacity  water level 𝑊. On the other hand, 
a controller  that always  opens the oriﬁce  minimally  results  in an uninterrupted  overﬂow  duration  of more than 2 days, which  is 
deﬁnitely  undesirable  and unacceptable.
Model-predictive  control  is often praised  for its robustness  against  model  uncertainties[ 24]. The results  in Fig.13demonstrate  
the robustness  as well. One can see that the heaviest  rainfall  occurs  around  the 𝑡 =24h, while there is a signiﬁcant  delay of several  
hours before  the stormwater  is actually  entering  the pond. While the diﬀerential  equation(2)induces  some delay between  the rainfall  
and the inﬂow  to the pond, the modeled  delay is much less than the simulated  delay by EPA-SWMM.  Even though  the delays  do not 
match,  repeatedly  relearning  a strategy  creates  robustness  against  modeling  imprecisions.
In the next experiment,  we changed  the control  horizon  to ℎ =6. All other parameters  of the system  and the experiment  remained  
unchanged.  Fig.14shows  the results  for the case of no noise on the sensor  readings  (left) and for the case of a noisy sensor  with 
standard  deviation  of 5 (right).  The results  of the sensors  with higher  noise levels are similar  to the ones with the noise level of 
𝜎=5. First, in both cases, the learned  controllers  are still able to prevent  overﬂow.  This indicates  that a control  horizon  of ℎ =6h is 
suﬃciently  large enough  to observe  the incoming  rain on time. Observing  the start of the raise of the water level more closely,  one 
might see that the curves  with the shorter  control  horizon  start to go up earlier  and then drop down before  matching  the curve for 
ℎ =12h. The drop happens  precisely  at the moment  a potential  overﬂow  could happen  within  the short horizon  of ℎ =6h. From 
that point on, reinforcement  learning  starts to adjust  the oriﬁce  settings  to let more water out of the stormwater  detention  pond.
The second  observation  is that the learned  strategy  for the case with no noise remains  surprisingly  almost  unchanged.  So shorten-
ing the control  horizon  did not aﬀect the learned  strategy.  Having  a shorter  control  horizon  in practice  is beneﬁcial:  as the calculation  
of each new strategy  requires  less computational  eﬀort with shorter  control  horizons,  synthesizing  a controller  could then actually  
be implemented  in embedded  systems  with limited  hardware.

--- Page 14 ---
Journal of Logical and Algebraic Methods in Programming 141 (2024) 100979
13E.H.Kim,M.A.Goorden,K.G.Larsenetal.
Fig. 14.Onlinesynthesisresultswith12hand6hhorizonunder(left)nonoiseincludedobservation(right)partialobservationwithnoise( 𝜎=5).
Finally,  shortening  the control  horizon  did signiﬁcantly  eﬀect strategies  learned  for sensors  with noise (see the right plot in 
Fig.14). The learned  strategies  keep the water lever higher  once the heavy  rain has passed  by and no potential  overﬂow  is possible.  
The reason  why a shorter  control  horizon  gets more optimal  results  could be explained  by the fact that reinforcement  learning  is 
used. Having  a shorter  control  horizon  means  that shorter  traces are generated  from the model  that feed the reinforcement  learning  
algorithm.  And shorter  traces mean less variability  in the traces is possible.  Consider  the number  of possible  control  strategies.  For a 
6 h control  horizon,  there are 36possible  control  strategies,  signiﬁcantly  less than 312possible  control  strategies  for a control  horizon  
of 12 h. This eﬀect is subsequently  ampliﬁed  by the stochastic  weather  forecast  andthe noisy sensors  in the model.  So, having  less 
variability  in the possible  traces increases  the probability  that reinforcement  learning  learns  the (near)  optimal  strategy.  This could 
be the eﬀect we are observing  for the noisy sensors.
5.4. Control  synthesis  using memory-equipped  sensors
In the following  two sections  we describe  experiments  covering  two ideas on how to potentially  improve  the performance  of 
controllers  equipped  with unreliable  sensors.  The ﬁrst idea, described  in this section,  is about adding  memory  to the controller,  while 
the second  idea, described  in Section5.5, concerns  using multiple  sensors  instead  of a single one.
Sensors  capable  of retaining  recorded  data or information  pertaining  to a speciﬁc  period  of time can be highly  advantageous,  not 
only in situations  where  real-time  data transmission  is not feasible  or practical,  but also as an approximation  of the entire state of 
the partially  observed  system[10].
In this section,  we considered  sensors  equipped  with a limited  amount  of memory  for storing  previously  recorded  sensor  values.  
For the analysis,  we rely on theSensorMemory model  (see Section4.5.1) that reads data every 2 minutes  and stores the last 10 
sensor  readings,  making  them available  for subsequent  control  strategy  synthesis.  The additional  memory  of the sensor  will serve as 
a more ﬁne-grained  approximation  of theentire  state of the partially  observed  system,  thereby  providing  a basis for improving  the 
strategies  being synthesized.

--- Page 15 ---
Journal of Logical and Algebraic Methods in Programming 141 (2024) 100979
14E.H.Kim,M.A.Goorden,K.G.Larsenetal.
Table 4
Cost analysis  based on synthesized  control 
strategy  under diﬀerent  levels of partial ob-
servation  with memory.
Cost [-]
No noise 731.143±0.039
Gaussian Noise
𝜇=0,𝜎=5.0 732.056±0.044
𝜇=0,𝜎=10.0732.191±0.086
𝜇=0,𝜎=15.0734.747±0.099
𝜇=0,𝜎=20.0734.832±0.105
𝜇=0,𝜎=100.0736.506±4.651
Fig. 15.Simulationresultsforanoiselesssensorwithsensormemory(left)andanoisysensor( 𝜎=5)withsensormemory(right).
5.4.1. Quantitative  results
Table4shows  the results  for the synthesized  strategies  using sensors  with the same noise levels,  conﬁgurations  and baselines  as 
previously  employed,  except  now have included  memory  into the sensor  model.  At ﬁrst glance,  the results  seems  reasonable,  as the 
expected  cost of each synthesized  strategy  grows  monotonically  with the noise level. But the intended  eﬀect,  i.e., an improvement  on 
the synthesized  control  strategy,  is absent.  When one compares  the costs for the diﬀerent  strategies  with those reported  in Table2, 
barely  any improvement  can be observed.  For example,  for the sensor  with noise 𝜎=10, the cost value decreases  from 732.55 ±0.06to 
732.191 ±0.086. While this is statistically  signiﬁcant  using the conﬁdence  intervals,  the improvement  is nonexistent  from a practical  
point of view.
5.4.2. Qualitative  results
The results  of applying  a memory  window  of size ten to a noiseless  observation  during  a synthesis  process  are depicted  in Fig.15. 
(While  the ﬁgure only shows  the result for a noiseless  sensor  and a noisy sensor  with 𝜎=5, the conclusion  also holds for the 
experiments  with higher  noise levels.)  By comparing  the controller’s  decisions  in Fig.15a to those in Fig.10a, we can see that 
both controllers  make very similar  decisions.  Speciﬁcally,  Fig.15(a) with memory  applied  does not fully open the oriﬁce  size at 
300 ≤𝑡 ≤360, thereby  allowing  for slightly  more sedimentation.
The synthesized  strategy  under the observation  condition  with noise for 𝜎=5is depicted  in Fig.15(b). Compared  to the obser-
vation  in Fig.15(a) without  noise, inconsistent  controller  action  can be observed  at 120 ≤𝑡 ≤180, which  shows  that the ability  to 
detect  a decrease  in water level appears  weaker.  On the other hand, comparing  the results  to Fig.10b, a controller  with memory  
seems  to prefer  a high oriﬁce  setting  followed  by a medium  oriﬁce  setting,  while a controller  without  memory  prefers  a high oriﬁce  
setting  followed  by a low setting  followed  by a high setting.  While the synthesized  controllers  are diﬀerent,  the reported  costs in 
Tables2and4suggest  that they have very similar  accumulated  sedimentation  costs.
This leads us to conclude  that adding  sensor  memory  does not have a signiﬁcant  (and expected)  improvement  on the performance  
of the synthesized  controllers.
5.5. Synthesis  using observations  of multiple  sensors
As the detection  accuracy  of a sensor  increases,  the cost of the sensor  also tends to increase.  This poses a challenge  in various  
industrial  scenarios  where  a decision  must be made between  procuring  a limited  number  of high-precision  yet costly sensors  or a 
larger quantity  of low-cost  yet imprecise  ones. Consequently,  sensor  optimization  becomes  a critical  aspect  to consider.

--- Page 16 ---
Journal of Logical and Algebraic Methods in Programming 141 (2024) 100979
15E.H.Kim,M.A.Goorden,K.G.Larsenetal.
Table 5
The cost comparison  of the optimal  strategy  synthesis  with ob-
servation  under independently  operated  sensors and a single 
sensor.
sensor𝜎=20.0 Cost [-] Overﬂow [min]
singlesensor 737.210 ±0.040 ≈0
twosensors 733.322 ±0.047 ≈0
foursensors 732.611 ±0.139 ≈0
sixsensors 732.258 ±0.129 ≈0
eightsensors 731.057 ±0.055 ≈0
In this regard,  there have been studies  on methods  to enhance  sensor  performance  by utilizing  multiple  sensors [26]. Utilizing  
this method  makes  it possible  to ﬁll in missing  data points.  Multiple  sensors  can be used to compensate  for each other’s  errors or 
limitations  to improve  the overall  accuracy  of observation[ 27].
We synthesized  optimal  strategies  under diﬀerent  conﬁgurations  of sensors.  Our hypothesis  is that synthesis  with multiple  in-
dependent  sensors  will produce  better performance  than synthesis  of a single sensor  observation.  We implemented  the experiment  
of this hypothesis  using Gaussian  noise 𝜎=20, and the result is shown  in Table5. The results  show that 1) multiple  sensors  (all 
𝜎=20) show better performance  than that of single sensor  with the same noise level and 2) each time adding  an additional  sensor  
increases  the performance,  but the eﬀect diminishes  with the number  of sensors.  The results  demonstrate  that the expected  cost of 
the synthesized  strategy  using four low-quality  sensors  can result in a cost that closely  approximates  that of a single sensor  with 
𝜎=10, while using six sensors  can result in a cost that closely  approximates  that of a single sensor  with 𝜎=5. With these results,  we 
can conclude  that our hypothesis  is correct.
6. Conclusion  and future  challenges
We introduce  a method  for synthesizing  near-optimal  control  strategies  for stormwater  detention  ponds,  where  the system  state is 
only partially  observed  through  noisy water level sensors.  The synthesized  control  strategies  adjusts  the oriﬁce  size of the stormwater  
detention  pond to control  the outﬂow  volume.  We model  the system  as a hybrid  Markov  decision  process  and synthesize  control  
strategies  based on reinforcement  learning  as implemented  in the tool UPPAALSTRATEGO. We conducted  several  experiments  for 
analyzing  the eﬀect of generating  control  strategies under  diﬀerent  levels of partial  observability.  One experiment  conﬁrms  that 
including  noise in the observations  during  synthesis  increases  the optimization  cost of the synthesized  strategy.  On the other hand, 
online  control  results  demonstrate  that noisy sensors  only aﬀect the performance  minimally.  To cope with noisy observations,  we 
performed  experiments  with memory  equipped  sensors  as well as settings  involving  multiple  sensors.  While having  a sensor  with 
memory  did not improve  the synthesis  performance,  deploying  multiple  low quality  sensors  can achieve  similar  results  as a single 
high-quality  sensor.
For future  research,  we intend  to develop  safety-guaranteed  and near-optimal  strategies  with the tool UPPAALSTRATEGO. By 
employing  the state space partitioning  method  outlined  in[28]or the abstraction  method  from[29], we could construct  a guaranteed  
safe shield  that ensures  the satisfaction  of the safety property  𝜑. This involves  calculating  a collection  of safe regions  alongside  the 
most permissive  safety strategy  𝜎𝜑. Building  on this foundation,  our objective  could then be to synthesize  an optimal  strategy  𝜎𝑜𝑝𝑡
within  a shielded  state space in our current  case study of a stormwater  detention  pond.
CRediT  authorship  contribution  statement
Esther H.  Kim:Writing  – review  & editing,  Writing  – original  draft, Visualization,  Methodology,  Investigation. Martijn A.  
Goorden:Writing  – review  & editing,  Writing  – original  draft, Supervision,  Conceptualization. Kim G.  Larsen:Writing  – review  
& editing,  Supervision,  Conceptualization. Thomas D.  Nielsen:Writing  – review  & editing,  Writing  – original  draft, Supervision,  
Conceptualization.
Declaration  of competing  interest
The authors  declare  the following  ﬁnancial  interests/personal  relationships  which  may be considered  as potential  competing  
interests:  Esther  Hahyeon  Kim reports  ﬁnancial  support  was provided  by Digital  Research  Centre  Denmark  (DIREC).  Martijn  Angelo  
Goorden  reports  ﬁnancial  support  was provided  by Digital  Research  Centre  Denmark  (DIREC).
Declaration  of generative  AI and AI-assisted  technologies  in the writing  process
During  the preparation  of this work, the authors  used ChatGPT-3.5  to rephrase  selected  parts of the text. After using this tool/ser-
vice, the authors  reviewed  and edited  the content  as needed  and took full responsibility  for the publication’s  content.

--- Page 17 ---
Journal of Logical and Algebraic Methods in Programming 141 (2024) 100979
16E.H.Kim,M.A.Goorden,K.G.Larsenetal.
Acknowledgements
This research  is funded  by the Digital  Research  Centre  Denmark  (DIREC),  Innovation  Fund Denmark.
Appendix A.  Additional  experimental  results
This appendix  contains  additional  experimental  results  for the learning  of oﬄine  controllers.  TablesA.6andA.7show the new 
weather  scenario,  where  the diﬀerence  with the one in Section5.2is highlighted  in bold font.
TableA.8shows  the new quantitative  results,  while Figs.A.16, A.17, and A.18show the simulation  plots, learned  decision  trees, 
and learned  state-space  partition’s,  respectively.
Fig. A.16.Behaviorofwater(w)andoriﬁce(openingrate(%)basedonthesynthesizedc ontrollerwithdiﬀerentlevelsofnoisysensors(eachrepeated10times).

--- Page 18 ---
Journal of Logical and Algebraic Methods in Programming 141 (2024) 100979
17E.H.Kim,M.A.Goorden,K.G.Larsenetal.
Table A.6
The weather  forecast  used for learning  in the additional  experi-
ments. The diﬀerence  compared  to the original  weather  scenario  
in Table1is highlighted  in bold font.
State Lowerbound Upperbound Rainintensity
[min] [min] [cm/min]
Dry 15 25 0Raining 25 35
0.05973± 𝜖
Dry 230 270 0
Raining 5 15 𝟎.𝟎𝟏𝟔𝟕𝟖±𝝐
Dry ∞∞ 0
Fig. A.17.Decision  tree representations  of the synthesized  strategies  based on a high-quality  sensor (a: 𝜎=5), two medium  quality sensors (b: 𝜎=10) and (c: 𝜎=20), 
and an uninformative  sensor (d: 𝜎=100).

--- Page 19 ---
Journal of Logical and Algebraic Methods in Programming 141 (2024) 100979
18E.H.Kim,M.A.Goorden,K.G.Larsenetal.
Table A.7
The weather  scenario  utilized  for evaluation.  The diﬀerence  com-
pared to the original  weather  scenario  in Table3is highlighted  
in bold font.
State Lowerbound Upperbound Rainintensity
[min] [min] [cm/min]
Dry 20 20 0Raining 30 30 0.05973Dry 250 250 0Raining 10 10 0.01678
Dry 50 50 0
Table A.8New experimental  results that outline the cost and duration  
of overﬂow  for a range of learned  control strategies  for var-
ious degrees  of sensor noise. For comparison,  the table also 
includes  results for a randomized  controller  and three static 
controllers.
SensorNoise Cost[-] Overﬂow[min]
Nonoise 732.38 ±0.04 ≈0
𝜎=5.0735.70±0.04 ≈0
𝜎=10.0739.40±0.11 ≈0
𝜎=15.0742.64±0.04 ≈0
𝜎=20.0746.43±0.13 ≈0
𝜎=100.0748.03±0.04 ≈0
Random 23,581.8 ±2087.26 1.86 ±0.51
Static-max 748.03 ±0.04 ≈0
Static-med 12,136.4 ±0.24 ≈0
Static-min 202,427.0 ±53.45 53.35 ±0.05
Fig. A.18.State-based  partitioning  of the synthesized  strategies  based on a no noise included  (a: 𝜎=0), high quality sensor (b: 𝜎=5), three medium  quality sensors 
(c: 𝜎=10), (d: 𝜎=15), (e: 𝜎=20), and an uninformative  sensor (f: 𝜎=100).

--- Page 20 ---
Journal of Logical and Algebraic Methods in Programming 141 (2024) 100979
19E.H.Kim,M.A.Goorden,K.G.Larsenetal.
References
[1] G. Tixier, M. Lafont, L. Grapentine,  Q. Rochfort,  J. Marsalek,  Ecological  risk assessment  of urban stormwater  ponds: literature  review and proposal  of a new 
conceptual  approach  providing  ecological  quality goals and the associated  bioassassment  tools, J. Ecol. Indic. 11 (2011) 1497–1506,  https://doi  .org /10 .1016 /j .
ecolind .2011 .03 .027.
[2] C.J.  Walsh, A.H. Roy, J.W. Feminella,  P.D. Cottingham,  P.M. Groﬀman,  R.P. Morgan,  The urban stream syndrome:  current knowledge  and the search for a cure, 
J. North Am. Benthol.  Soc. 24 (2005) 706–723,  https://doi  .org /10 .1899 /04 -028 .1.
[3] J.T.  Mobley,  T.B. Culver, Design of outlet control structures  for ecological  detention  ponds, J. Water Resour.  Plan. Manag.  140 (2014) 250–257,  https://
doi .org /10 .1061 /(ASCE  )WR .1943 -5452 .0000266.
[4] M.A.  Goorden,  K.G. Larsen, J.E. Nielsen,  T.D. Nielsen,  M.R. Rasmussen,  J. Srba, Learning  safe and optimal  control strategies  for storm water detention  ponds, 
IFAC-PapersOnLine  54 (2021) 13–18, https://doi  .org /10 .1016 /j .ifacol .2021 .08 .467.
[5]A. David, P.G. Jensen,  K.G. Larsen, M. Mikuˇcionis, J.H. Taankvist,  Uppaal Stratego,  in: International  Conference  on Tools and Algorithms  for the Construction  
and Analysis  of Systems,  Springer,  2015, pp.206–211.
[6]E.H. Kim, K.G. Larsen, M.A. Goorden,  T.D. Nielsen,  Controlling  stormwater  detention  ponds under partial observability,  in: NWPT: 33rd Nordic Workshop  on 
Programming  Theory,  2022, pp.1–3.
[7]M.A. Goorden,  P.G. Jensen,  K.G. Larsen, M. Samusev,  J. Srba, G. Zhao, STOMPC:  stochastic  model-predictive  control with uppaal stratego,  in: International  
Conference  on Automated  Technology  for Veriﬁcation  and Analysis,  Springer,  2022, pp.327–333.
[8]W.C. Huber, L.A. Rossman,  R.E. Dickinson,  EPA stormwater  management  model, Watershed  Mod. 338 (2005) 359.
[9] K. Jerath, S. Brennan,  C. Lagoa, Bridging  the gap between  sensor noise modeling  and sensor characterization,  Measurement  116 (2018) 350–366,  https://
doi .org /10 .1016 /j .measurement  .2017 .09 .012.
[10]M.C. Hill, C.R. Tiedeman,  Eﬀective  Groundwater  Model Calibration:  with Analysis  of Data, Sensitivities,  Predictions,  and Uncertainty,  John Wiley & Sons, 2006.
[11] A.F.  Torres-Rua,  A.M. Ticlavilca,  W.R. Walker,  M. McKee, Machine  learning  approaches  for error correction  of hydraulic  simulation  models for canal ﬂow 
schemes,  J. Irrig. Drain. Eng. 138 (2012) 999–1010,  https://doi  .org /10 .1061 /(ASCE  )IR .1943 -4774 .0000489.
[12]P. Ashok, J. Kˇretínsk`y, K.G. Larsen, A. Le Coënt, J.H. Taankvist,  M. Weininger,  SOS: safe, optimal  and small strategies  for hybrid Markov  decision  processes,  
in: Quantitative  Evaluation  of Systems:  16th International  Conference,  QEST 2019, Proceedings  16, Glasgow,  UK, September  10–12, 2019, Springer,  2019, 
pp.147–164.
[13]K.G. Larsen, M. Mikuˇcionis, M. Muniz, J. Srba, J.H. Taankvist,  Online and compositional  learning  of controllers  with application  to ﬂoor heating,  in: International  
Conference  on Tools and Algorithms  for the Construction  and Analysis  of Systems,  Springer,  2016, pp.244–259.
[14]M. Jaeger, P.G. Jensen,  K. Guldstrand  Larsen, A. Legay, S. Sedwards,  J.H. Taankvist,  Teaching  Stratego  to play ball: optimal  synthesis  for continuous  space 
MDPs, in: Automated  Technology  for Veriﬁcation  and Analysis:  17th International  Symposium,  ATVA 2019, Proceedings  17, Taipei, Taiwan,  October  28–31, 
2019, Springer,  2019, pp.81–97.
[15]M. Jaeger, G. Bacci, G. Bacci, K.G. Larsen, P.G. Jensen,  Approximating  Euclidean  by imprecise  Markov  decision  processes,  in: Leveraging  Applications  of 
Formal Methods,  Veriﬁcation  and Validation:  Veriﬁcation  Principles:  9th International  Symposium  on Leveraging  Applications  of Formal Methods,  ISoLA 2020, 
Proceedings,  Part i 9, Rhodes,  Greece,  October  20–30, 2020, Springer,  2020, pp.275–289.
[16]K.G. Larsen, A. Le Coënt, M. Mikuˇcionis, J.H. Taankvist,  Guaranteed  control synthesis  for continuous  systems  in Uppaal Tiga, in: Cyber Physical  Systems.  
Model-Based  Design, Springer,  2019, pp.113–133.
[17] S.A.  Nielsen,  E. Hansen,  Numerical  simulation  of the rainfall-runoﬀ  process on a daily basis, Hydrol.  Res. 4 (1973) 171–190,  https://doi  .org /10 .2166 /nh .1973 .
0013.
[18]A.T.H. Thomsen,  T.B. Moeslund,  G. Jensen,  J.E. Nielsen,  M.L. Pedersen,  M.R. Rasmussen,  Controlling  the hydraulic  impact of discharge  from storm water 
detention  ponds into streams,  in: International  Conference  on Urban Drainage,  IWA/IAHR,  2017, pp.821–824.
[19]C.D. Okwudibe,  B. Akinloye,  Design and simulation  of temperature  data logger, Am. J. Eng. Res. 6 (2017) 14–19.
[20]F. Hadiatna,  H. Hindersah,  D. Yolanda,  M.A. Triawan,  Design and implementation  of data logger using lossless data compression  method  for Internet  of things, 
in: International  Conference  on System Engineering  and Technology,  IEEE, 2016, pp.105–108.
[21]E.H. Kim, Reproducibility  Code Package  in Zenodo  – Controlling  Stormwater  Detention  Ponds Under Partial Observability,  2023.
[22]P. Praveena,  D. Rakita, B. Mutlu, M. Gleicher,  User-guided  oﬄine synthesis  of robot arm motion from 6-DOF paths, in: International  Conference  on Robotics  and 
Automation,  IEEE, 2019, pp.8825–8831.
[23]E.F. Camacho,  C.B. Alba, Model Predictive  Control,  Springer  Science  & Business  Media, 2013.
[24] C.E.  García, D.M. Prett, M. Morari,  Model predictive  control:  theory and practice  – a survey, Automatica  25 (1989) 335–348,  https://doi  .org /10 .1016 /0005 -
1098(89  )90002 -2.
[25] B.E.  McDonnell,  K. Ratliﬀ, M.E. Tryby, J.J.X. Wu, A. Mullapudi,  PySWMM:  the Python interface  to stormwater  management  model (SWMM),  J. Open Sour. 
Softw. 5 (2020) 2292, https://doi  .org /10 .21105 /joss .02292.
[26] X.  Wang, R. Hoseinnezhad,  A.K. Gostar, T. Rathnayake,  B. Xu, A. Bab-Hadiashar,  Multi-sensor  control for multi-object  Bayes ﬁlters, Signal Process.  142 (2018) 
260–270,  https://doi  .org /10 .1016 /j .sigpro .2017 .07 .031.
[27] Y.  Li, W. Zhang, X. Ji, C. Ren, J. Wu, Research  on lane a compensation  method  based on multi-sensor  fusion, Sensors  19 (2019) 1584, https://doi  .org /10 .3390 /
s19071584.
[28]A.H. Brorholt,  P.G. Jensen,  K.G. Larsen, F. Lorber, C. Schilling,  Shielded  reinforcement  learning  for hybrid systems,  in: International  Conference  on Bridging  the 
Gap Between  AI and Reality,  Springer,  2023, pp.33–54.
[29]M.A. Goorden,  K.G. Larsen, J.E. Nielsen,  T.D. Nielsen,  W. Qian, M.R. Rasmussen,  G. Zhao, Guaranteed  safe controller  synthesis  for switched  systems  using 
analytical  solutions,  in: IEEE Conference  on Control  Technology  and Applications  (CCTA),  2023, pp.784–790.
