--- Page 1 ---
HAL Id: hal-03624519
https://hal.science/hal-03624519v2
Submitted on 4 Apr 2022
HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access archive
for the deposit and dissemination of scientific re-
search documents, whether they are published or not.
The documents may come from teaching and research
institutions in France or abroad, or from public or pri-
vate research centers.L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL , est des-
tinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents scien-
tifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non, émanant
des établissements d’enseignement et de recherche
français ou étrangers, des laboratoires publics ou
privés.
HAL Authorization
Formal Verification of Real-Time Autonomous Robots: an
Interdisciplinary Approach
Mohammed Foughali, Alexander Zuepke
To cite this version:
Mohammed Foughali, Alexander Zuepke. Formal Verification of Real-Time Autonomous Robots: an Interdis-
ciplinary Approach. Frontiers in Robotics and AI, In press, ⟨10.3389/frobt.2022.791757⟩. ⟨hal-03624519v2⟩

--- Page 2 ---
Formal Veriﬁcation of Real-Time Autonomous
Robots: an Interdisciplinary Approach
Mohammed Foughali1;and Alexander Zuepke2;
1Universit ´e Paris Cit ´e, IRIF , CNRS, Paris, France
2Chair of Cyber-Physical Systems in Production Engineering, Technical University of
Munich, Garching, Germany
Correspondence*:
Mohammed Foughali
Alexander Zuepke
foughali@irif.fr, alex.zuepke@tum.de
ABSTRACT
Due to the severe consequences of their possible failure, robotic systems must be rigorously
veriﬁed as to guarantee that their behavior is correct and safe. Such veriﬁcation, carried out
on a model , needs to cover various behavioral properties ( e.g.,safety andliveness ), but also,
given the timing constraints of robotic missions, real-time properties ( e.g.,schedulability and
bounded response ). In addition, in order to obtain valid and useful veriﬁcation results, the model
must faithfully represent the underlying robotic system and should therefore take into account all
possible behaviors of the robotic software under the actual hardware and OS constraints ( e.g.,
the scheduling policy and the number of cores). These requirements put the rigorous veriﬁcation
of robotic systems at the intersection of at least three communities: the robotic community, the
formal methods community, and the real-time systems community. Verifying robotic systems is
thus a complex, interdisciplinary task that involves a number of disciplines/techniques ( e.g.model
checking, schedulability analysis, component-based design) and faces a number of challenges
(e.g.formalization, automation, scalability). For instance, the use of formal veriﬁcation (formal
methods community) is hindered by the state-space explosion problem, whereas schedulability
analysis (real-time systems) is not suitable for behavioral properties. Moreover, current real-time
implementations of robotic software are limited in terms of predictability andefﬁciency , leading
to,e.g., unnecessary latencies. This is ﬂagrant, in particular, at the level of locking protocols in
robotic software. Such situation may beneﬁt from major theoretical and practical ﬁndings of the
real-time systems community.
In this paper, we propose an interdisciplinary approach that, by joining forces of the different
communities, provides a scalable and uniﬁed means to efﬁciently implement and rigorously verify
real-time robots. First, we propose a scalable two-step veriﬁcation solution that combines formal
methods and schedulability analysis to verify both behavioral and real-time properties. Second,
we devise a new multi-resource locking mechanism that is efﬁcient, predictable and suitable for
real-time robots, and show how it improves the latter’s real-time behavior. In both cases, we show,
using a real drone example, how our approach compares favorably to the literature. This paper
is a major extension of the RTCSA 2020 publication “A Two-Step Hybrid Approach for Verifying
Real-time Robotic Systems”.
Keywords: autonomous robots, robotic frameworks, formal veriﬁcation, statistical model checking, schedulability analysis, real-time
locking, multi-resource locks, reader-writer locks
1

--- Page 3 ---
Foughali et al. Formal Veriﬁcation of Real-Time Autonomous Robots
1 INTRODUCTION
1.1 Context & Addressed Problem
Robotic systems are being increasingly deployed in human environments ( e.g., home assistants, robotic
surgery, autonomous-driving cars) and costly missions ( e.g., space exploration). Most modern robotic
systems are thus safety critical , due to the severe consequences of their possible failure, ranging from
considerable economic losses to human injuries. This notion of “safety critical” is oftentimes tied to the
real-time capabilities of the robot. For instance, obstacle avoidance , a classical ingredient of autonomous
navigation, must be realised in real time, i.e.the robot must stop or navigate away soon enough not to
collide with e.g.a human on the ﬁeld. In this paper, we focus on autonomous robots in this scope, which
we simply refer to as real-time robots.
A real-time robot results from a tight coupling between software and hardware. The software, inherently
complex, is majoritarily component-based (e.g.MAUVE (Gobillot et al., 2019), Orocos (Soetens and
Bruyninckx, 2005), and GenoM3 (Mallet et al., 2010)). The software components, commonly known as
functional components , collaborate while interacting with the hardware, typically a multi-core embedded
computer , which we abbreviate MEC hereafter, and a set of sensors and actuators. Each functional
component implements complex algorithms, often organized in tasks, to perform some computations using
the resources provided by the MEC. Computations results are communicated between components to close
the perception-action loop and fulﬁll the robot’s missions.
Due to their safety-critical nature, exempliﬁed above, it is crucial to guarantee that real-time robots
behave safely and correctly w.r.t. the real-time constraints of the robotic mission, considering both their
software implementation and MEC’s capabilities. The latter are usually limited, featuring only a small
number of cores on which a large number of software tasks is assigned. These hardware limitations are due
to the size, weight and power (SWaP) considerations. For instance, we can see this in autonomous drones
used in advanced research, e.g.Kamel et al. (2015); Khedekar et al. (2019); Chermprayong et al. (2019)
(two cores) and Walter et al. (2018); Jeong et al. (2021) (four cores) and industry, e.g.the Quanser QDrone1
(four cores). The complexity and constraints of the software-hardware couple, as introduced above, renders
providing sufﬁcient guarantees on the correctness and safety of real-time robots a particularly hard research
problem as explained hereafter.
The ﬁrst major issue pertains to the “veriﬁcation” practices within the robotic community. Roboticists
usually rely on scenario-based testing , carried out in the ﬁeld, or, to avoid ﬁeld testing costs, by means of
robotic simulators such as Gazeebo (Koenig and Howard, 2004) and MORSE (Echeverria et al., 2012).
Unfortunately, scenario-based testing is inherently unreliable, as faulty scenarios may remain uncovered
even by the heaviest and longest testing campaigns. Many examples in the literature corroborate the
previous statement. For instance, Pecheur (2000) gives the details of a full-year test failing to detect a
bug in a NASA experiment. Another example is reported in Kress-Gazit et al. (2011), where a software
bug that, while never occurred during thousands of hours of simulations and over 450 km of ﬁeld tests,
disqualiﬁed the autonomous vehicle Alice from the 2007 Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
(DARPA) urban challenge. More details on these two examples, as well as further examples, may be found
in (Foughali, 2018, Chapter 1).
Besides, even if one assumes some sound veriﬁcation approaches may efﬁciently replace scenario-
based testing in robotics, a second major issue arises: mainstream robotic frameworks have little focus
1https://www.quanser.com/products/qdrone
2

--- Page 4 ---
Foughali et al. Formal Veriﬁcation of Real-Time Autonomous Robots
on real-time capabilities in the rigorous sense of the expression, making them unsuitable for real-time
applications. The conclusions of Maruyama et al. (2016) provide a prominent example of this unsuitability
w.r.t. theRobotic Operating System (ROS) (Quigley et al., 2009), the most popular robotic framework today.
Recent attempts are made to switch to ROS2 which is under development2with real-time issues still being
investigated (Blass et al., 2021; Choi et al., 2021).
Two questions then immediately follow: what should scenario-based testing be complemented with
in order to provide rigorous guarantees on the safety of real-time robots? And what should be done to
provide acceptable real-time capabilities within robotic frameworks? The answer to either question requires
multidisciplinary approaches at the crossroads of the robotic, the formal methods, and the real-time systems
communities. We ﬁrst give, for each question, a proposition that takes into account the interdisciplinarity
of the question and discuss the related problems (Sect. 1.2). Then we explain, through our contributions,
how we concretize such propositions (Sect. 1.3).
1.2 Propositions & Difﬁculties
Proposition 1: Using rigorous veriﬁcation techniques in robotics
Scenario-based testing should be accompanied by mathematically sound approaches where important
behavioral properties (e.g.liveness andsafety ) and real-time properties (e.g.schedulability andbounded
response ) are rigorously veriﬁed against a model faithfully representing the software-hardware couple that
is the real-time robot. Formal veriﬁcation andschedulability analysis belong to such approaches. Formal
veriﬁcation can deal with both behavioral and real-time properties, but its use in robotics is impeded by
scalability issues. Indeed, if the formal technique is exhaustive ( e.g.model checking), the state-space
explosion problem is observed in real-world robotic systems, i.e.their state spaces are intractable because
of their sheer complexity. On the other hand, if the formal technique is non exhaustive, such as Statistical
Model Checking (SMC) (Legay et al., 2010), the properties can no longer be evaluated with certainty, but
with some probability, which is not sufﬁcient in critical missions ( e.g.if a task in a component is hard real-
time (HRT) , its schedulability must be veriﬁed with certainty). Finally, the literature on formal veriﬁcation of
robotics ignores MEC and operating system (OS) constraints, which restricts the results validity (Sect. 10).
Likewise, the applicability of schedulability analysis to robotic systems is limited. First, its theoretical
results are hardly generalizable to robotic tasks because the latter models are much more complex than the
task models used in the real-time systems literature (Sect. 2). Second, schedulability analysis leaves other
important properties such as behavioral properties unattended. The core of this proposition is to develop
an approach that combines the advantages of both formal veriﬁcation and schedulability analysis for a
rigorous veriﬁcation of real-time robots.
Proposition 2: Adapting real-time algorithms to robotic frameworks
Typically, tasks in a real-time robotic application are dependent on each other, where the dependency
stems from their need to perform computations and exchange data, and thus access the MEC’s
resources concurrently. The way the exclusive access to resources is handled, i.e.the real-time locking
protocol (Brandenburg, 2019) (the algorithm used to lock andunlock the MEC’s resources3when accessed
concurrently by real-time tasks), has a direct effect on schedulability and therefore real-time performance
(more in Sections 2 through 9). Mainstream robotic frameworks lack predictable (bounded blocking) and
efﬁcient (low-overhead) locking protocols (Sect. 2, Sect. 10). In other words, there is an urgent need to
2https://docs.ros.org/en/rolling/Roadmap.html
3“Resources” here, and throughout this paper, relate to memory and possible input/output devices and not to processor cores, the concurrency over which is
handled through scheduling algorithms.
3

--- Page 5 ---
Foughali et al. Formal Veriﬁcation of Real-Time Autonomous Robots
use a real-time locking algorithm that is (1) efﬁcient, (2) predictable and (3) suitable for robotics. Such
suitability refers to, inter alia , managing resources in a ﬁne-grained ,multi-resource ,read/write fashion
with possible mixed read-write requests (Sect. 6.2). State-of-the-art ﬁne-grained multi-resource protocols
(from outside the robotic community) are promising candidates, yet none satisﬁes all three requirements
above. In particular, DGL, the multi-resource version of the real-time nesting locking protocol (RNLP)
family (Ward and Anderson, 2012, 2013, 2014; Ward, 2016), suffers from efﬁciency drawbacks and does
not support mixed read-write requests, whereas MRLock (Zhang et al., 2013) shows degraded predictability
in corner cases (Sect. 6.3). The core of this proposition is to beneﬁt from the advantages of DGL and
MRLock in order to propose a new implementation of a predictable-and-efﬁcient locking protocol that is
suitable for real-time robots.
1.3 Contributions
From the analysis and observations made in Sect. 1.2 above, we establish a dependency between
Propositions 1 and 2. Indeed, a predictable, efﬁcient, and suitable locking protocol (Proposition 2) has, due
to its direct effect on real-time performance, a direct consequence on Proposition 1 ( e.g.a protocol with
lower overheads and lower blocking bounds may lead to better schedulability, more in Sections 8 and 9).
Therefore, we depict our ﬁrst contribution as an overall veriﬁcation approach that remedies the problems
discussed under Proposition 1. Then, we explain our second contribution as a solution to the problems
discussed under Proposition 2, and show how we integrate such solution in the overall veriﬁcation approach
in order to obtain better veriﬁcation results (essentially better schedulability and tighter blocking bounds).
Our ﬁrst contribution is the two-step veriﬁcation approach presented in Foughali (2020), of which the
current paper is an extension. We combine formal methods and schedulability analysis, where neither of the
two is sufﬁcient alone (Sect. 1.1). Our approach enables verifying both real-time and behavioral properties
while taking into account the actual speciﬁcities of the robotic platform (mainly the MEC’s number of cores
and scheduling policy). Furthermore, we provide a high level of automation, which makes our approach
suitable for robotic programmers with no particular knowledge in formal methods or schedulability analysis.
Step one focuses on guaranteeing schedulability with certainty. We develop a schedulability test for HRT
robotic tasks, which belong to a (mixed-)critical application, under a ﬁxed-priority (FP) preemptive policy
and where resource sharing is handled using the global real-time locking protocol MSRP (Gai et al., 2001).
If the original application, or a modiﬁed version achievable by e.g.modifying tasks deadlines, together
with the MEC’s number of cores satisfy this test, then schedulability of HRT tasks is guaranteed. This
will be the basis of step two, where we verify, up to a high probability, other important properties less
crucial than schedulability of HRT tasks. Such veriﬁcation is done with SMC on formal models that we
automatically generate from the robotic application, the number of cores and the FP scheduler (altogether
proven to satisfy schedulability for HRT tasks in step one). The approach is applied to a real autonomous
drone system, developed using the robotic framework GenoM3, and the veriﬁcation in step two is carried
out using the formal framework UPPAAL-SMC (David et al., 2015).
Our second contribution boils down to LLAB, a lock-less array-based implementation of DGL, and
R/W LLAB, its task-fair multi-resource reader-writer variant, as new asymptotically optimal and efﬁcient
real-time locking implementations that are suitable for robotics. We conduct a set of experiments on
different platforms to show how the LLAB (resp. R/W LLAB) implementations have lower overheads than
both DGL and MRLock while guaranteeing the same (resp. providing better) blocking bounds than DGL.
Finally, we reiterate the two-step veriﬁcation approach on the same drone system where we replace global
MSRP with R/W LLAB, and show how the new veriﬁcation results conﬁrm a better schedulability and
tighter blocking bounds in the veriﬁed real-time robot.
4

--- Page 6 ---
Foughali et al. Formal Veriﬁcation of Real-Time Autonomous Robots
1.4 Outline
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Sect. 2, we provide background on real-time robots
and exemplify through presenting GenoM3 and an autonomous drone case study. Then, we present our
ﬁrst contribution in Sections 3 through 5. In Sect. 3, we give examples of crucial properties in robotics
and analyze the problems preventing their veriﬁcation with formal methods or schedulability analysis
independently. In Sect. 4, we detail our veriﬁcation approach, where resource sharing is handled using
the global MSRP protocol. Sect. 5 shows and discusses the results of applying our veriﬁcation approach
to the drone case study. Afterwards, we present our second contribution in Sections 6 through 9. In
Sect. 6, we rely on the background given in Sect. 2 to show the limitations of the current locking choices in
robotic frameworks and derive accordingly a set of requirements w.r.t. to the real-time locking protocol
needed in robotics. Then, we show why new implementations of algorithms like DGL may fulﬁll such
requirements while performing better than global MSRP. In Sect. 7, we present our LLAB implementation
and its reader-writer variant R/W LLAB. Section 8 experimentally evaluates LLAB and R/W LLAB and
compares their performance to that of other real-time locking protocols including DGL. We reiterate
afterwards the veriﬁcation process on the same drone case study on new models integrating R/W LLAB
and formally show the gains in schedulability and blocking bounds (Sect. 9). Finally, we compare our work
to the state-of-the-art in Sect. 10 and conclude with possible directions of future work (Sect. 11).
This paper is an extension of the RTCSA 2020 publication “A Two-Step Hybrid Approach for Verifying
Real-time Robotic Systems” (Foughali, 2020). In particular, the second contribution and its integration in
the veriﬁcation process (Sections 6 through 9) are new material.
2 BACKGROUND
Robotic software is typically developed using dedicated component-based frameworks (Kortenkamp and
Simmons, 2008). Each framework is coupled with a middleware (Elkady and Sobh, 2012), in charge
of low-level primitives of e.g.communicating with the OS. Though ROS (Quigley et al., 2009), the
most popular robotic framework today (using its own middleware, called ROS-Com) is unsuitable for
real-time robots4, a number of frameworks provide “real-time support” such as OROCOS (Bruyninckx,
2001), MAUVE (Gobillot et al., 2019) and GenoM3 (Mallet et al., 2010). Such support is provided
through middleware where, contrary to ROS-Com, some real-time aspects are considered and analyzed:
the OROCOS-RTT middleware (Soetens and Bruyninckx, 2005) for both MAUVE and OROCOS and the
PocoLibs5middleware for GenoM36. In the remainder of this paper, we omit the term “middleware” to
alleviate writing and reading alike, and refer to the couple framework/middleware simply using the name
of the framework and the term “framework”, that will thus include both the framework and its proper
middleware. For instance, OROCOS will refer to the OROCOS framework using the OROCOS-RTT
middleware, whereas GenoM3 refers to the GenoM3 framework using the PocoLibs middleware.
In this paper, all our models, analysis and results are carried out on GenoM3 speciﬁcations. This is due
to the main advantage of GenoM3 having automatic translations toward formal veriﬁcation frameworks
(e.g.to Fiacre/TINA (Foughali, 2017) and UPPAAL-SMC (Foughali et al., 2019b)) the soundness of
which is mathematically proven (Foughali et al., 2019b), and that GenoM3 was the basis of our work
in Foughali (2020) of which the present article is an extension. We will still point out the similarities
4A number of references are provided in Sect. 1 where this claim was initially made. Following a consensus in both the robotic and real-time systems
communities, this claim is the initial motivation of other articles such as (Saito et al., 2018), referred to in Sect. 10.
5https://www.openrobots.org/wiki/pocolibs
6Actually, both MAUVE and GenoM3 support also the ROS-Com middleware, but recommend using OROCOS-RTT and PocoLibs, respectively, for real-time
applications.
5

--- Page 7 ---
Foughali et al. Formal Veriﬁcation of Real-Time Autonomous Robots
PortsPeriodic Tasks
CodelsIDSread/writeread/write
optitrackmikrokopternhfcpom
Execution tasks:publish 4msServices:InitRead…Execution tasks:control 1msServices:InitServoStop…Execution tasks:main 1mscomm 1msServices:Connect    Monitor    …           IMUMocapPoseCmdExecution tasks:io 1msﬁlter 1msServices:AddMeasure…maneuver
VelocityGoal
HW (drone sensors/actuators)HW (Optitrack motion capture sensor)Execution tasks:exec 5msplan 5msServices:GoToTakeO!…
services
Figure 1. A drone example showing some services of the quadcopter case study (right) and a generic
GenoM3 component (left).
between GenoM3 and the other real-time-oriented robotic frameworks throughout this section, and discuss
more their common limitations and how our contributions may apply to any of them in Sect. 10.
2.1 Robotic Software Speciﬁcities
We brieﬂy present robotic software speciﬁties using GenoM3 and a quadcopter case study.
A robotic software, which we call a system , is made of communicating components (Sect. 1.1). To account
for timing constraints, a component encapsulates periodic tasks , in charge of its complex algorithms. The
latter are organized within services . Because services are heavy and share resources, they are broken into
small pieces of code , each attached to a state in a Finite-State Machine (FSM) , hence the popularity of
FSMs in robotics. Thus, there are four “levels” in a system (from the lowest to the highest): pieces of code,
services (FSMs), tasks, and components.
Though not unanimous in robotics, the above organization is used by most real-time-oriented robotic
frameworks with subtle differences ( e.g.while MAUVE and OROCOS confound components with tasks,
i.e.a component is a task, GenoM3 preserves both levels). Note that, since there is no standard terminology
for most levels, the one we use is that of GenoM3.
We provide a generic informal description of GenoM3 with a focus on concurrency and real-time aspects.
A more formal example using timed-automata is given in Sect. 4.1. Note that this description is simpliﬁed
for readability and to remain in the scope of this paper ( e.g.control tasks andaperiodic tasks are excluded).
The organization of a component is shown in Fig. 1 (left), where we can see the three component “levels”
described above. Pieces of code are called codels . Each codel, attached to a state of a service FSM, has a
Worst Case Execution Time WCET. By abuse of terminology, FSM states are simply called codels. Each
taskt, featuring a period, is in charge of a set of services St. We say that each service s2Stisaservice of
t, andtisthetask ofs(scannot belong to any St0with t06=t). To perform their computations, codels
share the Internal Data Structure (IDS) of the component. Finally, ports are used to communicate with
other components, and are thus accessible by the codels in all components that use them.
Codels are thus critical sections that usually have short execution times (see the drone example in
Sect. 2.2). The execution of a codel is subject to a prior locking of a set of resources (multiple resources),
6

--- Page 8 ---
Foughali et al. Formal Veriﬁcation of Real-Time Autonomous Robots
each resource being an IDS fragment or a port. A resource may be locked in shared (read-only) or exclusive
(write) mode.
2.1.1 Behavior
We brieﬂy explain how a component evolves in a top-down fashion (from tasks to codels), following the
scheduler-agnostic semantics developed in Foughali et al. (2019b).
The component is piloted by an external client thatrequests services. Each task t, at each period, executes
only the services previously requested by the client (among services in St) sequentially. When a service
ﬁnishes executing, the task informs the client by sending a report . Communication between clients and
tasks is abstracted in the rest of this paper for readability and simplicity.
Each service FSM has at least two codels: start (at which the ﬁrst execution begins) and ether (the
termination point). A service execution ends when either (i) codel ether is reached (service is terminated)
or (ii) another codel cis reached after taking a pause transition ,i.e.a transition labeled pause (see the
abstract FSM in Fig. 1 (left)), we say then the service is paused and refer to cas apause codel . In the latter
case, the service is resumed, at the next period of its task, starting from c.
2.1.2 Concurrency
Tasks (in a system), each of which executes its requested services sequentially (see previous paragraph),
are run as parallel threads (assuming enough cores are available). To maximize parallelism, access to
shared resources is handled at the codels level: resources (ports or ﬁelds of the IDS) that a codel needs
for its execution are statically deﬁned, so two codels in conﬂict (using at least a same port or a same
IDS fragment) may not execute in parallel (simultaneous readings are allowed). Thus, while executing its
requested services, a task needs to busy-wait ( spin) when one of such services reaches a codel in conﬂict
with another codel, in another service being executed by another task concurrently. Following this low-level
concurrency model, a codel may be either thread safe (TS) (not in conﬂict with any codel) or thread unsafe
(TU) (otherwise). Because of ports sharing, codels in conﬂict may belong to different components (example
in Sect. 4.1).
2.1.3 Speciﬁcation & Templates
While we content with graphical illustrations of GenoM3 systems, the latter are actually speciﬁed
textually. Each component is written in a dotgen (.gen) ﬁle, in which tasks, services, and codels are
speciﬁed. A system may be then built by #-including the dotgens of the different components in another
dotgen.
Templates transform dotgen speciﬁcations into Tool Command Language (Tcl) structures for automatic
generation purposes. The robotic programmer can access all information in the dotgen ( e.g.tasks periods,
FSM and codels WCET), manipulate them and generate a text ﬁle in any format accordingly. We have used
this mechanism in previous work to automatically generate formal models (Foughali, 2018). In Sect. 4, we
give examples of templates developed to automatize the two-step approach presented in this paper.
2.2 Case Study
To validate our approach, we use the Quadcopter case study from LAAS-CNRS. Fig. 1 (right) shows
its GenoM3 organization in which some names are modiﬁed for simplicity. The system contains ﬁve
components collaborating to achieve autonomous aerial navigation. We give a high-level description (in
terms of components and ports) on how these components collaborate (the interested reader may refer
to Foughali (2017) for more details on each component).
Component MIKROKOPTER processes data from the Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU) and the propellers
7

--- Page 9 ---
Foughali et al. Formal Veriﬁcation of Real-Time Autonomous Robots
sensors and uses them to write the current IMU and velocity to ports IMU andVelocity , respectively.
Component OPTITRACK processes data from the Optitrack motion capture system and writes it to
port Mocap . Component POM reads the IMU and captured position from, respectively, ports IMU
(MIKROKOPTER ) and Mocap (OPTITRACK ), to which it applies an Unscented Kalman Filter UKF to
compute the estimated position of the drone that it writes to port Pose . Such position is fed to (i) MANEUVER ,
which uses it to compute an intermediary goal position that it writes to port Goal , and to (ii) NHFC , which
uses it, together with the current Velocity (from MIKROKOPTER ), to compute and update, in port Cmd , the
velocity to reach the intermediary goal position (from Goal inMANEUVER ). Finally, the perception-action
loop closes as MIKROKOPTER reads the updated velocity in Cmd (NHFC ) and applies it to the drone
propellers.
In the Quadcopter case study, tasks run at high frequencies (most at 1 kHz), and critical sections, typically
short (less than 50 s), share more than 30 resources (IDS fragments and ports). Hardware-wise, the drone
is controlled by an ODROID-XU3 MEC, featuring an ARM-based quad-core CPU. This low number of
cores is dictated by the SWaP considerations as explained in Sect. 1.1.
3 THE VERIFICATION CHALLENGE
In this section, we explain the importance of rigorous veriﬁcation of real-time robots and detail its
challenges using the drone example presented in Sect. 2.2.
If the drone software fails, the drone may crash, inducing economic costs and/or human injuries. We give
examples of crucial properties that must be veriﬁed to avoid such failure, and explain why their veriﬁcation
is particularly challenging.
3.1 Properties of Interest
The drone system has three critical components: MIKROKOPTER ,NHFC and POM. That is, tasks in these
components are HRT: each must always ﬁnish executing within its period, otherwise the drone may crash.
It follows that the schedulability property must be proven always true for these tasks, for all possible
scenarios. In the remaining components (less critical), tasks are allowed to miss their deadlines. However,
it is still important to verify that they are e.g.exempt of starvation, that is being, at some point, delayed
forever by critical tasks monopolizing resources. For e.g.tasks in MANEUVER , such starvation would make
the drone hover forever without fulﬁlling its mission (as it may not navigate to a ﬁnal goal position). These
tasks must thus not starve, but also, ideally, respect their deadlines for a timely fulﬁllment of the mission.
3.2 Difﬁculties
Now, in order to verify these properties, using model checking (or SMC) or schedulability analysis
independently proved insufﬁcient in robotics in general and on this drone system in particular.
3.2.1 With model checking / SMC
Model checking does generally not scale with complex robotic applications. For instance, we show
in Foughali et al. (2019b) that, although it performs well on the stationary ﬂight application (i.e.component
MANEUVER is excluded), model checking with state-of-the-art tools fails to scale on the navigation
application involving all the ﬁve components (Fig. 1), with eight tasks and over 20 services broken into
more than 80 codels. In the same work (Foughali et al., 2019b), we use SMC to verify properties up to a
high probability. Though SMC provides better guarantees than scenario-based testing, it is not suitable for
the schedulability property of HRT tasks which must be proven with certainty.
Another problem of model checking (and generally formal veriﬁcation) in robotics is that extending
8

--- Page 10 ---
Foughali et al. Formal Veriﬁcation of Real-Time Autonomous Robots
formal models with scheduling algorithms usually penalizes their scalability because of (i) preemption
and/or (ii) the necessity to create large models to handle schedulers (Foughali and Hladik, 2020). For the
drone navigation application, the integration of schedulers in formal models (which already do not scale as
explained above) produces new formal models that still do not scale, even when preemption is not allowed.
3.2.2 With schedulability analysis
From a real-time analysis point of view, we focus on three levels in GenoM3 (and generally robotic)
systems: the tasks level, the services level and the codels level (component are abstracted as tasks map to
cores). Robotic tasks models are thus more complex than those usually considered in real-time analysis: a
robotic task executes, at each period, a sequence of services each comprising a sequence of codels with
possible spinning and/or preemption between them, rather than one job whose WCET is known. A particular
problem is the computation of the WCET of tasks, which is practically intractable. Indeed, besides the fact
that a TU codel (Sect. 2.1.2) may remain inﬁnitely blocked waiting for resources (robotic frameworks do
not guarantee the absence of starvation), the sequence of codels to execute in services by a task may differ
from a period to another depending on e.g.which services are requested (Sect. 2.1.1). Another problem is,
even if such sequences WCET are somehow obtained, theoretical results of schedulability analysis in the
literature are still unusable because the preemption model in robotics is also different (more in Sect. 4.1).
Finally, schedulability analysis provides no guarantees on other properties excluding schedulability.
4 A TWO-STEP HYBRID APPROACH
Our approach combines both formal veriﬁcation, by means of SMC, and schedulability analysis to achieve
scalable rigorous veriﬁcation of crucial properties in robotics. We divide properties into two types: Type
Icovers properties that must be veriﬁed with certainty (schedulability of all HRT tasks), while Type II
comprises properties that may be veriﬁed with a high probability ( e.g.absence of starvation in less critical
tasks). On that basis, the key idea is the following. Since model checking does not scale, then we may use
SMC for Type II properties, but only once properties of Type I are veriﬁed with certainty. Thus, we ﬁrst
check whether we can guarantee properties of Type I using schedulability analysis. This is the ﬁrst step of
our approach, which takes into account the actual number of cores on the MEC and a scheduling policy
(Sect. 4.1). If step one is conclusive, an UPPAAL-SMC model of the considered application, number of
cores and scheduler (already proven to satisfy properties of Type I in step one) is generated. On such formal
model, we verify by means of SMC properties of Type II , which concludes the second step of our approach
(Sect. 4.2).
4.1 Step One: Schedulability Analysis
Our approach is based on Response Time Analysis (RTA). First, we compute the tasks’ WCETs, taking
into account delays caused by mutual exclusion over resources (Sect. 4.1.1). Then, we compute the tasks’
Worst Case Response times (WCRT) considering the concurrency over cores (Sect. 4.1.2).
4.1.1 Computing Tasks WCET
In the following, we explain more where the difﬁculty of computing task WCET (Sect. 3.2) comes
from, using the UPPAAL formal model of the GenoM3 task main (component MIKROKOPTER ) of the
drone (Fig. 1) shown in Fig. 2. This model, automatically generated, is proven correct w.r.t. GenoM3
semantics (Foughali et al., 2019a,b). The model is simpliﬁed for readability purposes.
Each timed automaton (TA) in UPPAAL, made of locations andedges connecting them, and possibly
having a clockx, is called a process . Time invariants (in purple) may be associated with locations, and
edges may have guards (in green) and operations (in blue). Processes are arranged to ﬁt with the “layers”
9

--- Page 11 ---
Foughali et al. Formal Veriﬁcation of Real-Time Autonomous Robots
Task main (component mikrokopter)managertimer
servicesInit
Applyurgency
Figure 2. Simpliﬁed UPPAAL model of task main in component MIKROKOPTER . Process Urgency does
not belong to any component and is added to enforce urgencies, i.e.prevent unnecessary lazy waits (the
receiver edge “exe?” is always ready).
view given in Sect. 2.1: the task layer, composed of processes timer andmanager , the services layer, where
each underlying GenoM3 service FSM is mapped to an UPPAAL process, and the codels layer, where
codels are locations in services processes. Fig. 2 shows that task main has two services: InitandApply .
Shared variables and functions are used by processes to communicate. Array tabtholds the names and
“statuses” of all services of task t. Each of its cells contains two ﬁelds: n, a service name, and st, the
10

--- Page 12 ---
Foughali et al. Formal Veriﬁcation of Real-Time Autonomous Robots
service status that may be either R(requested by a client) or V(for “V oid”, otherwise). The timer of t
gives at exactly each period a signal, through variable tick t, to the manager to start execution, by taking
the edge start!manage . The operation of such edge searches, through function next(), for the index
of the next requested service in tabt(having status R) starting at index it(initially 0) and stores the
result in it(the size of tabtif such service does not exist). At location manage , the manager executes the
requested services sequentially: variables lock tandturn tare used to pass the control to the next service
to execute (computed previously through function next()). When such service ﬁnishes execution, either by
terminating7(e.g.edge end exec!ether in service Apply ) or pausing ( e.g.edge run exec!run pause
in service Init), it computes the index of the next service to execute and gives the control back to the
manager. And so, the control passes back and forth between the manager and the requested services until
each of the latter has executed once (detected when next()hits the bottom of tabt), so the manager transits
back to start and awaits the next period.
Now, at the codels level, a codel cin a service sis represented either by one location c(if it is TS)
or two locations candcexec (TU, otherwise), plus a location cpause if such codel is targeted by a
pause transition in the underlying GenoM3 speciﬁcation. The WCET of cis represented with an invariant
xwcet[cst]on locationc(cexec ifcis TU), where wcet is an array of all codels WCET indexed with
unique identiﬁers. The array of Booleans mut is used to handle concurrency: it tracks the execution of TU
codels in the system. Therefore, guards on edges c!cexec ensurecdoes not start executing unless no
codel in conﬂict with cis currently executing, witnessed by the falseness of the corresponding ﬁelds in mut.
For instance, codel run of service Apply is in conﬂict with codel recv (in service Connect , executed by
the other task comm inMIKROKOPTER ), and codel start (in service servo of task control in component
NHFC ), which explains the guard on the edge run!run exec in process Apply . If such guard is true,
codel run starts executing by taking run!run exec through which it turns its own ﬁeld in mut to true
to prevent, in turn, codels in conﬂict with it to execute.
This example shows the complexity of GenoM3 (and generally robotic) tasks. From a real-time analysis
perspective, we identify two problems. First, the WCET of a sequence of codels (which a task executes)
is possibly inﬁnite, because we do not know beforehand how long a TU codel needs to wait to secure
the resources it needs (the blocking time). Second, even if we bound such blocking time, it is practically
infeasible to compute by hand the WCETs of all possible sequences: for instance, summing the WCETs of
all codels in all services in a task (assuming we bound and include blocking bounds in TU codels WCETs)
would be a naive solution (such sum would be a coarse overapproximation that will likely prevent ﬁnding
a feasible schedule). We propose a solution for both problems by, respectively (i) an implementation to
bound blocking times for TU codels and (ii) an algorithm to compute the WCET of a task by traversing all
possible codels sequences. We explain how the solution can be automated.
4.1.1.1 Bounding TU Codels WCET
We propose an implementation to enable computing a blocking bound Bc(on the time needed to acquire
resources, i.e.IDS or ports) of any TU codel c. Then, we get the actual WCET of cby summing its WCET
(from the GenoM3 speciﬁcation) with Bc.
The implementation is inspired from multiprocessor resource-sharing protocols. Brandenburg (2011)
reviewed a number of such protocols, mainly categorized into spin-based (busy-waiting ) and suspension-
based , and pointed out that the former are easier to implement and perform better than the latter when
durations of critical sections are short. As we explained in Sect. 2, FSM in robotics are designed to reduce
7In this case, there is an additional operation: Vis assigned to the service status in tab tto preventtfrom executing it again at its next period.
11

--- Page 13 ---
Foughali et al. Formal Veriﬁcation of Real-Time Autonomous Robots
Listing 1. Generating largest WCET of TU codels per task.
1<’s e t wcets max [ l i s t ] ’>
2<’foreach comp [ d o t g e n components ] f’>
3<’ foreach tp r i m e [ $comp t a s k s ] f’>
4<’ i ff$ tp r i m e == $ tg f c o n t i n u eg
5<’ s e t max wcet 0 ’ >
6<’ foreach s [ $ t p r i m e s e r v i c e s ] f’>
7<’ foreach c [ $s c o d e l s ] f’>
8<’ i ff[l l e n g t h [ $c mutex ] ] && ( [ $c wcet ] >$max wcet )g f’>
9<’ s e t max wcet [ $c wcet ] g’>
10<’g’>
11<’g’>
12<’ lappend wcets max $max wcet ’ >
13<’g’>
14<’g’>The l i s t i s<” [ l r e v e r s e [ l s o r t wcets max ] ] ” >
the times of locking shared resources, which makes spin-based protocols suitable to our case. Actually, the
previous reasoning ﬁts with the reality of spinlocks being widely used in robotics ( e.g.ROS and GenoM3
systems). At ﬁrst, we use the global MSRP protocol (Gai et al., 2003). In a nutshell, a TU codel cappends
itself to a FIFO queue and its thread is spinlocked until cgets access to shared resource, and spinlocked
threads are non preemptible. TS codels are not concerned as they are in conﬂict with no other codel in
the system (Sect. 2.1.2). The direct disadvantage of this approach is that all TU codels compete for the
shared resources as a whole, which reduces the overall parallelism of the system (it is possible for a TU
codel cto be blocked by another TU codel c’in the FIFO queue even though candc’are not in mutual
conﬂict). In Sect. 9, we will use our new ﬁne-grained algorithm R/W LLAB (which we devise and evaluate
in Sections 6 through 8) which efﬁciently and predictably overcome this disadvantage.
Let us compute Bcof a TU codel cin a service sin a taskt. We assume there are ntasks andmcores
(m<n). In worst case scenarios, the thread trying to execute cspins after already m1threads are in
the spinlock FIFO queue (for accessing shared resources). Since each thread corresponds to a GenoM3
task that (i) is sequential and (ii) spins only when trying to execute a TU codel, the ﬁrst m1entries of
the FIFO are occupied by TU codels each in a distinct GenoM3 task, different than t. In the worst case,
each t0of them1tasks already spinlocked is trying to execute TU codel c’with the largest WCET
among the TU codels of all services in t0. Thus,Bcis upper-bounded by the sum of the WCET of codels
c’. To get that sum, we proceed as follows. (1) For each task t06=t, we ﬁnd, within all its services, the
largest WCET of all TU codels. (2) We sort, in a decreasing order, the values found in (1). (3) Bcis equal
to the sum of the ﬁrst m1values sorted in (2).
Once Bccomputed, we sum it with WCET c(the WCET of codel cgiven in the GenoM3 speciﬁcation)
to get the actual WCET of c(including the blocking bound). To make codels actual WCETs computations
accessible to robotic programmers, we make use of the template mechanism (Sect. 2.1.3). We give in
Listing 1 an example that performs steps (1) and (2) of the algorithm above, then writes (to a ﬁle) the
list output by (2) for any TU codel in any service in task t. The template generator evaluates everything
enclosed in <’ ’>(resp.<” ”>) in Tcl without output (resp. and outputs the result), and outputs the
rest as is. Line 4 excludes task t, and line 8 conditions considering codel conly when it is TU through the
non-emptiness of the ﬁeld [$c mutex ], a ready-to-use list containing all codels in conﬂict with c. The last
line writes to a ﬁle the list after sorting it in a decreasing order.
Thus, at the end of these computations, we have the actual WCET of all codels, which we call simply
12

--- Page 14 ---
Foughali et al. Formal Veriﬁcation of Real-Time Autonomous Robots
Figure 3. Modiﬁed process of Apply for WCET task computation.
WCET in the remainder of this section and throughout the following section with the veriﬁcation results
(that is, the WCET provided by GenoM3 if cis TS, summed with Bcifcis TU). Our approach to compute
Bcis generic, and may thus be pessimistic in some cases. For instance, if the scheduler is partitioned, some
of them1largest elements of wcets max (Listing 1) may belong to tasks allocated to the same core as
t, and thusBcis overestimated. However, this generecity brings a valuable advantage. Indeed, since the
computation is afﬁnity-independent, the roboticist performs this step only once and, if some HRT tasks do
not pass the schedulability test (Sect. 4.1.2), may try to ﬁnd a better afﬁnity by reallocating tasks based on
the timing constraints already computed (the afﬁnity does not affect such constraints). This is explained
further in Sect. 5.
4.1.1.2 Deducing Tasks WCET
We call each possible (full) codel sequence executed by task tahyperjob . The largest WCET of all
hyperjobs in tis then simply the WCET of t.
Therefore, to compute the WCET of t, we proceed as follows. (1) For each service sin taskt, we sum the
WCETs of codels involved in each possible path (starting either at codel start or some pause codel, and
ending either at ether or some pause codel). (2) We ﬁnd, for each s, the value of the largest among the
sums computed in (1). (3) We sum the values found in (2). (4) we repeat (1), (2), (3) for all tasks in the
GenoM3 system. Thus, this algorithm will give the maximum time to execute the longest possible path in
all services in t, which corresponds to the largest WCET of all possible hyperjobs in t(i.e.the WCET of t).
The above algorithm being classical in model checking, the idea is to beneﬁt from the already existing
UPPAAL template (Foughali et al., 2019b) to achieve it. Yet, we know that the overall UPPAAL model of
this application does not scale. The good news is, however, we do not need to consider the system as a
whole: since WCETs are now known for all codels, we may adapt services processes of task tto allow
computing the maximum time of their possible paths (step (1) above) without considering the rest of the
system.
First, locations cexec are no longer needed: location cis enough, the invariant bound of which is the
WCET of codel c(Sect. 4.1.1.1). That being done, interactions of each service with services outside tcease
to exist (since bounds Bcare now included in TU codels WCET, all guards and operations involving the
mut array are removed). Then, we (i) make all ether andcpause locations urgent (time cannot progress
at them) and add, to each service process of t, a clockyreset to 0at all edges leaving ether orcpause
locations. This way, ytracks the time of each possible path from location start (or any cpause location)
to location ether (or any cpause location). We have thus what we need for step (1) of the algorithm above,
13

--- Page 15 ---
Foughali et al. Formal Veriﬁcation of Real-Time Autonomous Robots
hyperjobPreemption pointscodel c …codel c’ 
Figure 4. Hyperjob model.
and may remove all the remaining non-clock guards and operations in the services of t. It follows that there
are no more interactions between any service process in tand the rest of the system, which means we can
obtain the WCET for each possible path in each service separately.
Fig. 3 shows the result of these changes to the UPPAAL process of service Apply (Fig. 2). Now, all we
need to do is ask UPPAAL for the maximum value of clock yat location ether and each location cpause
using the UPPAAL query pattern supfp:lg:p:y(withpbeing the process name and lthe location name),
store the results and repeat the operation for each service in task t, which corresponds to step (1) of the
algorithm above. Then, we perform (2) and (3), then repeat the whole process for all other tasks (step (4))
to get the WCET of all tasks in the GenoM3 system.
4.1.2 Analysis
Once the tasks’ WCETs are computed, we compute their WCRT for RTAs analysis. We recall that
schedulability tests from the literature are not applicable to robotic tasks even when they take memory-
sharing into account. For instance, standard task and scheduling models assume a task executes only
one job at each release. This means that, if we use available tests, we should treat each hyperjob in each
tasktas a regular job and, since such hyperjob is likely to include a TU codel, make it non preemptible
(Sect. 4.1.1.1). Consequently, we will most likely end up with a set of non-preemptible tasks, which renders
preemptive scheduling useless.
Thus, we need to perform schedulability analysis based on the model in Fig. 4: each hyperjob may be
preempted at the end of each codel. The reason for this is rather straightforward: in robotics, elementary
pieces of code (codels in GenoM3) are designed by roboticists as the smallest pieces (of the algorithm
they belong to) that must be performed with no intermediary perturbations. TU codels present another
feature that consolidates the rationale of codels non-interruptibility: their interruption may compromise
their memory-dependent computations.
4.1.2.1 Scheduling Assumptions
We use a partitioned ﬁxed-priority FP scheduler. There are two main reasons. First, partitioned FP is
very popular in domains related to robotics, such as automotive systems ( e.g.in AUTOSAR (Wieder and
Brandenburg, 2013)), since it removes the cost of task migration. Second, global schedulers are known to
perform poorly compared to partitioned ones, even though this might result from over-pessimism of tests
in global approaches (Gracioli et al., 2013).
For the sake of analysis, we introduce a ﬁrst real-time model on which we will carry out schedulability
analysis. The task set of the robotic system is the union of HRT and less critical tasks =h[l. There
are two priorities: prh(rep. prl), the high (resp. low) priority, assigned to all tasks in h(resp.l). The
platform features mcores C1:::Cm(m <jj). Let Aibe the afﬁnity of core Ci, that is the set of
tasks allocated to it. Then, Ai=Ail[Aihwhere Ail=l\Ai(resp. Aih=h\Ai) is the set
of low (resp. high) priority tasks allocated to Ci. Since the algorithm is partitioned, each task is statically
allocated to only one core, that is 8i;j21::m;i6=j:Ai\Aj=;. The size of the queue of Ciis
equal to the cardinality of its afﬁnity jAij.
14

--- Page 16 ---
Foughali et al. Formal Veriﬁcation of Real-Time Autonomous Robots
Following the model in Fig. 4, a task is a set of hyperjobs t=fhj1:::hjjtjg. A hyperjob is an ordered set
of codels hj=fc1:::cjhjjg. If a codel cbelongs to a hyperjob in t, we may say simply that cbelongs to
t. When needed, we use the superscript (t) to denote that a hyperjob or a codel belongs to task t, and the
double subscript jkto denote that a codel cjbelongs to hyperjob hjk. Superscripts/subscripts are omitted
when unnecessary, unimportant or clear from the context.
This real-time model is deliberately speciﬁc to our approach, as it integrates the bounding of blocking
times performed in this step. Further in this paper (Sect. 6), we will introduce a generic real-time and
locking model for GenoM3 based on which we devise a new locking mechanism to replace MSRP.
4.1.2.2 Computing Tasks WCRT
At each period Pt, one (depending on the evolution of the system) of the hyperjobs in tis to be executed.
The WCRT of tdeﬁnes an upper bound on the time separating the moment ai, at which a hyperjob hji
is activated (arrives in a core queue), and the moment fi, at which it ﬁnishes its execution and frees
the core, that is WCRT t=max i21::jtj(fiai)(Eq. 1). Let ri2[ai;fi)be the moment hjiisreleased ,
that is a core is given to it and it starts to execute ( fiis excluded because hjicannot execute in a zero
time). By inserting riin Eq. 1 we get WCRT t=max i21::jtj(firi+riai)which we may upper bound
WCRT t(max i21::jtj(firi) +max i21::n(riai))(Ineq. 2). Now, we know that the left-hand operand
of the right-hand side of Ineq. 2 is the WCET of twhich we already computed in Sect. 4.1.1. We call
the remaining operand the Worst case Waiting Time WWT t=max i21::jtj(riai)(Eq. 3). Therefore
WCRT tWWT t+WCET t(Ineq. 4).
A hyperjob hjof a high-priority task tallocated to core Ci(t2Aih) worst position in the prioritized
queue ofCiis equal tojAihj. The worst waiting time of hjcorresponds to this very position (hyperjobs
of tasks in Aih, having the same priority prhast, are already in the queue, so hjhas to wait for them to
ﬁnish). Now, in this worst situation, the worst case is when the hyperjob at the head of the queue cannot
start immediately as a low-priority task hyperjob hj0is still not preempted (we recall that preemption
points are set at the end of each codel, Fig. 4). It follows that the worst waiting time for hjis equal to
the sum of the WCET of all jAihj1hyperjobs (each belonging to a task t02Aihnftg) in the queue
plus the WCET of the codel of hj0being currently executed. We maximize such worst waiting time for all
hyperjobs in tto get WWT t(see Eq. 3). To account for the waiting needed for high-priority hyperjobs, we
maximise the WCET of all hyperjobs in each task t02Aihnftgand sum them (1). Then, we add to the
value obtained in (1) the waiting for preemption by maximizing the WCET of codels in low-priority tasks
t002Ail(2). (1) is simply the sum of the WCET of tasks t02Aihnftgand in (2) we add the WCET of
the longest codel in tasks t002Ail, which gives us the following bound for any task tallocated to core Ci:
WWT tt02AihnftgWCET t0+maxt002Ail
l21::jt00j
k21::jhjt00
lj(WCETct00
kl) (Ineq: 5)
We sum WWT twith WCET tto upper-bound WCRT t(see Ineq. 4). Finally, we state the schedulability
test for HRT tasks8t2h:WCRT tPt(Ineq. 6).
While pessimistic, this test is sufﬁcient: if the maximum time a task tneeds from its activation to its end
is less than its deadline (period), then tis schedulable. We trade off optimism for sustainability : Burns and
Baruah (2008) show that RTA-based FP schedulability tests are sustainable in the sense that they remain
valid even if some tasks manage to execute in less than their WCET.
15

--- Page 17 ---
Foughali et al. Formal Veriﬁcation of Real-Time Autonomous Robots
Table 1. WCET of HRT tasks.
HRT task WCET (ms)
main 0.51
comm 0.47
io 0.68
ﬁlter 0.55
control 0.52
Table 2. Longest-codel WCET in low-priority tasks.
Task WCET of longest codel (ms)
publish 0.3
plan 0.4
exec 0.4
Table 3. Tasks periods.
Task Period (ms) Task Period (ms)
main 1 control 1
comm 1 publish 4
io 1 plan 5
ﬁlter 1 exec 5
4.2 Step Two: Formal Veriﬁcation
If all HRT tasks in the GenoM3 system pass the schedulability test in step one, we may verify other –less
critical– properties using SMC. We automatize the generation of UPPAAL-SMC models by extending the
template presented in Foughali et al. (2019b).
First, we make sure that the WCET computations, made with the help of UPPAAL (Sect. 4.1), still hold
in UPPAAL-SMC models. This is a simple proof. As shown in Foughali et al. (2019b), the only difference
between UPPAAL-SMC and UPPAAL models is at the level of services, where non-deterministic edges
may have custom probabilities. To give an example, let us get back to Fig. 2. In process Init, there are
two edges out of location run exec. In UPPAAL, these edges are equiprobable (chances to take one or the
other are equal). In UPPAAL-SMC, one may use custom probabilities (that sum to one) on such edges, a
mechanism which we exploited in Foughali et al. (2019b) to insert experiment-based probabilities. Now,
w.r.t. the computations made in Sect. 4.1, this difference has no impact since, for HRT tasks, we need to
explore all paths anyway, no matter how big or small is the probability to take each of them. Second, we
need to integrate the global MSRP protocol in the veriﬁed model and use the original WCETs of codels.
Third, we need to integrate the FP scheduler in the UPPAAL-SMC model and automatize it in the template.
For readability, the technical details on how (i) the UPPAAL-SMC model is extended with the FP
scheduler and (ii) the obtained formal model is automatized in a template are omitted in this paper, but the
interested reader may refer to (Foughali, 2020, Section III.B).
5 RESULTS
We apply our approach to verify important properties on the drone navigation under a partitioned FP policy
and the number of cores on the drone MEC (quad-core ODROID-XU3, Sect. 2.2).
16

--- Page 18 ---
Foughali et al. Formal Veriﬁcation of Real-Time Autonomous Robots
Table 4. Initial afﬁnity.
Core Afﬁnity
C1fmain;commg
C2fio;plang
C3flter;publishg
C4fcontrol;execg
Table 5. WCRT of HRT tasks considering the initial afﬁnity (Table 4).
HRT task WCRT (ms)
main 0.98
comm 0.98
io 1.08
ﬁlter 0.85
control 0.92
Table 6. New afﬁnity (by permuting tasks in blue in the initial afﬁnity in Table 4).
Core Afﬁnity
C1fmain;commg
C2fio;publishg
C3flter;plang
C4fcontrol;execg
5.1 Step One
We comply with the notation given in Sect. 4.1: m=4(number of cores), h=fmain;comm;io;lter;controlg
(the set of HRT, i.e.high-priority tasks, those of the critical components MIKROKOPTER ,POM and
NHFC ),l=fpublish;plan;execg(the set of low-priority tasks, those of components OPTITRACK and
MANEUVER ). Following the steps given in Sect. 4.1.1, we compute the actual WCET of all TU codels
in the system and update such WCET accordingly, then compute the WCET of the ﬁve HRT tasks in the
system (Table 1). For each of the remaining three tasks, we identify the codel having the largest WCET
(Table 2)8. We recall tasks periods in Table 3.
An issue that arises is how to allocate tasks to cores. It stems from the bin-packing problem, known to be
NP-hard. In this paper, the way we allocate tasks is inspired by the ﬁrst-ﬁt decreasing heuristic. We start by
allocatingmhigh-priority tasks (in h) to themcores, then repeat until all tasks in hare allocated. Then,
we do the same for low-priority tasks (thus allocation is by decreasing priority). The ﬁrst-ﬁt part is left to
after running the schedulability test on HRT tasks (if such test fails). This allocation is not exactly what
the original heuristic does, but in our case, it intuitively tends to reduce the WCRT of HRT tasks in the
application. Indeed, such WCRT increases with the number of HRT tasks allocated to the core (Ineq. 5),
and so allocating ﬁrst HRT tasks minimizes the maximum number of HRT tasks allocated to a core Ci,
upper-bounded by dh=me. The (decreasing) afﬁnity we start with is given in Table 4.
We are now ready for schedulability analysis: we apply Ineq. 5 (using the values from Table 1 and
Table 2) for each task tto upper bound WCRT t, then compare the latter with the period Ptfrom Table 3
(Ineq. 6). The results (Table 5), show that all HRT tasks pass the schedulability test except for task io,
whose WCRT is 80 s larger than its period.
8Note how codels’ WCETs in Table 2 are much larger than the general trend of codels’ WCETs being short, less than 50 s, Sect. 2.2. This is because WCETs
in Table 2 include the blocking bounds Bcas explained in Sect. 4.1.
17

--- Page 19 ---
Foughali et al. Formal Veriﬁcation of Real-Time Autonomous Robots
Table 7. WCRT of HRT tasks considering the new afﬁnity (Table 6).
HRT task WCRT (ms)
main 0.98
comm 0.98
io 0.98
ﬁlter 0.95
control 0.92
Table 8. Veriﬁcation results (step two).
prob t2
t xmax=4xmax=5xmax=6xmax=7
publish [0, 0.004] [0, 0.004] [0.996, 1] [0.996, 1]
plan [0, 0.004] [0, 0.004] [0.996, 1] [0.996, 1]
exec [0, 0.004] [0, 0.004] [0, 0.004] [0.996, 1]
At this point, we may try to change the afﬁnity without modifying the decreasing pattern (no more than
two HRT tasks per core). Here, the generecity of the approach in Sect. 4.1.1.1 allows us to reason only
using the timing constraints from Tables 1 and 2, which remain valid regardless of the chosen afﬁnity. We
notice that, by permuting the allocation of low-priority tasks publish andplan , all HRT tasks pass the
schedulability test (Table 6). This new afﬁnity guarantees schedulability for all HRT tasks in the system
(Table 7) and will be thus the basis of step two.
5.2 Step Two
We generate, from the afﬁnity in Table 6, the number of cores and the GenoM3 system, an UPPAAL-SMC
model. In the latter, schedulability for HRT tasks (Sect. 9.3), is guaranteed by construction (step one).
Now, using UPPAAL-SMC, we guarantee, up to a high probability, that low-priority tasks never starve,
a less critical, yet important property (Sect. 3.1). To do so, we reason as follows. We know that in any
task manager (Fig. 3), location manage denotes that a hyperjob is being executed. Thus, the absence of
starvation means that (i) location manage is reachable and (ii) whenever it is reached, location manage is
eventually left (back to location start ). (i) is a reachability property while (ii) is a leadsto (special type of
liveness) property which UPPAAL-SMC does not support. This is a limitation of the tool and not intrinsic
to SMC.
Fortunately, there is a simple workaround if we augment the manager model (Fig. 3) with a clock
xthat is reset to 0whenever any location is left. Thus, if the value of xis upper-bounded, then
manage (i) is reachable (otherwise xwould be unbounded at start orask) and (ii) eventually left
(otherwisexwould be unbounded at manage ), which corresponds to the same (i) and (ii) above. We
may thus transform the two-step reachability-leadsto property into a safety property as we query the
UPPAAL-SMC veriﬁer to estimate the probability of xbeing bounded by value xmax ,e.g.for task plan :
Pr[b]([]manager plan:xxmax)(withbbeing a time bound for SMC simulations). We call prob t
the probability of satisfying this property by a task t.
We set the statistical parameters to a high conﬁdence ( =0:02) and precision ( =0:002), which
means that the highest probability we can obtain for prob tis99:8%i.e.prob t2[0:996;1]with
a conﬁdence 100%=98%. For each task t, we set xmax toPtand raise it until such highest
probability is reached.
Table 8 gives the results for all low-priority tasks: each is starvation-free with a 99:8%probability as soon
18

--- Page 20 ---
Foughali et al. Formal Veriﬁcation of Real-Time Autonomous Robots
asxmax =7 ms. This means that, for any value smaller than 7 ms, some low-priority tasks have a very
low probability to complete given any execution scenario. For instance, as shown in Table 8, the probability
that task exec will always execute in less than xmax =6 ms is comprised between 0and4percent, a
value that increases signiﬁcantly to the maximum possible probability given the precision ( 99:8%2%)
whenxmax is increased to 7 ms. In sum, we have a high conﬁdence that the time separating the activation
and the end of execution of any low-priority task is upper-bounded by the value 7 ms.
UPPAAL-SMC takes up to 25 minutes to verify each property, a value that grows exponentially if we try
to tighten the precision further: with tending toward zero SMC tends toward classical model checking
and thus scalability is threatened as we noticed in Foughali et al. (2019b).
5.3 Discussion
We prove, with certainty, the schedulability for all HRT tasks in the application, while proposing a
scheduling policy on the drone platform. Also, we prove with a high probability that low-priority tasks
never starve for cores. Thus, considering the real robotic platform and the afﬁnity and scheduling algorithm
we propose, the GenoM3 system of the drone guarantees the latter does not crash because HRT constraints
are not met, and is highly likely to fulﬁll its navigation missions (Sect. 3.1).
However, schedulability tests of HRT tasks barely pass (the WCRT of each task is quite close to its
deadline, Table 7). This means that, in reality, tasks may still miss their deadlines due to e.g.the overhead
induced by the global MSRP implementation. Since the overheads of locking protocols are hard to quantify
and upper-bound in the general case, it would be better if tasks WCRT were signiﬁcantly smaller than
their respective deadlines. Also, though a lower priority task missing its deadline is not safety critical ( i.e.
will not lead to a crash), it is still mission critical (will likely cause a larger time for the drone to fulﬁll a
navigation mission). These results may be enhanced by replacing global MSRP with a ﬁne-grained locking
protocol to tighten the blocking bounds (due to spinning for resources) and improve schedulability, as we
will see in the rest of this paper.
6 SETTING THE REQUIREMENTS FOR REAL-TIME LOCKING IN ROBOTICS
As we have explained in Sections 2 and 4, the locking model used in GenoM3 is not exempt of starvation
and not necessarily fair, which makes it unpredictable . In Sections 4 and 5, we proposed to use a predictable
(fair and starvation-free) global locking protocol, namely global MSRP. As we explained in the same
sections, global MSRP introduces larger blocking bounds because all resources are locked at once, making
TU codels wait for other TU codels that do not necessarily use the same set of resources. What we need is
aﬁne-grained real-time locking protocol that is predictable, suitable for robotics and, ideally, efﬁcient (low
overheads). Before we set more precisely the requirements for such needed protocol, we ﬁrst formalize a
generic real-time model for GenoM3 systems (based on the one given in Sect. 4) including a formalization
of the locking model of GenoM3 explained informally in Sect. 2.
6.1 Real-Time Model
From a real-time point of view, a GenoM3 system is made of a set of dependent tasks, a set of shared
resources, and a set of cores.
6.1.1 Task Model
The set of tasks is =ft1:::tjjg, wherejjis the number of tasks in all components . Each
tasktiis deﬁned as a set of jobs ti=fJi
1:::Ji
jtijg, where each job (called hyperjob earlier) Ji
kis
anordered set of critical sections Ji
k=fcsi
k;1:::csi
k;jJi
kjg, with each critical section being simply a
19

--- Page 21 ---
Foughali et al. Formal Veriﬁcation of Real-Time Autonomous Robots
codel. Contrary to the model introduced in Sect. 4, we refer to hyperjobs simply as jobs and use the
subscript of a task as superscripts in jobs and critical sections belonging to such a task (as before,
superscripts/subscripts are omitted when unnecessary, unimportant or clear from the context). We may
thus obtainJ=[i21::jj([k21::jtijJi
k)andCS=[i21::jj([k21::jtij([l21::jJi
kjcsi
k;l)), respectively the set
of all jobs and all critical sections in the system.
The same notations as in Sect. 4 are used for tasks periods and priorities and critical sections (codels)
WCETs. The set of shared resources is L=fl1:::ljLjg. The function R:CS7!P (L)(whereP(L)is the
powerset of L) associates each critical section with all the resources it needs for its execution, regardless of
the mode (read-only or write mode, Sect. 2) in which such resources are accessed. Finally, the set of cores
isC=fC1:::CjCjg.
6.1.2 Behavior:
Except for a more complex notion of jobs, the above model is essentially equivalent to the generic
sporadic task model (Brandenburg, 2011). However, the behavior is constrained by two speciﬁcities of
the robotic context (regardless of the used scheduler): (i) spinning is favored over suspension , and (ii)
preemption is disallowed during both spinning and execution of a critical section, and may thus be viewed
as a kind of limited preemption models (Buttazzo et al., 2012).
At each period Pti, tasktiisactivated . When released ,tiexecutes job Ji
m(chosen at runtime) by
sequentially executing its ordered set of critical sections csi
m;1:::csi
m;jJimj, where each critical section csis
executed iff no other critical section cs0that is in conﬂict with cs(see below) is being executed, otherwise
tispins non-preemptively. titerminates when the execution of Ji
mends, i.e.when it ﬁnishes executing
csi
m;jJimj, the last critical section in Ji
m. If the scheduler is preemptive, preemption is allowed only between
critical sections: regardless of its priority, tiis non-preemptible from the moment it starts spinning or
executing a critical section csto the moment it ﬁnishes executing cs.
6.1.3 Resource Conﬂicts:
Locking in GenoM3 is handled at the critical sections’ level using statically deﬁned conﬂicts . To formalize
the model given in Sect. 2, we ﬁrst introduce a new function Rw:CS7!P (L)that returns for each critical
section csthe set of resources that csaccesses exclusively in write mode. Therefore Rw(cs)R(cs),
andRr(cs) =R(cs)nRw(cs)is the set of resources accessed by csin read-only mode. Accordingly, the
locking model of GenoM3 marks two critical sections csandcs0(in two different tasks) as in conﬂict iff
there is at least one resource used by both csandcs0that is accessed in write mode by csorcs0,i.e.either
the intersection R(cs)\Rw(cs0)(between all resources used by csand resources used by cs0in write
mode) or the intersection R(cs0)\Rw(cs)is not empty. Formally:
csandcs0are in conﬂict iff (R(cs)\Rw(cs0))[(Rw(cs)\R(cs0))6=;(Equivalence 1).
Note how this model is multi-resource andnesting-free in accordance with the “elementary codes” design
in robotics (Sect. 10). This locking model is also reader/writer. However, this model is underspeciﬁed and
unpredictable, as neither fairness nor starvation freedom are guaranteed (though deadlock freedom is).
The real-time model given in this section covers all we need for real-time analysis. Therefore, whenever
possible, we will drop terms such as codels and services and stick to the notation of this real-time model.
6.2 Requirements
Following the observations made in Sect. 2 and the real-time model above, we deﬁne a set of requirements
w.r.t. the real-time locking implementation needed in robotics. We recall that the objective is to devise a
predictable and efﬁcient ﬁne-grained implementation which will allow us to obtain shorter blocking bounds
20

--- Page 22 ---
Foughali et al. Formal Veriﬁcation of Real-Time Autonomous Robots
and thus improve schedulability and other real-time properties (Sect. 5.3).
Let us ﬁrst summarize our observations:
Locking in robotic software suffers from predictability and/or efﬁciency issues (this is not the case for
GenoM3 only, more in Sect. 10).
Resources are typically accessed in a multi-resource fashion (lock and unlock at once all the resources
needed by a critical section).
Multi-resource locking in robotics can be reﬁned using knowledge on the mode each resource is
accessed in by a critical section (reader/writer locking), where multiple resources in different modes
may be locked simultaneously ( mixed read-write ).
Typically, critical sections have short WCET, which explains in part favoring spinning over suspension.
The number of resources is relatively large ( e.g.over 30 in the drone application, Sect. 2.2).
The number of cores is small due to SWaP considerations (Sect. 1.1), e.g.four in the drone application
(Sect. 2.2).
Thus, what we need is a real-time locking implementation that is:
Multi-resource, nesting free, reader/writer (mixed read-write).
Predictable: fair and starvation free, ideally with the smallest blocking bounds possible ( e.g.
asymptotically optimal blocking bounds).
Efﬁcient in the context of small number of cores and large number of resources: low overheads.
We analyse below existing state-of-the-art multi-resource locks and show why we need a new
implementation to comply with all requirements above. Such new implementation is then presented
in the next section (Sect. 7).
6.3 Analysis of existing multi-resource locks
Multi-resource locking protocols acquire exclusive ownership of multiple resourcesR(cs)in asingle
request operation and conversely release these resources in a single operation as well. To comply with the
requirements above, we assume non-preemptive execution during a critical section, and spinning.
We assume that an implementation of a multi-resource locking protocol uses resource bitmasks as
representation for R(cs),i.e., individual resources are denoted by a bit in an array of integers. All discussed
multi-resource locking mechanisms expose such an interface.
One way to implement a multi-resource locking mechanism is a multi-bit test and test-and-set (TATAS)
lock. Each bit in a machine word9represents one resource, and a lock operation succeeds if all bits of
requested resources can be changed from 0 to 1 atomically. However, TATAS locks do not support any
ordering of concurrent requests, thus showing the risk of starvation and unbounded spinning.
Considering FIFO ordering of concurrent resource requests for fairness , two fundamentally different
approaches can be used by a locking protocol: (i) Use oneFIFO queue to order all resource requests. A later
resource request is blocked by earlier conﬂicting request until all earlier conﬂicting resource requests have
released their resources. Alternatively, (ii) use multiple per-resource FIFO queues, one for each resources,
and acquire the requested resources in a nested fashion and in total order. A request to multiple requested
resources is granted when all individual nested requests succeed. Still, both approaches have exactly the
9A machine word is typically the largest unit in memory that can be changed atomically. The size of the machine word limits the number of resources.
21

--- Page 23 ---
Foughali et al. Formal Veriﬁcation of Real-Time Autonomous Robots
same blocking bounds, if we neglect implementation overheads.
This duality between multi-resource locks and nested locking allows the real-time nesting locking
protocol (RNLP) family (Ward and Anderson, 2012, 2013, 2014; Ward, 2016) to provide a solution in both
use cases. Dynamic group locks (DGL) (Ward and Anderson, 2013; Ward, 2016) are the multi-resource
lock variant of RNLP, and Reader-Writer RNLP (R/W RNLP) (Ward and Anderson, 2014) provides a
reader-writer extension to DGL. With Contention-sensitive RNLP (C-RNLP) (Jarrett et al., 2015), there is
also an extension to RNLP that relaxes the strict FIFO ordering and tries to dynamically eliminate transitive
blocking chains . The RNLP family provide the tightest blocking bounds known in the real-time literature,
proven to be asymptotically optimal.
Conceptually, RNLP locks are always presented by using dedicated queues per resource in the
literature (Ward and Anderson, 2012, 2013, 2014; Ward, 2016). However, later work of the author’s give a
hint to single queue implementations of the non-reader-writer variants (Jarrett et al., 2015). R/W RNLP
cannot be implemented using a single queue, as its complex arbitration rules require multiple queues.
All RNLP implementations have a similar structure. One or more internal locks protect internal state
(one or many queues) and the locks must be taken in both request and release operations. Also, there is a
Boolean blocking condition outside any internal critical sections where a lock request operation performs
busy waiting on resource conﬂicts.
Another notable multi-resource is Zhang et al. ’sMRLock , based on a single lock-less queue that tracks
all resource requests in FIFO order (Zhang et al., 2013). Requests can comprise an arbitrary number of
resources, and insertion into and removal from the queue happen in a lock-free manner. MRLock is thus
conceptually similar to single-queue implementations of DGL, but replaces the lock-based queue by a
lock-less one, making it remarkably efﬁcient (as it eliminates the overheads of locking and unlocking
the queue itself). However, MRLock is designed for best-effort use cases without real-time scenarios in
mind, e.g.preemptive high-performance computing. Therefore, its design tolerates preemption of lock
or unlock operations at any time. This makes MRLock unsuitable for real-time applications, as it suffers
from a degraded predictability in corner cases. In particular, MRLock loses its fairness and/or starvation
freedom when it reaches the limits of its internal queue, e.g.when too many new short-running requests
arrive and complete, but previous older long-running requests are still busy. This drawback may be viewed
as a structural side-effect of the lock-less queue (Zhang et al., 2013, Sect. 4.2).
Multi-resource locks can be extended to reader-writer multi-resource locks to further tighten the blocking
bounds. For this, we distinguish between resources requested for shared read access Rr(cs)resp. resources
requested for exclusive write access Rw(cs), and require that an implementation provides an interface to
specify both Rr(cs)andRw(cs)in lock and unlock operations.
The precedence by FIFO-ordering works well for exclusive multi-resource locks and results in fair
ordering of all requests. However, when extending exclusive multi-resource locks to reader-writer locks,
we must also consider the ordering of read and write requests to each other. Note that the standard reader-
preferring and writer-preferring reader-writer lock variants are unsuitable for real-time systems, as they
starve either writers or readers.
Task-fair reader-writer locks order arriving requests in FIFO order, but allow adjacent read requests to
form a concurrent group until the next write request arrives (Mellor-Crummey and Scott, 1991b). Note
that strictly alternating read and write requests deﬁnes the worst case for task-fair reader-writer locks
where the locks degrade to fair non-reader-writer locks in behavior. Task fairness emerges automatically if
an implementation follows the formalization of conﬂicts in Sect. 6.1.3 andensures FIFO ordering of all
22

--- Page 24 ---
Foughali et al. Formal Veriﬁcation of Real-Time Autonomous Robots
requests.
Another mechanism suitable for real-time systems is phase fairness (Brandenburg and Anderson, 2010),
where requests are queued in either read or write request queues, and reader and writer phases alternate.
Then, on a phase switch to readers, all waiting readers are released. This improves the throughput of read
requests at the cost of write requests.
To the best of our knowledge, R/W RNLP and fastR/W RNLP are the only real-time reader-writer
multi-resource locks described in literature (Ward and Anderson, 2014; Nemitz et al., 2019a). R/W RNLP
provides phase fairness . Its extension fastR/W RNLP distinguishes between nested and non-nested
requests, and provides a fast-path for non-nested requests, which request only a single resource. However,
R/W RNLP and fastR/W RNLP provide an interface with explicit lock and unlock operations for Rr(cs)
and explicit lock and unlock operations for Rw(cs), but not a combined interface that allows to specify
bothRr(cs)andRw(cs)at the same time. The authors discuss the possibility of such a “mixed mode”
interface, but provide no implementation (Ward and Anderson, 2014). We assume that an implementation,
if possible, would be non-trivial due to the overall complexity of the entitlement mechanisms. Hence, both
R/W RNLP and fastR/W RNLP are useless for mixed read-write requests. We skip the fastR/W RNLP in
the remainder of this work, as the fast-path to request a single resource does not help in the robotic use
case.
Opposing the requirements presented in Sect. 6.2 to the analysis made in this section leads to the following
conclusion. Predictable (with asymptotically optimal blocking bounds) multi-resource real-time locking
protocols exist, namely DGL, but no suitable reader-writer variant is available for mixed read-write needed
in robotics. Also, DGL efﬁciency may be improved through the use of a lock-less structure, such as in
MRLock, to eliminate internal overheads. Therefore, in the next section, we will present an implementation
that exactly tackles these two limitations. Indeed, our R/W LLAB implementation features the predictability
of DGL with the same asymptotically optimal bounds (and better blocking bounds in practice because of
its reader/writer nature). At the same time, it (i) is suitable for mixed read-write requests and (ii) has lower
overheads than DGL as it uses a lock-less implementation, as we will see throughout Sections 7 and 8.
7 LOCK-LESS ARRAY-BASED MULTI-RESOURCE READER-WRITER LOCKS
We present an efﬁcient-and-predictable multi-resource lock that supports task-fair reader/writer locking
with mixed read-write requests.
The analysis in Sect. 6 shows different design techniques for queuing and internal locking. First, we
stick to a design of using resource bitmasks, like in the other approaches. This helps to handle a large
number of resources. Second, we opt for a single queue design that orders all requests logically in FIFO
order. The single queue approach allows to use simple checks if older requests on the queue are in conﬂict
with newer requests, and number of requests on the queue is bounded by the number of CPU cores. Also,
a check for conﬂict based on resource bitmasks is agnostic to the actual number of requested resources.
Third, we aim for a lock-less design. But instead of using a lock-less queue as in MRLock, we use a design
based on a ﬁxed-size array (number of CPU cores) where a core’s ID relates to the index in the array. We
then establish a FIFO order on the requests by using a ticket mechanism, similar to ticket spinlocks. This
allows to use the relative difference of drawn tickets to distinguish newer from older requests. Also note
that checks for conﬂicts do not exactly need to happen in FIFO order. A request just needs to ensure to
visit all older requests on the queue for correctness. For efﬁciency, we iterate the ﬁxed-size array in order,
identify older requests based on the relative age of their ticket, then check and spin on conﬂicting requests.
23

--- Page 25 ---
Foughali et al. Formal Veriﬁcation of Real-Time Autonomous Robots
Lastly, we must handle race conditions that can happen on concurrent insertion of requests. We aim for a
design that shows a low overhead for non-conﬂicting but concurrent requests.
7.1 Task-Fair Conﬂict Check for Multi-Resource Reader-Writer Locks
Task-fair reader-writer locking follows the rules explained in Sect. 6.1.3. To alleviate notations, we
use an abuse of terminology, as we let R(cs)denote both the set of requested resources and the request
itself preceding the execution of critical section cs. We also extend the term conﬂict to include sets of
resources as well (two sets of resources R(cs)andR(cs0)are in conﬂict if critical sections csandcs0
are in conﬂict, Sect. 6.1.3). Therefore, a lock request R(cs) =Rr(cs)[Rw(cs)(Rr(cs)for reading and
Rw(cs)for writing) made by a task t(to execute critical section cs) is in conﬂict with an older request
R(cs0) =Rr(cs0)[Rw(cs0)made by task t0(to execute critical section cs0) iff Equivalence 1 (Sect. 6.1.3).
From an implementation point of view, Equivalence 1 uses both the corresponding bitmasks to R(cs)and
R(cs0)in the conﬂict check. Since these bitmasks include bits of all resources requested by csandcs0, it is
desirable to use them the least possible in the checks. We may therefore redeﬁne Equivalence 1 to include
only R(cs0)as follows:
csandcs0are in conﬂict iff (Rr(cs)\Rw(cs0))[(Rw(cs)\Rw(cs0))[(Rw(cs)\R(cs0))6=;(by
replacing R(cs)in Equivalence 1 with Rr(cs)[Rw(cs)then distributing union over intersection).
Then we obtain:
csandcs0are in conﬂict iff (Rr(cs)\Rw(cs0))[(Rw(cs)\R(cs0))6=;(Equivalence 2) (by getting rid
of(Rw(cs)\Rw(cs0))since it is included in (Rw(cs)\R(cs0))).
We therefore store R(cs) =Rr(cs)[Rw(cs)for each request in the array. Then, checking for the absence
of conﬂicts (Equivalence 2) becomes a conjunction of two bitwise AND operation, each operating on each
integer in two resource bitmasks (see the explanation of the listing below).
7.2 Implementation
Listing 2 shows the implementation of the Lock-Less Array-Based (LLAB) multi-resource lock with
task-fair reader-writer locking, named R/W LLAB, in C language. The presented implementation is suitable
for architectures with a relaxed memory model, such as ARM. Atomic load/store operations are annotated
with relaxed ,acquire , orrelease semantics following the C11/C++11 memory model, but must be adapted
to the OS or runtime environment. For brevity, the presented version uses 64-bit integers for resource
bitmasks. The non-reader-writer variant LLAB can be derived from R/W LLAB by assuming that all
resources are write requests. A commented and extended version of Listing 2 can be found in our git
repository10. We discuss the implementation below.
With the number of cores known at compile time (line 1), the FIFO queue is implemented as an array
of nodes statically assigned to cores in a one-to-one exclusive mapping (line 12). Each node comprises a
drawn ticket and two bitmask of resources for reading and writing (lines 5 to 8). Bitmasks of known size
(line 3) track the requested resources, and tickets ensure FIFO ordering of tasks through drawing from a
global ticket counter . The global data of the lock object comprises thus a global ticket counter and the array
of nodes (lines 10 to 13).
To address race conditions on insertion, the implementation uses two least signiﬁcant bits of the drawn
ticket recorded in the array node of core Cto capture the status of the request:
Ifticket mod 4 = 0 , then the request by core Cisinactive ,i.e.no task is currently trying to execute,
or a task just ﬁnished executing a critical section on core C,
10https://gitlab.com/azuepke/llab/.
24

--- Page 26 ---
Foughali et al. Formal Veriﬁcation of Real-Time Autonomous Robots
Listing 2. Implementation of R/W LLAB.
1# d e f i n e MAX CORES 16 / / number o f CPU c o r e s
2
3t y p e d e f u i n t 6 4 t r e s t ; / / r e s o u r c e b i t m a s k t y p e
4
5t y p e d e f s t r u c t f / / per −c or e node
6 a t o m i c u i n t 3 2 t t k t ; / / drawn t i c k e t
7 r e s t rw , w; / / r e s o u r c e s ( r e a d w r i t e , w r i t e )
8gn o d e t ; / / i n i t i a l l y z e r o
9
10 t y p e d e f s t r u c t f / / g l o b a l l o c k s t a t e
11 a t o m i c u i n t 3 2 t t k t ; / / g l o b a l t i c k e t
12 n o d e t c [MAX CORES ] ; / / a r r a y o f nodes
13gl o c k t ; / / i n i t i a l l y z e r o
14
15 void r w l l a b l o c k ( l o c k t*l ,i n t c o r e i d , r e s t r , r e s t w)
16f
17 u i n t 3 2 t s e l f t k t , c t k t ;
18
19 n o d e t*s e l f = &l − >c [ c o r e i d ] ;
20 s e l f − >rw = rjw;
21 s e l f − >w = w;
22 a t o m i c s t o r e r e l a x e d (& s e l f − >t k t , 1 ) ;
23
24 s e l f t k t = a t o m i c f e t c h a n d a d d a c q u i r e r e l e a s e (& l − >t k t , 4 ) ;
25
26 a t o m i c s t o r e r e l a x e d (& s e l f − >t k t , s e l f t k t + 2 ) ;
27
28 f o r ( n o d e t*c = l − >c ; c <&l −>c [MAX CORES ] ; c ++) f
29 i f( c == s e l f )
30 c o n t i n u e ;
31
32 dof
33 c t k t = a t o m i c l o a d r e l a x e d (&c− >t k t ) ;
34gwhile ( ( c t k t & 0x1 ) != 0 ) ;
35
36 i f( ( ( c t k t & 0x2 ) == 0)
37jj ( ( i n t 3 2 t ) ( c t k t − s e l f t k t ) >0)
38jj ( ( ( r & c− >w) == 0) && ( (w & c− >rw ) == 0 ) ) )
39 c o n t i n u e ;
40
41 while ( a t o m i c l o a d r e l a x e d (&c− >t k t ) == c t k t )
42 ; /*s p i n */
43g
44
45 a t o m i c a c q u i r e b a r r i e r ( ) ;
46g
47
48 void r w l l a b u n l o c k ( l o c k t*l ,i n t c o r e i d )
49f
50 n o d e t*s e l f = &l − >c [ c o r e i d ] ;
51 a t o m i c s t o r e r e l e a s e (& s e l f − >t k t , 0 ) ;
52g
25

--- Page 27 ---
Foughali et al. Formal Veriﬁcation of Real-Time Autonomous Robots
ifticket mod 4 = 1 , then the request by core Cisin preparation (see below), and
ifticket mod 4 = 2 , then the request by core Cisactive ,i.e.a task is executing or spinning to execute
a critical section on core C.
Accordingly, the global ticket is always incremented by 4 (line 24) to keep the two least signiﬁcant bits
free.
The basic workﬂow of a lock operation is: (i) prepare a request (lines 19 to 21), (ii) set the drawn ticket
number to 1to indicate the request as in preparation (line 22), (iii) draw a unique ticket (line 24), (iv)
store the drawn ticket in C’s node with the active bit set (line 26), then (v) iterate all other cores’ requests
(lines 28 to 43), (vi) spin on requests in in preparation state (lines 32 to 34), (vii) check for potential
conﬂicts (lines 36 to 39), and (viii) spin on resource conﬂicts (lines 41 to 42).
Note that the lock operation comprises two different spinning points. In step (vi), spinning on requests in
in preparation state if the ticket counter is 1(lines 32 to 34) ensures correctness in case a race condition
happens when a lock operation is delayed between steps (iii) and (iv), e.g.by an interrupt, as drawing
a ticket (line 24) and storing the ticket and thus marking the request as active (line 26) is not an atomic
operation. This ensures that the later checks in step (vii) correctly observe the drawn ticket of that request.
The second spinning happens on actual resource conﬂicts (lines 41 to 42). But ﬁrst, the lock operation
checks that the request of another one is active (line 36), that this request is older than its own request
(lower relative ticket number) (line 37), and that the request is in conﬂict (resource bitmasks conﬂict)
(line 38). If all conditions are met, the lock operation then spins until the requests ticket number changes.
Theunlock operation simply sets the ticket number to zero (line 51), which marks its former request as
inactive .
In the following, we provide some important implementation details that are however not necessary to
understand the behavior described above.
First, ordering memory accesses is crucial in this algorithm. Setting a node to in preparation state (line 22)
must become visible to the other cores before drawing a new ticket, i.e.before the store of the fetch-and-add
completes (line 24), as the algorithm explicitly spins on this state (lines 32 to 34), and the store of the drawn
ticket in the node (line 26) must happen afterwards. Likewise, the requested resources of a node (lines 20
and 21) must be visible before checking them (line 38). Both properties are ensured by drawing the ticket
atomically with acquire andrelease semantics (line 24). This operation enforces a global ordering of the
three steps (ii) to (iv) of the algorithm and allows to use relaxed semantics before and afterwards. Note that
this ordering between a node’s resource bitmask and its ticket value is only guaranteed for resource requests
that happened before drawing the ticket, i.e.allprevious resource requests, but not for newer requests that
happen later. However, the algorithm does not depend on an exact ordering for newer requests, as it skips
newer nodes solely on their ticket number. The ﬁnal acquire barrier in the lock operation (line 45) pairs
with the store release in the unlock operation (line 51). Note also that spinning for changes of the ticket
value (lines 41 and 42) using acquire semantics would not be a sufﬁcient replacement for the ﬁnal acquire
barrier (line 45), as other cores might release the shared resources (line 51) brieﬂy before the check of the
ticket state (line 36 and 37).
Second, the global ticket counter can overﬂow, therefore the implementation must check the relative
ageof drawn ticket numbers (line 37). Additionally, for any ticket number that is recorded in a node, the
related critical section must complete before the same ticket number is withdrawn again. A 32-bit counter
incremented by 4 provides 230unique tickets, and the relative age changes sign after 229unique tickets, so
recurring tickets are not a problem on real systems.
26

--- Page 28 ---
Foughali et al. Formal Veriﬁcation of Real-Time Autonomous Robots
Our design for LLAB and R/W LLAB draws on techniques found in ticket locks (Mellor-Crummey
and Scott, 1991a) to establish a FIFO order between requests, and on the idea to wait on other nodes to
complete internal operations found in the unlock path of MCS locks (Mellor-Crummey and Scott, 1991a).
The idea to encode additional state in the ticket counter can also be found in phase-fair reader-writer
locks (Brandenburg and Anderson, 2010).
Conceptually, LLAB and R/W LLAB behave exactly as the single-queue implementation of DGL, thus
preserving the same theoretical blocking bounds, but comes with two additional advantages. First, their
lock-less structure removes the internal overheads found in DGL, making them more efﬁcient. Second,
R/W LLAB is reader/writer and supports mixed read-write requests, thus tightening further the blocking
bounds by allowing some simultaneous readings (Sect. 8). To the best of our knowledge, R/W LLAB is the
ﬁrst real-time multi-resource locking protocol that supports mixed read-write requests.
8 EVALUATION
We perform two different types of experiments to evaluate LLAB and R/W LLAB among the other
multi-resource locks. The ﬁrst type evaluates any internal overheads in the uncontended case (Sect. 8.1),
where we use two hardware platforms: an ARM system with four cores (Raspberry Pi 2B running an
RTOS) and an Intel system with 2x 16 cores / 64 hardware threads (2x Intel Xeon Silver 4216 running
Linux). The ARM system is representative for real-time robots, where MECs feature a low number of
cores (Sect. 6.2), whereas the Intel system allows an evaluation in a more generic multi-core setting. The
second type of experiment measures the overheads of an execution scenario with mixed reader-writer
workloads using randomized critical sections on the ARM platform (Sect. 8.2). In each experiment, we
compare the presented locking mechanism LLAB resp. R/W LLAB with other multi-resource locks,
namely: DGL (Ward and Anderson, 2013), R/W DGL (our task-fair reader-writer variant of DGL),
R/W RNLP (Ward and Anderson, 2014), MRLock (Zhang et al., 2013), and a multi-bit test and test-and-set
(TATAS) lock. The implementation of DGL uses a single queue and is obtained from Nemitz et al. (2019a).
A fast-path optimization allows non-conﬂicting requests to bypass the queue11. R/W DGL is our own
task-fair reader-writer extension of DGL. It is based on a single queue as well and uses the conﬂict check
described in Sect. 7.1. But due to the nature of reader-writer locks, it cannot use the fast-path to bypass the
queue12. Our implementation of R/W RNLP that uses phase fairness follows the pseudocode from Ward
and Anderson (2014). As resources are managed in dedicated queues and the resource bitmasks in our
benchmark are typically only sparsely populated, we use an efﬁcient iterator for bitmasks (see Table 9). A
naive implementation of a for-each-bit operation based on a loop over all bits in a machine word causes
too much overheads. Fortunately, modern processor architectures provide instructions to count leading
or trailing zeros in machine words, so we use compiler intrinsics such as GCC’s builtin ctz() for
efﬁcient iteration. Any internal locking in our experiments is based on MCS locks (Mellor-Crummey and
Scott, 1991a) and phase-fair reader-writer ticket locks (Brandenburg and Anderson, 2010). For MRLock
and TATAS, we use the example code from Zhang et al. (2013). We instantiate MRLock with an internal
queue of 256nodes ( cells13) on Intel and 16nodes on ARM.
We added memory barriers with load-acquire orstore-release semantics where needed for the weak
memory model on ARM and pause instructions on x86 to yield to other hardware threads when spinning.
11A non-conﬂicting lock operation simply marks the requested resources as locked.
12Read requests are accumulative. During an unlock operation, one cannot decide if other requests still have the same resources read-locked without checking
all other requests in detail.
13In MRLock, queue nodes are denoted as cells (Zhang et al., 2013).
27

--- Page 29 ---
Foughali et al. Formal Veriﬁcation of Real-Time Autonomous Robots
 0 1 2 3 4 5 6
 0  1  2  3  4A
Average execution time [ µs]
Number of CPU cores (ARM)TATAS
MRLock
DGL
R/W-DGL
R/W-RNLP
LLAB
R/W-LLAB
 0 50 100 150 200
 0  16  32  48  64BAverage execution time [ µs]
Number of CPU cores/hardware threads (Intel) 0 2 4 6 8 10
Figure 5. Average execution time of a lock!unlock sequence for a variable number of uncontended
resources on different hardware architectures in parallel. Each lock type supports 64 resources. (A)shows
for an ARM Cortex-A7 at 600 MHz with four physical cores. The stacked data points represent the results
for an increasing number of requested resources, i.e.from 1 to a limit of 16 resources per core. (B)shows
for a dual Intel Xeon Silver 4216 at 2.1 GHz. Here, cores 1 to 16 are physical cores on the ﬁrst CPU and
cores 17 to 32 are physical cores on the second CPU. Cores 33 to 48 are hardware thread siblings of the
cores on the ﬁrst CPU and cores 49 to 64 of the cores on the second CPU. Each core requests one resource
related to its core ID. The red box zooms in on the results of the ﬁrst 16 cores.
Table 9. Average execution time overhead (CPU cycles) of different iterators and locks in isolation
Test or Lock Res. Arm Intel
CPU cycles in 1 s 600 2400
naive bit iterator 1 537 151
(bitwise shift and &) 64 594 93
efﬁcient bit iterator 1 11 5
(builtin ctz() ) 64 342 193
TATAS 1..64 87 37
MRLock 1..64 172 51
DGL 1..64 278 67
R/W DGL 1..64 290 66
R/W RNLP read lock 1..64 166 35
write lock 1 649 196
64 3713 857
LLAB 1..64 136 199
R/W LLAB 1..64 154 224
Locks and core-speciﬁc internal data are aligned to cachelines to prevent false sharing. All lock types
support up to 64 resources, i.e.resource bitmasks are 64-bit sized. We provide implementations of all locks
in our git repository.
28

--- Page 30 ---
Foughali et al. Formal Veriﬁcation of Real-Time Autonomous Robots
8.1 Internal Overheads in the Uncontended Case
In the ﬁrst experiment, we measure the overhead in the uncontended case. For this, we let a thread lock
and unlock an increasing number of exclusive ( i.e.write) resources in a tight loop and measure the execution
time of 1024 lock!unlock sequences. This shows the performance impact of the number of requested
resources in a lock or unlock request as vertically stacked data points for the different types of locks. The
results show the average execution time of a single lock!unlock sequence, including any outliers.
Additionally, we run this test on a number of cores in parallel. Each core locks and unlocks resources
private to the core (so they are uncontended), but in the same shared lock. This exposes the overhead of any
internal synchronization ( e.g.internal locks or CAS-loops) of the different locking mechanisms. Fig. 5 (A)
shows the results the ARM system and Fig. 5 (B)for the Intel system. As the data points on a single core
are next to each other, Table 9 shows the results on a single core in detail for both architectures.
At ﬁrst, it becomes visible in Fig. 5 (A)that R/W RNLP shows an execution time that is sensitive to the
number of requested resources in each lock!unlock sequence, during which the lock implementation
iterates the resources three times. This is easily explained by the design choice in R/W RNLP to use
dedicated queues per resource. In contrast, TATAS, MRLock, DGL, R/W DGL, LLAB and R/W LLAB
areinsensitive to the number of requests. It also becomes visible that R/W RNLP is exceptionally slow
compared to the rest. This is mostly due to the internal locking overhead. The R/W RNLP lock operation
comprises three internal critical sections, adding much static overhead.
On a single core and with just a few resources, the performance of all locks is next to each other, as Table 9
shows. But with an increasing number of cores, internal overhead increases and scalability decreases. On
Intel, for a larger number of cores until the number of physical cores on the ﬁrst CPU (16) is reached
(red box in Fig. 5 (B)), TATAS scales best, immediately followed by LLAB and R/W LLAB, then DGL,
MRLock, and R/W DGL follow next with already more than twice the execution time when using 16
cores. The trend ampliﬁes when crossing the boundary to the second CPU from core 17 on. Beyond the
32 available physical cores, the Linux kernel starts to schedule the tasks on each core’s hardware thread
sibling as well. Then the performance of TATAS drops signiﬁcantly. LLAB and R/W LLAB become the
fastest lock implementations, followed by TATAS and DGL. With a large gap, MRLock and R/W DGL
follow. In all cases, R/W RNLP is the lock with the most overhead. The performance of DGL shows that it
runs in fast-path mode with an empty queue. Its performance characteristics relate to two consecutive MCS
lock!unlock operations. R/W DGL and MRLock additionally need to search the queue for conﬂicts.
We were surprised that LLAB scales better than MRLock on the Intel system, as our initial results on ARM
showed that both were next to each other. We assume that the extra overheads in MRLock are caused by
reading head and tail pointers to queue nodes in each internal loop, while LLAB and R/W LLAB scan their
queues linearly from front to back. With this, MRLock shows one additional level of pointer indirection
than R/W LLAB. Also, the memory layout of LLAB and R/W LLAB is more compact than for MRLock.
Overall, LLAB and R/W LLAB have a visible performance advantage (as one can see from Fig. 5), which
matches our expectations of Sect. 7.
8.2 Mixed Reader-Writer Workloads
As a second benchmark, we evaluate the locks in an experiment using randomly generated critical
sections with synthetic mixed reader-writer workloads similar to the case study presented in Sect. 2.2. On
the ARM system with four cores, we run a taskset with one periodic task per core (period 1 ms). Each task
locks and unlocks a random number of critical sections (1 to 8, following a square distribution) comprising
randomized read and write requests for up to 32 shared resources. The critical sections comprise 4.1 read
29

--- Page 31 ---
Foughali et al. Formal Veriﬁcation of Real-Time Autonomous Robots
 0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000
 0  5  10  15  20  25  30Overall execution time [ µs]
Random taskset (ordered by increasing execution time)just WCET
global MCS lock
TATAS
MRLock
DGL
R/W-DGL
LLAB
R/W-LLAB
Figure 6. Synthetic mixed reader-writer workload scenario with four periodic tasks executing in parallel
on ARM using a randomized set of critical sections requesting multiple resources. The data set “just WCET”
shows the nominal execution time inside the critical sections (without blocking). The data set “global lock”
shows the overhead when using a global lock instead of multi-resource locks.
and 1.9 write requests on average. The time spent in the critical sections follows a power function (1 to
17s), but mostly favoring short critical sections. Our selected parameters and their distribution follows the
execution scenario of the real drone example in Foughali (2020) and our observations on other GenoM3
systems such as the autonomous terrestrial robot used in Foughali et al. (2020). For instance, our quad-core
ARM system is similar to the ARM-based quad-core ODROID, and the critical sections execution times
are upper-bounded with the WCETs of the critical sections in Foughali (2020).
To remove any differences in the tasks’ release times introduced by the hardware or the operating system,
we let the tasks synchronize at each period on a barrier before executing the critical sections, and then
add a random release jitter of up to 0.1 s. We then measure the execution time from before acquiring the
ﬁrst critical section to after releasing the last critical section, then sum the execution times of all tasks
on all cores for 20 periods (20 ms) into a single score. Fig. 6 shows the results for different lock types in
30 generated tasks sets. As references, we also show the accumulated execution time inside the critical
sections (minimum possible execution time without any blocking, “just WCET”), as well as a run using
global MSRP implemented with an MCS lock (maximum blocking time) as lower and upper bounds. Here,
we did not include R/W RNLP, as it provides no interface to lock both reader and writer requests at the
same time (more in Sect. 8.3). This leaves R/W DGL and R/W LLAB as the only reader-writer locks. All
other locks handle read requests as exclusive requests.
The results for short tasksets with a low number of critical sections are next to each other. But for more
complex tasksets, three trends emerge. First, the generated critical sections favor the reader-writer locks
R/W DGL and R/W LLAB over exclusive multi-resource locks. This hints to potential beneﬁts of using
reader-writer locks in such scenarios. Second, TATAS is one of the fastest locks. We expected this due to the
simplicity of TATAS and the low number of resources. But note that TATAS locks do not guarantee FIFO
30

--- Page 32 ---
Foughali et al. Formal Veriﬁcation of Real-Time Autonomous Robots
queuing of conﬂicting requests. Third and lastly, the lock-less design of R/W LLAB beats the lock-based
design R/W DGL. But the other locks are next to each other without a clear winner. We also expected
this, as there is not much internal contention on the lock due to the randomized time spent inside critical
sections.
8.3 Discussion
Summarizing the benchmark results of Sect. 8, we can observe two major trends. First, reducing static
overhead, e.g.the use of internal locks, matters for good performance. Second, the execution time of
internal critical sections can be either sensitive to the number of requested resources, or insensitive . This
sensitivity comes from the effect of using multiple queues, which requires iterating over resources instead
of iterating over potential conﬂicts from other cores. We argue that insensitivity with its O(1)dependency
on the number of resources and O(n)dependency on the number of conﬂicts scales better in the long term,
as the number of resources usually grows faster than the number of cores that can cause conﬂicts. In a
nutshell, when the number of cores is small and the number of resources is large, which is typically the
case for real-time robots (Sect. 6.2), it is better to spin on conﬂicts rather than on resources. Our locks
combine both trends (i) by spinning on conﬂicts instead of resources and (ii) by eliminating internal locks
using a lock-less array (LLAB and R/W LLAB).
Compared to DGL, LLAB is predictable with exactly the same theoretical blocking bounds as DGL,
but with lower overheads, as our experiments show. Further, since conﬂicts may change at runtime,
LLAB preserves the dynamicity of DGL, therefore making the locking in any application using the latter
implementable in the former. Yet, DGL (and RNLP in general) also supports suspension, whereas LLAB is
presented for a spin-based context.
Compared to R/W RNLP, our presented R/W LLAB provides task fairness , while R/W RNLP provides
the better phase fairness (Brandenburg and Anderson, 2010). However, this is not visible in the evaluation,
as R/W RNLP does not provide an interface to acquire mixed sets of read and write resources in the
nesting-free multi-resource context, making R/W RNLP impractical to use in e.g.robotic software. We
assume that this is due to the structure of R/W RNLP that uses different types of internal locks for read and
write requests to protect the internal state (Ward and Anderson, 2014).
It is worth mentioning that the way R/W LLAB works is somewhat similar to concurrency groups (Nemitz
et al., 2019b). Yet, concurrency groups are computed ofﬂine, prior to the system execution, which makes
them unsuitable for resource requests that may change from one execution to another. Lastly, we must note
that DGL can be extended to a task-fair variant as well, as our experiment with R/W DGL shows. In this
case, R/W LLAB may be viewed as, essentially, a more efﬁcient (lock-less) implementation of R/W DGL.
Comparing to MRLock, both MRLock and LLAB map the single queue to an array. However, LLAB
relies on non-preemptive locking in a real-time system for correctness, whereas MRLock also supports
preemption at any time, which is inevitable in non-real-time best-effort systems. This adds additional
complexity to the implementation, as the evaluation shows that LLAB scales better than MRLock on a
larger number of cores. Additionally, MRLock has a different design of the array. While the array size in
LLAB is limited by the number of available cores jCj, MRLock allows the user to conﬁgure a larger array
to support more than jCjnodes at a time. When enqueuing requests, MRLock guarantees fairness as long as
the array has free space. But when the next free node in the array is busy, e.g.because its lock-holding task
was preempted, new requests start to spin for this task to ﬁnish and free its position in the queue. MRLock
then loses its fairness guarantees (Zhang et al., 2013, Sect. 4.2). While this problems could be solved by
selecting an array bound that is large enough to prevent this corner case, determining such bound may be
31

--- Page 33 ---
Foughali et al. Formal Veriﬁcation of Real-Time Autonomous Robots
hard for a real-time system using sporadic tasks. This is because we must at least ensure that the array is
large enough so that the longest running critical section never collides with all possible combinations of
shorter critical sections that run in the mean time.
As any locking algorithm, LLAB and R/W LLAB still have their drawbacks. One downside that does not
become visible in the presented experiments is that the lock-less array design requires to scan the full array
for potential conﬂicts. For a larger number of cores, the array-based designs must access a larger (constant)
number of consecutive cachelines than the other lock implementations. For example, R/W LLAB uses 25
cachelines of 64 bytes on the Intel system with 64 cores / hardware threads. In contrast, the number of
cachelines needed by the other lock implementation vary from 2 to 65, depending on the size of the queue,
and because queue nodes are kept on distinct cachelines. However, the effect is practically invisible on
systems with a small number of cores such as the ARM system with 4 cores that requires 2 cachelines to
manage 64 resources with R/W LLAB, and thus this downside is harmless in the case of real-time robots.
Also, the linear memory accesses when iterating the array beneﬁt from the prefetch units implemented in
today’s CPUs.
To wrap up our discussion, the proposed LLAB and R/W LLAB fulﬁll our requirements (Sect. 6.2) for
real-time robotic systems, or any other real-time system with non-preemptive critical sections as deﬁned in
Sect. 6.1. Our evaluation (Sect. 8) shows that LLAB, implemented as a lock-less array variant of DGL,
excels in efﬁciency over the other solutions. Second, its task-fair reader-writer lock variant R/W LLAB
addresses the use cases of robotic frameworks: it (i) is spin-based, multi-resource, nesting-free and
reader/writer with support for mixed read-write requests, (ii) is suitable for systems with a small number of
cores and large number of resources. Third, LLAB and R/W LLAB use resource bitmasks, that may be
updated at runtime, for both read and write requests, making them easier to use and less error prone than
nested lock requests (no risk of deadlocks) and suitable for applications where conﬂicts between critical
sections may change at runtime. Finally, both implementations have a simple conﬁguration preventing
any additional complexity as in MRLock. With this, LLAB and R/W LLAB can help improve the locking
situation in today’s robotics frameworks (Sect. 2, Sect. 10). Also, they show promising scalability beyond
the low number of cores found in real-time robots.
9 A TWO STEP HYBRID APPROACH (REVISITED)
As seen in Sect. 5, applying our two-step veriﬁcation approach (Sect. 4) to the drone system (Sect. 2.2) gives
acceptable results: all HRT tasks are schedulable and lower-priority tasks do not starve with upper-bounded
execution times. However, as we point out in the discussion in Sect. 5.3, it is still desirable to have a model
where such results correspond to better schedulability for both HRT and lower-priority tasks to account
for the overheads of the locking protocol. Therefore, in this section, we assume that the concurrency in
our drone system is handled using R/W LLAB, the new algorithm we devised in Sect. 7, and reiterate the
veriﬁcation approach. Since R/W LLAB is ﬁne-grained and supports reader/writer locking, we are likely to
obtain smaller blocking bounds and therefore tighter WCRTs and better schedulability. Furthermore, due
to the low overheads of R/W LLAB (Sect. 8), tighter WCRTs will give us a higher conﬁdence that our
veriﬁcation results will be preserved in practice, as the negligible overhead of R/W LLAB will likely not
cause deadline misses when it adds to tasks WCRTs, in particular HRT tasks.
9.1 Step One: Schedulability Analysis
The difference in this step compared to what we have seen in Sect. 4.1 is that the bounds Bcfor each TU
codel care computed following the ﬁne-grained reader-writer speciﬁcities of R/W LLAB instead of the
single-memory nature of global MSRP. Therefore, a new algorithm to compute the bound Bcfor a TU
32

--- Page 34 ---
Foughali et al. Formal Veriﬁcation of Real-Time Autonomous Robots
Table 10. New WCET of HRT tasks.
HRT task WCET (ms)
main 0.32
comm 0.26
io 0.33
ﬁlter 0.29
control 0.42
Table 11. New WCET of largest codel in low-priority tasks.
Task WCET of longest codel (ms)
publish 0.22
plan 0.19
exec 0.17
Table 12. New WCRT of HRT tasks considering afﬁnity in Table 6.
HRT task WCRT (ms)
main 0.58
comm 0.58
io 0.55
ﬁlter 0.46
control 0.59
codel cin tasktis summarized next. (1) For each task t06=t, we ﬁnd, within all its services, the largest
WCET of all TU codels in conﬂict with c(following the reader/writer conﬂict deﬁnition in Sect. 7) or
in transitive conﬂict with c(see more about transitive blocking chains in (Jarrett et al., 2015)). (2) We
sort, in a decreasing order, the values found in (1). (3) Bcis equal to the sum of the ﬁrst jCj1values
sorted in (2). The rest of step one remains unchanged, where the new tighter bounds Bc, computed using
the new algorithm above, are used to compute tasks WCETs and WCRTs. One important remark is that
this algorithm could not have been used with the original multi-resource reader/writer locking model of
GenoM3 which, contrary to R/W LLAB, guarantees neither fairness nor starvation freedom (Sect. 6.1.3).
9.2 Step Two: Formal Veriﬁcation
The only change in this step is that concurrency handling is managed through an R/W LLAB encoding
in the UPPAAL-SMC model. This is trivial in UPPAAL-SMC using a classical queue14. The remaining
details are unchanged since we use the same scheduler as in Sect. 4.
9.3 Results
We apply the same two-step approach with the changes indicated above (to comply with the R/W LLAB
implementation) to the same drone case study (Sect. 2.2). We consider the same afﬁnity in Table 6, and the
same properties are veriﬁed with the same statistical parameters for step two as in Sect. 5.
9.3.1 Step One
The new WCETs of the ﬁve HRT tasks (resp. largest codel WCET in the three lower-priority tasks) in the
system are given in Table 10 (resp. Table 11). The new WCRTs of HRT tasks are given in Table 12.
Notice how each HRT tasks passes the schedulability test with a WCRT comfortably lower than its
14Needless to use a lock-less queue here because timed automata provide a higher-level model where switching between states ( akataking transitions) is
considered timeless, so blocking times do not include overheads unless the latter are speciﬁed explicitly in intermediate states.
33

--- Page 35 ---
Foughali et al. Formal Veriﬁcation of Real-Time Autonomous Robots
Table 13. New veriﬁcation results (step two).
prob t2
t xmax=2xmax=3xmax=4xmax=5
publish [0, 0.004] [0.996, 1] [0.996, 1] [0.996, 1]
plan [0, 0.004] [0.996, 1] [0.996, 1] [0.996, 1]
exec [0, 0.004] [0, 0.004] [0.996, 1] [0.996, 1]
deadline. This is a direct effect of using a predictable ﬁne-grain reader/writer locking protocol instead of a
global one in this type of applications, which conﬁrms our observations in Sect. 8.2.
9.3.2 Step Two
We generate, from the afﬁnity in Table 6, the number of cores and the GenoM3 system, an UPPAAL-SMC
model where concurrency is handled using R/W LLAB. Then, we verify the same bounded response
properties as in Sect. 5. The veriﬁcation results are given in Table 13.
Here, we notice that lower-priority tasks are most likely schedulable as well, with a 99:8%probability
as soon asxmax =3 ms for tasks publish (period 4 ms) and plan (period 5 ms) and xmax =4 ms
for task exec (period 5 ms). Here also, the tighter bounds induced by R/W LLAB lead to a highly likely
comfortable schedulability of lower-priority tasks, thus conforming, up to a high probability, with mission
criticality as well.
9.4 Discussion
Using R/W LLAB allowed to improve the veriﬁcation results in Sect. 5, where global MSRP was used
instead. This improvement coincides with our expectations following the improved blocking bounds of
R/W LLAB and our evaluation in Sect. 8. The new model, considering R/W LLAB instead of global MSRP,
guarantees schedulability of all tasks, therefore complying with both safety and mission criticality, which
was unveriﬁable in the original model (because of the scalability issues of the original GenoM3 system
including an unpredictable locking model) and insufﬁcient using global MSRP. The veriﬁed model does
not take R/W LLAB implementation overheads into account (that is, we would have exactly the same
results with lock-based R/W DGL). We argue, however, that the low overheads of R/W LLAB compared
to other locks including R/W DGL, experimentally evaluated in Sect. 8, combined with the signiﬁcant
difference between tasks WCRTs and their deadlines (Sect. 9.3), would lead to the schedulability of all
tasks preserved in the runtime setting.
However, it is possible, for other applications, that step one is not conclusive, that is we fail to ﬁnd an
afﬁnity that allows all HRT tasks to pass the schedulability tests. In this case, we may consider redesigning
the application by e.g.changing the periods, which is nevertheless not always feasible because periods may
be dictated by hardware constraints ( e.g.sensor frequency).
10 RELATED WORK
In this section, we review the state of the art on both veriﬁcation of real-time robots (Sect. 10.1) and locking
choices in real-time-oriented robotic frameworks (Sect. 10.2).
10.1 Rigorous Veriﬁcation of Real-Time Robotic Applications
One of the main issues hindering the use of schedulability analysis is the generalization of tests to robotic
task models (Gobillot et al., 2019). Some robotic software initiatives try to tackle this issue (Soetens and
Bruyninckx, 2005; Schlegel et al., 2010; Gobillot et al., 2019). In particular, MAUVE (Gobillot et al.,
34

--- Page 36 ---
Foughali et al. Formal Veriﬁcation of Real-Time Autonomous Robots
2019) supports speciﬁcation, implementation and analysis of real-time constraints. Other works propose
some real-time extensions for the popular framework ROS (Saito et al., 2018; Wei et al., 2016). However,
all these works focus on adding schedulability features, sometimes with schedulability analysis support,
and thus leave important properties such as reachability and bounded response unattended.
On the other hand, a major challenge of using formal veriﬁcation is bridging robotic software, not formally
founded, with formal methods. Proposed solutions range from ad-hoc non-reusable formalization (Kim and
Kang, 2005; Molnar and Veres, 2009) to formal frameworks for robotics (Miyazawa et al., 2017). Another
difﬁculty is the lack of scalability of exhaustive veriﬁcation techniques due to the complexity and size of
robotic systems. Non-exhaustive techniques, such as SMC, used in Hazim et al. (2016), are not suitable for
critical applications where schedulability of HRT tasks must be veriﬁed with certainty. Besides, to the best
of our knowledge and except for our efforts (Sect. 10.1.1), the literature on formal veriﬁcation in robotics
(including works cited here) ignores the MEC and OS scheduling constraints, which restricts the results
validity to the unrealistic assumption of all tasks running in parallel at all times.
10.1.1 Our previous work
In (Foughali, 2017, 2019; Foughali and Hladik, 2020), we proposed automated support to verify various
properties of robotic applications under different scheduling policies by means of model checking. Such
support is not suitable for the drone navigation application because of scalability issues. In (Foughali et al.,
2019b), we proposed an automated approach based on SMC to verify, up to a high probability, a number
of properties. This approach is not suitable either for the drone system because SMC guarantees are not
enough for critical properties such as the schedulability of HRT tasks. In other works, we propose the use of
runtime veriﬁcation RV to cope with the scalability issues of model checking (Foughali et al., 2020; Oc ´on
et al., 2020). Though lightweight and scalable, RV techniques check properties as the system executes, and
are thus non suitable for critical applications where guarantees are needed prior to system deployment.
10.2 Real-Time Locking in Robotics
Besides ROS, there is a large corpus of robotic frameworks in the literature with different philosophies,
capabilities, and design choices ( e.g.YARP (Metta et al., 2006), OpenRT-M (Ando et al., 2005), and
ArmarX (Vahrenkamp et al., 2015)). In our state of the art, we only focus on those frameworks that are
real-time oriented, that is developed for real-time applications, mainly ROS2, OROCOS (Bruyninckx,
2001), MAUVE (Gobillot et al., 2019) and GenoM3 (Mallet et al., 2010). As explained in Sect. 1.1,
ROS2 is still under development and its real-time capabilities are yet to be understood (Casini et al., 2019;
Blass et al., 2021; Choi et al., 2021). As seen in Sect. 10.1 above, MAUVE (Gobillot et al., 2019) is
perhaps the most mature real-time-oriented robotic framework with full support for WCET estimation and
schedulability analysis. Locking-wise, however, MAUVE relies on the OROCOS-RTT middleware (Sect. 2)
where each component contains only one task, and resources are duplicated as data ﬂow ports attached to
components (Soetens and Bruyninckx, 2005). Then, whenever a component writes its own port, it diffuses
the written value to components that need it by writing to their corresponding ports. This mechanism has
two main disadvantages. First, it induces a memory constraint as most of data structures are duplicated.
Second, the lock-free manner of accessing ports is subject to starvation in corner cases (Herlihy et al., 2020,
Chapter 5). GenoM3 uses a low-level ﬁne-grained, yet unpredictable concurrency model (Sect. 2.1.2).
Perhaps, this lack of predictable and efﬁcient locking mechanisms in real-time robotics is due to the fact
that real-time locking is out of a roboticist’s expertise, but also the speciﬁcities of robotic software making
it hard to apply state-of-the-art locks to real-time robots (Sect. 6.2). For instance, real-time-oriented robotic
35

--- Page 37 ---
Foughali et al. Formal Veriﬁcation of Real-Time Autonomous Robots
frameworks do not use nesting. They typically implement algorithms in “elementary codes” ( akacodels,
e.g.C functions as seen for GenoM3, Sect. 2) each requesting all resources for its execution ( e.g.speciﬁed
in its arguments) at once (codels are also used in MAUVE, see (Gobillot et al., 2019, Sect. 3.1)).
11 CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK
In this work, we describe an automated two-step approach to rigorously verify complex (mixed-) critical
real-time robots. It combines schedulability analysis and formal veriﬁcation and is suitable for real-time
robotic applications that do not scale with model checking. Our approach is automated for non-expert users
and validated on a real drone case study. Further, we present LLAB and R/W LLAB, two novel spin-based
real-time locking implementations for multicore real-time robots. They fulﬁll a set of requirements, based
on real-time robots speciﬁcities, while outperforming the state-of-the-art multi-resource locks DGL and
MRLock in predictability and/or efﬁciency. LLAB and R/W LLAB are also useful beyond the scope
of robotics, i.e.in any multicore/manycore real-time system with short critical sections that requires
nesting-free multi-resource locking.
We give two examples of future work directions. First, though our experiments in Sect. 8 are carried
out on a system that is inspired from a real robotic application, we still need to implement R/W LLAB
in a robotic framework, e.g.GenoM3 or MAUVE, and evaluate its performance on actual executions of
real-time robots. Second, our veriﬁcation approach (Sect. 4, Sect. 9) does not include the locking-related
overheads. While real-time analysis usually focuses on theoretical blocking bounds, recent works such
as Nemitz et al. (2021) propose overhead-aware schedulability analysis . This will be a good starting point
for us to quantify various overheads on real robotic implementations and include them in our veriﬁcation
process.
FUNDING
AZ was supported by the Chair for Cyber-Physical Systems in Production Engineering at TUM and the
Alexander von Humboldt Foundation.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This paper is a major extension of the RTCSA 2020 publication “A Two-Step Hybrid Approach for
Verifying Real-time Robotic Systems” (Foughali, 2020).
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The implementation of the locking protocols and the benchmarks are publicly available at
https://gitlab.com/azuepke/llab/. The UPPAAL-SMC template is publicly available, since Foughali et al.
(2019b), at https://github.com/Mo-F/uppaal-smc-exp.
REFERENCES
Ando, N., Suehiro, T., Kitagaki, K., Kotoku, T., and Yoon, W.-K. (2005). RT-middleware: distributed
component middleware for RT (robot technology). In International Conference on Intelligent Robots
and Systems (IROS) (IEEE), 3933–3938
Blass, T., Hamann, A., Lange, R., Ziegenbein, D., and Brandenburg, B. B. (2021). Automatic latency
management for ROS 2: Beneﬁts, challenges, and open problems. In Real-Time and Embedded
Technology and Applications Symposium (RTAS) (IEEE), 264–277
36

--- Page 38 ---
Foughali et al. Formal Veriﬁcation of Real-Time Autonomous Robots
Brandenburg, B. B. (2011). Scheduling and locking in multiprocessor real-time operating systems . Ph.D.
thesis, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
Brandenburg, B. B. (2019). Multiprocessor real-time locking protocols: A systematic review. CoRR
abs/1909.09600
Brandenburg, B. B. and Anderson, J. H. (2010). Spin-based reader-writer synchronization for
multiprocessor real-time systems. Real Time Systems 46, 25–87
Bruyninckx, H. (2001). Open robot control software: the OROCOS project. In International Conference
on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) (IEEE), 2523–2528
Burns, A. and Baruah, S. (2008). Sustainability in real-time scheduling. Journal of Computing Science
and Engineering 2, 74–97
Buttazzo, G. C., Bertogna, M., and Yao, G. (2012). Limited preemptive scheduling for real-time systems. a
survey. IEEE transactions on Industrial Informatics 9, 3–15
Casini, D., Blaß, T., L ¨utkebohle, I., and Brandenburg, B. B. (2019). Response-time analysis of ROS 2
processing chains under reservation-based scheduling. In Euromicro Conference on Real-Time Systems
(ECRTS) , ed. S. Quinton (Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum f ¨ur Informatik), vol. 133 of LIPIcs ,
6:1–6:23
Chermprayong, P., Zhang, K., Xiao, F., and Kovac, M. (2019). An integrated delta manipulator for aerial
repair: A new aerial robotic system. IEEE Robotics & Automation Magazine 26, 54–66
Choi, H., Xiang, Y ., and Kim, H. (2021). PiCAS: New design of priority-driven chain-aware scheduling for
ROS 2. In Real-Time and Embedded Technology and Applications Symposium (RTAS) (IEEE), 251–263
David, A., Larsen, K. G., Legay, A., Miku ˇcionis, M., and Poulsen, D. B. (2015). UPAAL SMC tutorial.
Journal of Software Tools and Technology Transfer 17, 397–415
Echeverria, G., Lemaignan, S., Degroote, A., Lacroix, S., Karg, M., Koch, P., et al. (2012). Simulating
Complex Robotic Scenarios with MORSE. In International Conference on Simulation, Modeling, and
Programming for Autonomous Robots (SIMPAR) . 197–208
Elkady, A. and Sobh, T. (2012). Robotics middleware: A comprehensive literature survey and attribute-
based bibliography. Journal of Robotics 2012, 959013
Foughali, M. (2017). Toward a correct-and-scalable veriﬁcation of concurrent robotic systems: insights on
formalisms and tools. In International Conference on Application of Concurrency to System Design
(ACSD) (IEEE), 29–38
Foughali, M. (2018). Formal veriﬁcation of the functional layer of robotic and autonomous systems. PhD
Thesis, INSA Toulouse.
Foughali, M. (2019). On reconciling schedulability analysis and model checking in robotics. In
International Conference on Model and Data Engineering (MEDI) (Springer), 32–48
Foughali, M. (2020). A two-step hybrid approach for verifying real-time robotic systems. In International
Conference on Embedded and Real-Time Computing Systems and Applications (RTCSA) (IEEE), 1–10
Foughali, M., Bensalem, S., Combaz, J., and Ingrand, F. (2020). Runtime veriﬁcation of timed properties
in autonomous robots. In International Conference on Formal Methods and Models for System Design
(MEMOCODE) (ACM/IEEE), 1–12
Foughali, M., Dal Zilio, S., and Ingrand, F. (2019a). On the Semantics of the GenoM3 Framework . Tech.
Rep. 19036, LAAS/CNRS
Foughali, M. and Hladik, P. (2020). Bridging the gap between formal veriﬁcation and schedulability
analysis: The case of robotics. Journal of Systems Architecture 111, 101817
Foughali, M., Ingrand, F., and Seceleanu, C. (2019b). Statistical model checking of complex robotic
systems. In International SPIN Symposium on Model Checking of Software (Springer), 114–134
37

--- Page 39 ---
Foughali et al. Formal Veriﬁcation of Real-Time Autonomous Robots
Gai, P., Di Natale, M., Lipari, G., Ferrari, A., Gabellini, C., and Marceca, P. (2003). A comparison
of MPCP and MSRP when sharing resources in the Janus multiple-processor on a chip platform. In
International Conference on Embedded and Real-Time Computing Systems and Applications (RTCSA)
(IEEE), 189–198
Gai, P., Lipari, G., and Di Natale, M. (2001). Minimizing memory utilization of real-time task sets in
single and multi-processor systems-on-a-chip. In Real-Time Systems Symposium . 73–83
Gobillot, N., Lesire, C., and Doose, D. (2019). A design and analysis methodology for component-based
real-time architectures of autonomous systems. Journal of Intelligent Robotic Systems 96, 123–138
Gracioli, G., Fr ¨ohlich, A. A., Pellizzoni, R., and Fischmeister, S. (2013). Implementation and evaluation of
global and partitioned scheduling in a real-time OS. Real-Time Systems 49, 669–714
Hazim, M., Qu, H., and Veres, S. (2016). Testing, veriﬁcation and improvements of timeliness in ROS
processes. In Towards Autonomous Robotic Systems Conference (TAROS) . 146–157
Herlihy, M., Shavit, N., Luchangco, V ., and Spear, M. (2020). The art of multiprocessor programming
(Newnes)
Jarrett, C. E., Ward, B. C., and Anderson, J. H. (2015). A contention-sensitive ﬁne-grained locking protocol
for multiprocessor real-time systems. In International Conference on Real Time Networks and Systems
(RTNS) , ed. J. Forget (ACM), 3–12
Jeong, S., Kim, D., Kim, S., Ham, J.-W., Lee, J.-K., and Oh, K.-Y . (2021). Real-time environmental
cognition and sag estimation of transmission lines using uav equipped with 3-D lidar system. IEEE
Transactions on Power Delivery 36, 2658 – 2667
Kamel, M., Alexis, K., Achtelik, M., and Siegwart, R. (2015). Fast nonlinear model predictive control
for multicopter attitude tracking on SO(3). In International Conference on Control Applications (CCA)
(IEEE), 1160–1166
Khedekar, N., Mascarich, F., Papachristos, C., Dang, T., and Alexis, K. (2019). Contact-based navigation
path planning for aerial robots. In International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) (IEEE),
4161–4167
Kim, M. and Kang, K. C. (2005). Formal construction and veriﬁcation of home service robots: A case
study. In International Symposium on Automated Technology for Veriﬁcation and Analysis (ATVA)
(Springer), 429–443
Koenig, N. and Howard, A. (2004). Design and use paradigms for Gazebo, an open-source multi-robot
simulator. In International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) (IEEE), 2149–2154
Kortenkamp, D. and Simmons, R. (2008). Robotic systems architectures and programming. In Springer
Handbook of Robotics (Springer). 187–206
Kress-Gazit, H., Wongpiromsarn, T., and Topcu, U. (2011). Correct, reactive, high-level robot control.
IEEE Robotics & Automation Magazine 18, 65–74
Legay, A., Delahaye, B., and Bensalem, S. (2010). Statistical model checking: An overview. In
International Conference on Runtime Veriﬁcation (RV) (Springer), 122–135
Mallet, A., Pasteur, C., Herrb, M., Lemaignan, S., and Ingrand, F. (2010). GenoM3: Building middleware-
independent robotic components. In International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA)
(IEEE), 4627–4632
Maruyama, Y ., Kato, S., and Azumi, T. (2016). Exploring the performance of ROS2. In International
Conference on Embedded Software (EMSOFT) , eds. P. Eles and R. Mangharam (ACM), 5:1–5:10
Mellor-Crummey, J. M. and Scott, M. L. (1991a). Algorithms for scalable synchronization on shared-
memory multiprocessors. ACM Transactions on Computer Systems 9, 21–65
Mellor-Crummey, J. M. and Scott, M. L. (1991b). Scalable reader-writer synchronization for shared-
38

--- Page 40 ---
Foughali et al. Formal Veriﬁcation of Real-Time Autonomous Robots
memory multiprocessors. In ACM SIGPLAN Symposium on Principles & Practice of Parallel
Programming (PPOPP) , ed. D. S. Wise (ACM), 106–113
Metta, G., Fitzpatrick, P., and Natale, L. (2006). YARP: yet another robot platform. International Journal
of Advanced Robotic Systems 3, 8
Miyazawa, A., Ribeiro, P., Li, W., Cavalcanti, A., and Timmis, J. (2017). Automatic property checking
of robotic applications. In International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) (IEEE),
3869–3876
Molnar, L. and Veres, S. (2009). System veriﬁcation of autonomous underwater vehicles by model checking.
InOCEANS-EUROPE (IEEE), 1–10
Nemitz, C. E., Amert, T., and Anderson, J. H. (2019a). Real-time multiprocessor locks with nesting:
optimizing the common case. Real Time Systems 55, 296–348
Nemitz, C. E., Amert, T., Goyal, M., and Anderson, J. H. (2019b). Concurrency groups: a new way to
look at real-time multiprocessor lock nesting. In International Conference on Real-Time Networks and
Systems (RTNS) , eds. J. Ermont, Y . Song, and C. Gill (ACM), 187–197
Nemitz, C. E., Caspin, S., Anderson, J. H., and Ward, B. C. (2021). Light reading: Optimizing reader/writer
locking for read-dominant real-time workloads. In Euromicro Conference on Real-Time Systems
(ECRTS) , ed. B. B. Brandenburg (Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum f ¨ur Informatik), vol. 196 of
LIPIcs , 6:1–6:22
Oc´on, J., Dragomir, I., Coles, A., Green, A., Kunze, L., Marc, R., et al. (2020). ADE: Autonomous
decision making in very long traverses. In International Symposium on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Robotics
and Automation in Space (i-Sairas) (Lunar and Planetary Institute)
Pecheur, C. (2000). Veriﬁcation and validation of autonomy software at NASA . Tech. rep., NASA Ames
Research Center
Quigley, M., Conley, K., Gerkey, B., Faust, J., Foote, T., Leibs, J., et al. (2009). ROS: an open-source robot
operating system. In ICRA workshop on open source software . vol. 3, 5
Saito, Y ., Sato, F., Azumi, T., Kato, S., and Nishio, N. (2018). ROSCH: real-time scheduling framework for
ROS. In International Conference on Embedded and Real-Time Computing Systems and Applications
(RTCSA) (IEEE), 52–58
Schlegel, C., Steck, A., Brugali, D., and Knoll, A. (2010). Design abstraction and processes in robotics:
From code-driven to model-driven engineering. In International Conference on Simulation, Modeling,
and Programming for Autonomous Robots (SIMPAR) (Springer), 324–335
Soetens, P. and Bruyninckx, H. (2005). Realtime hybrid task-based control for robots and machine tools.
InInternational Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) (IEEE), 259–264
Vahrenkamp, N., W ¨achter, M., Kr ¨ohnert, M., Welke, K., and Asfour, T. (2015). The robot software
framework ArmarX. Information Technology 57, 99–111
Walter, V ., Staub, N., Saska, M., and Franchi, A. (2018). Mutual localization of UA Vs based on blinking
ultraviolet markers and 3D time-position hough transform. In International Conference on Automation
Science and Engineering (CASE) (IEEE), 298–303
Ward, B. C. (2016). Sharing non-processor resources in multiprocessor real-time systems . Ph.D. thesis,
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
Ward, B. C. and Anderson, J. H. (2012). Supporting nested locking in multiprocessor real-time systems. In
Euromicro Conference on Real-Time Systems (ECRTS) , ed. R. Davis (IEEE Computer Society), 223–232
Ward, B. C. and Anderson, J. H. (2013). Fine-grained multiprocessor real-time locking with improved
blocking. In International Conference on Real-Time Networks and Systems (RTNS) , eds. M. Auguin,
R. de Simone, R. I. Davis, and E. Grolleau (ACM), 67–76
39

--- Page 41 ---
Foughali et al. Formal Veriﬁcation of Real-Time Autonomous Robots
Ward, B. C. and Anderson, J. H. (2014). Multi-resource real-time reader/writer locks for multiprocessors.
InInternational Parallel and Distributed Processing Symposium (IPDPS) (IEEE Computer Society),
177–186
Wei, H., Shao, Z., Huang, Z., Chen, R., Guan, Y ., Tan, J., et al. (2016). RT-ROS: A real-time ROS
architecture on multi-core processors. Future Generation Computer Systems 56, 171–178
Wieder, A. and Brandenburg, B. B. (2013). On spin locks in AUTOSAR: Blocking analysis of FIFO,
unordered, and priority-ordered spin locks. In Real-Time Systems Symposium (RTSS) (IEEE), 45–56
Zhang, D., Lynch, B., and Dechev, D. (2013). Fast and scalable queue-based resource allocation lock
on shared-memory multiprocessors. In International Conference on Principles of Distributed Systems
(OPODIS) , eds. R. Baldoni, N. Nisse, and M. van Steen (Springer), vol. 8304 of Lecture Notes in
Computer Science , 266–280
40
