--- Page 1 ---
Design and Veriﬁcation of a
Health-Monitoring Driver Assistance System
Helena Gruhn, Daniel St ¨ohr, Mehmet G ¨overciny, and Sabine Glesner
Software Engineering for Embedded Systems, Technical University of Berlin,
yGeriatrics Research Group, Charit ´e - Universit ¨atsmedizin Berlin,
fhelena.gruhn, daniel.stoehr, sabine.glesner g@tu-berlin.de, mehmet.goevercin@charite.de
Abstract —Health-monitoring driver assistance systems sup-
port an independent and self-determined lifestyle enhancing the
driver’s safety. These systems are health-critical and need to
guarantee correct behavior in emergency situations such as heart
attacks. Furthermore, they have to be adjustable and extendable
with respect to integrated functionalities to ﬁt individual and
changing needs. We present a concept for a mobile, service-
oriented driver assistance system with dynamic network behavior.
Additionally, we introduce a veriﬁcation approach to ensure
correct behavior.
I. I NTRODUCTION
Mobility is a central aspect of a self-determined lifestyle.
A rising number of assistive technologies have been developed
to support trafﬁc participants, in particular mobile elderly
persons, in hazardous situations, e.g., distance-warning or au-
tonomous emergency stop systems [1]. In particular, the num-
ber of elderly causing trafﬁc accidents with personal injuries
increased in Germany by 4.5 %between 1990 and 2005 [2]. A
driver assistance system has to be modular and extendable to
ﬁt the individual needs of each person. In particular, elderly
with developing multimorbidities need a support network that
is easily adjustable to their changing demands. Furthermore,
assistance systems have to be trustworthy and reliable. In
particular, in life-endangering situations their correct behavior
has to be guaranteed. It must be ensured that emergency
reactions are triggered in time and that all relevant messages
within the system and to the surrounding environment reach
their destination eventually. To reach this goal, it is necessary
to verify the correct behavior of such systems.
In this paper, we present our service-oriented health-
monitoring driver assistance system (DAS) combined with our
approach for the veriﬁcation of its correct functionality. Our
main contribution is to provide a design method for these
assistance systems such that current veriﬁcation techniques can
be applied. Hence, we signiﬁcantly increase the safety and
reliability of theses systems. Hereby, we focus on correctness
w.r.t. network topology, functional, and timing behavior.
II. A HEALTH -MONITORING DRIVER ASSISTANCE SYSTEM
Our DAS increases driving safety by reacting to speciﬁc
emergency situations, e.g., heart attacks, by triggering an
emergency stop. To assess the driver’s health status, vital
parameters, e.g., the heart beat, must be observed [3]. As
elderly people often show a highly individual multimorbidity,
we need our DAS to be adaptable by adjusting the choice of
observed vital parameters to individual needs.
To this end, we design our DAS as a service-oriented sensor-
actuator network [4]. Each node has sensing and/or actuation
Biosignal
Amplifier
ECG
Respiration
Belt
Controller
Camera
ES
System
Sound
System
 Pulse
MeterFig. 1. An example for sensors used within the Driver Assistance System
capabilities. Vital parameters are registered using the respective
sensors .Actuators , i.e., a speaker and the autonomous emer-
gency stop system (ES system), interact with the environment.
The controller is a special, central network node that processes
the readings of all connected sensors and triggers emergency
actions. For this purpose, it implements a set of rules specify-
ing which speciﬁc sensor readings imply emergency situations.
The network is service-oriented , requiring all nodes to offer a
uniﬁed and platform-independent interface to ensure interoper-
ability. This allows for a dynamic interaction of mobile nodes ,
e.g., sensors directly carried by the driver, with the network.
A. An Assistance System for Cardiac Patients
In Figure 1, we illustrate a DAS designed to assist people
with a high risk of heart attacks. The network consists of
different nodes which observe the driver’s vital parameters. An
electrocardiogram (ECG ) monitors the heart activity and the
pulse. A respiration belt captures the breathing. Furthermore,
the network includes a camera to detect microsleep and tunnel
vision by observing eye and head movements, a biosignal
ampliﬁer , and a controller that provokes emergency actions.
We assume that the driver also has an assistance system
securing his health status at home requiring the continual
application of a portable pulse meter . This device dynamically
joins or exits the network when the driver enters or leaves the
car, respectively. While in the network the mobile pulse meter
remains into a standby mode to avoid redundant measurements
of the pulse and to reduce energy consumption. It restarts after
exiting the network or when a malfunction of the ECG is
detected to avoid data loss. The system is able, e.g., to react
to a heart attack by triggering a safe emergency brake or to
voice an alarm to alert the driver after detecting microsleep.
III. V ERIFICATION FRAMEWORK
Within the DAS several safety-critical processes occur. We
must guarantee that neither the driver, nor other road users

--- Page 2 ---
Informal
SpecificationInformal
Specification
Verification Framework
Timed Behavior Communicational Behavior
Timed Automata
Controller Model MTimed CTL
Specification S
Model
CheckerMS?yes/noπ Calculus
Specificationπ Calculus
System Model
Bisimulation
Relation?Theorem
Proveryes/noFig. 2. Our Framework for verifying the Driver Assistance System
are harmed due to incorrect system behavior, e.g., through a
delayed triggering of an alarm signal. As testing only shows
the presence of errors, but not their absence, we propose a
formal veriﬁcation framework to prove the correctness of the
DAS. To the best of our knowledge no formal framework for
service-oriented networks exists. Existing work on wireless
networks either does not cover topology changes [5], [6] or
is not platform-independent [7].
We visualize our veriﬁcation framework in Figure 2. The
starting point is an informal requirements speciﬁcation created
by physicians and other domain experts. The informal spec-
iﬁcation consists of (1) a set of medical (and time-related)
rules describing, e.g., which combination of vital parameters
implies a heart attack, and (2) a set of network requirements
stating which communication paths have to be available on
which point of execution. We use two specialized veriﬁcation
methods to handle both types of requirements separately.
This is necessary as no actual formalism is able to cover
time-related controller behavior on the one hand, and highly
dynamic network behavior on the other hand. In the following,
we shortly outline both veriﬁcation approaches and how we
integrate them into our framework.
A. Functionalities and Timing Behavior
We verify functional and time-related mechanisms imple-
mented within the controller by relying on the well-established
concept of model checking . Firstly, we construct a model of the
controller’s behavior as a timed automaton [8] (TA). The model
describes how the controller reacts to events occurring within
the network and in which situations events are triggered by the
controller itself. Additionally, timing behavior, e.g., timeouts
or delays, can be expressed within the model. Secondly, we
construct the corresponding behavioral requirements from the
informal speciﬁcation using the temporal logic Timed CTL [9]
(TCTL ). We perform the veriﬁcation process automatically
by using the model checker UPPAAL [10]. UPPAAL takes
a TA model Mand a TCTL speciﬁcation Sas input and
automatically calculates if MfulﬁllsS, in shortM j=S.
IfMdoes not fulﬁll Sa counter example is generated so that
conclusions on the error source of the implementation can be
directly drawed.
B. Dynamic Network Behavior
We also need to verify that our DAS functions correctly
after modiﬁcations of the network topology. These could be the
extension of the network through the addition of a new node or
a breakdown of a previously established wireless connection.Here, we only consider the ability of a node to receive and
send messages by examining the existing communication links.
We assume that the internal node behavior is correct. Our
idea is to extract all information concerning communication
channels and node reachability from the informal speciﬁcation
by building a -calculus [11] speciﬁcation. Then, we model
our concrete implementation using a -calculus variant as
described in [12]. We choose the -calculus as basis for
our veriﬁcation approach because it is a formally deﬁned,
compositional and well-established formalism. We will prove
the correctness of our system by showing a bisimulation
relation between the speciﬁcation and the model. For a semi-
automatic proof we will use a theorem prover.
IV. C ONCLUSION & F UTURE WORK
In this paper, we presented an approach for the design
and veriﬁcation of a DAS. With that, we are able to develop
individual and safe assistance systems supporting elderly to
preserve their mobility. We plan to continue our work by
deriving concrete rules for our heart attack scenario and by
evaluating our framework with these.
Furthermore, we plan to improve the capabilities of our frame-
work by including a method we developed for automatically
generating correct controller models [13]. With that, we will
be able to to decrease development cost and time by directly
generating correct models out of given speciﬁcations.
REFERENCES
[1] P. Waldmann et al., “Der Nothalteassistent-abgesichertes Anhalten bei
pl¨otzlicher Fahrunf ¨ahigkeit des Fahrzeugf ¨uhrers,” in Ambient Assisted
Living-AAL , 2010.
[2] J. Schade and A. Engeln, Fortschritte der Verkehrspsychologie Beitr ¨age
vom 45. Kongress der Deutschen Gesellschaft f ¨ur Psychologie . VS
Verlag f ¨ur Sozialwissenschaften, 2008.
[3] H. Ehmen, M. G ¨overcin, M. Haesner, J. Kiselev, and E. Steinhagen-
Thiessen, “Fahrleistungsrelevante Parameter im Alter,” in Ambient As-
sisted Living-AAL . VDE VERLAG GmbH, 2010.
[4] A. Rezgui and M. Eltoweissy, “Service-oriented sensor-actuator net-
works: Promises, challenges, and the road ahead,” Computer Commu-
nications , vol. 30, no. 13, pp. 2627–2648, 2007.
[5] D. Martinez et al., “Formal speciﬁcation and design techniques for
wireless sensor and actuator networks,” Sensors , vol. 11, no. 1, pp.
1059–1077, 2011.
[6] M. Diaz et al., “A component framework for wireless sensor and actor
networks,” in Emerging Technologies and Factory Automation, 2006.
ETFA ’06. , sept. 2006, pp. 300 –307.
[7] O. Sharma et al., “Towards verifying correctness of wireless sensor
network applications using insense and spin,” Model Checking Software ,
vol. 5578, pp. 223–240, 2009.
[8] R. Alur and D. L. Dill, “A theory of timed automata,” Theoretical
Computer Science , vol. 126, pp. 183–235, 1994.
[9] R. Alur, “Techniques for Automatic Veriﬁcation of Real-Time Systems,”
Ph.D. dissertation, Stanford University, 1991.
[10] G. Behrmann, A. David, and K. G. Larsen, “A tutorial on UPPAAL ,” in
Formal Methods for the Design of Real-Time Systems: 4th International
School on Formal Methods for the Design of Computer, Communication,
and Software Systems , no. 3185. Springer-Verlag, 2004.
[11] R. Milner, Communicating and Mobile Systems: The pi-Calculus .
Cambridge University Press, 1999.
[12] H. Gruhn and S. Glesner, “Towards a Formal Framework for Mo-
bile, Service-Oriented Sensor-Actuator Networks,” in Formal En-
gineering approaches to Software Components and Architectures
(FESCA@ETAPS2013) , 2013.
[13] D. St ¨ohr and S. Glesner, “Planning in Real-Time Domains with Timed
CTL Goals via Symbolic Model Checking,” in 7th International Sym-
posium on Theoretical Aspects of Software Engineering , to appear.
