--- Page 1 ---
Verifyingfunctionalbehaviorsofautomotiveproductsin
EAST-ADL2 using UPPAAL-PORT
Eun-Young Kang1 2, Pierre-Yves Schobbens1, and Paul Pettersson2
1Computer Science Faculty, Universityof Namur, Belgium
2MDHPROGRESSResearch Centre,V ¨asters ,Sweden
{eun-young.kang,pierre-yves.schobbens }@fundp.ac.be
paul.pettersson@mdh.se
Abstract. Westudytheuseofformalmodelingandveriﬁcationtechniquesatan
early stage in the development of safety-critical automotive products wh ich are
originally described in the domain speciﬁc architectural language EAST-A DL2.
Thisarchitecturallanguageonlyfocusesonthestructuraldeﬁnitionoff unctional
blocks. However, the behavior inside each functional block is not spec iﬁed and
thatlimitsformalmodelingandanalysisofsystemsbehaviorsaswellasef ﬁcient
veriﬁcation of safety properties. In this paper, we tackle this problem by p ropos-
ing one modeling approach, which formally captures the behavioral exe cution
inside each functional block and their interactions, and helps to improve the for-
mal modeling and veriﬁcation capability of EAST-ADL2: the behavior of ea ch
elementary function of EAST-ADL2 is speciﬁed in UPPAAL Timed Automata.
The formal syntax and semantics are deﬁned in order to specify the beh avior
modelinsideEAST-ADL2andtheirinteractions.Acompositionofthefunctio nal
behaviors is considered a network of Timed Automata that enables us to ve rify
behaviorsoftheentiresystemusingtheUPPAALmodelchecker.Theme thodhas
been demonstrated by verifyingthe safetyof theBrake-by-wiresystem design.
1 Introduction and MainThemes
EAST-ADL2isanarchitecturedescriptionlanguageforthed evelopmentofautomotive
embedded systems [1]. Advanced automotive functions [15,6 ] are increasingly depen-
dent on software and electronics. These automotive embedde d systems are becoming
progressively complex and critical for the entire vehicle. Model-based development
(MBD) is a means to manage this complexity and develop embedd ed systems in a way
that increases safety and quality. The EAST-ADL2 modeling a pproach addresses this
topic and provides means to integrate the engineering infor mation from documents,
spreadsheets and legacy tools into one systematic structur e, an EAST-ADL2 system
model.
Our aim is to use formal modeling techniques at an early stage in the development
life cycle of automotive embedded systems, and to use symbol ic simulators and model
checkers as debugging and veriﬁcation tools to ensure that t he predicted function be-
haviorsofthemodeledsysteminEAST-ADL2satisfycertainr equirementsundergiven
assumptions on the environment where thesystem issupposed tooperate.
EAST-ADL2expressesthestructureandinterconnectionoft hesystem.Systembe-
havior is deﬁned based on the deﬁnition of a set of elementary functional blocks and

--- Page 2 ---
their triggers and interfaces. However, the behavioral deﬁ nition inside each elementary
functional block is not speciﬁed, which limits the automati c translation from EAST-
ADL2 models to other formal models for efﬁcient veriﬁcation . Instead, the execution
of each function is described with external behavioral anne xes and legacy tools includ-
ing general UML tool and domain-speciﬁc tools, e.g., Simuli nk or UML [13]. This
restricts the construction of a complete system behavior mo del and veriﬁcation of the
behavior of theentiresystem model withveriﬁcation tools.
Toachieveourgoalbyimprovingtheaforementionedrestric tion,weproposeafor-
mal approach which facilitates the veriﬁcation of system fu nction behaviors in EAST-
ADL2 by using UPPAAL-PORT model-checker [8]: this approach speciﬁes a behavior
inside of each elementary function (block) in Timed Automat a (TA) and constructs a
completesystembehaviormodelbytheparallelcomposition oflocalbehaviors.Inpar-
ticular, we specify the execution of each function behavior in the UPPAAL-PORT TA
modelandconsider acomposition ofthefunctionbehaviors a sanetworkofTAsothat
the behaviors of the entire system in EAST-ADL2 can be formal ly deﬁned. Then this
network TA can beanalyzed and veriﬁed by UPPAAL-PORT model c hecker.
Thisworkisorganizedasfollows.Section2introducestech nologyandbackground,
EAST-ALD2 and UPPAAL-PORT toolkit as used in our approach. S ection 3 presents
ourapproachforverifyingsystembehaviorsinEAST-ADL2by usingUPPAAL-PORT
model checker: this approach formally captures the behavio r inside each functional
block and their parallel compositional interactions. Furt hermore, the formal deﬁnition
enablestransformationofthegivenmodeltomodelsofUPPAA L-PORTtoolformodel
checking.Insection4,ourmethodisdemonstratedinverify ingthesafetyoftheBrake-
by-wiresystem design. Wediscuss further workand conclude inSection 5.
2 Background
2.1 EAST-ADL2
The goals of modeling with EAST-ADL2 are to deal with complex ity control and
improve safety, reliability, cost, and development efﬁcie ncy through MBD. For this,
EAST-ADL2 structures a system model into multiple abstract ion levels in terms of the
development lifecycle of automotive embedded systems.
EAST-ADL2 is an information model, connecting different vi ews of the system.
Theviews areinﬂuenced bythedifferent engineering tradit ionsand backgrounds. This
concept allows EAST-ADL2 to handle various types of informa tion including require-
ments,vehiclefeatures,systemenvironment,application functions,deploymentofsoft-
ware and hardware resources, behaviors, non-functionalit y properties such as variabil-
ity, timing constraint, dependability, and V&V related inf ormation. Abstract solution,
design,andimplementationdetailsarefoundindifferenta bstractionlevelsinthemodel:
the highest abstraction level, Vehicle(Feature) level , characterizes a vehicle by means
of features and deﬁnes implementation-independent inform ation such as features and
requirements.Fig.1depictsanoverviewofthesystemmodel andtheabstractionlevels
of EAST-ADL2.
AtAnalysis level , functionality is realized based on the features and requir ements.
These features and requirements are reﬁned by the decision o f logical design with the
deﬁnition of logical abstract functions of features and the ir interactions, and require-

--- Page 3 ---
Fig.1.Thestructureof an EAST-ADL2SystemModel
ments. The model at this level is used for the analysis of cont rol requirements, tim-
ing constraints, data consistency between interfaces, haz ard identiﬁcation, etc. Design
levelcontainsconcretefunctionaldeﬁnitionaccordingtothere alizedlogicaldesign.In
particular, functional deﬁnition of application software , functional abstraction of hard-
ware and middleware are presented, as well as hardware archi tecture being captured
and function-to-hardware allocation being deﬁned. Implementation level , i.e. the soft-
ware architecture, is represented using the AUTOSAR standa rd and allocates software
modules to a network of Electronic Control Units (ECUs) acco rding to the AUTOSAR
standard[2].AsinFig.1,EAST-ADL2extensionsareconstru ctsforrequirements,vari-
ability,behaviors,dependability,andV&Vactivities,et c.EAST-ADL2isintendedtobe
an integration framework for functionality deﬁned in diffe rent notations and tools. The
behavioral deﬁnition therefore relies on the deﬁnition of a set of elementary functions
that are executed based on the assumption of run-to-complet ion execution (read inputs
from ports, compute, and write outputs on ports). This is cho sen to enable analysis and
behavioralcompositionandmakethefunctionexecutionind ependentofbehavioralno-
tations. Detailsof those issuesareexplained inSection 3.
2.2 UPPAAL-PORT
UPPAAL-PORT is a model checking tool for component based mod eling, simulation,
and veriﬁcation of real-time and embedded systems modeled a s real-time components.
ItcanbeusedasanEclipseplugintogetherwiththeSAVEinte grateddevelopmentenvi-
ronment(IDE)[16,17]inordertosupportgraphicalmodelin gofinternalcomponentbe-
haviorsasanUPPAAL-PORTTAandcompositionofcomponents. Themodelchecker
of UPPAAL-PORT veriﬁes properties expressed in a subset of t imedcomputational
tree logic (TCTL). The current input ﬁle format for UPPAAL-PORT is a com ponent
modeling language, SAVE-CCM [3], which describes the archi tectural framework for
modeling real time embedded applications with particular e mphasis on automotive do-

--- Page 4 ---
C2C1(b) SAVECCM Components Model (a) Function Blocks in EAST−ADL2
F1
F2A2A
(d) Target Model
FC1
FC2assigned(c) UPPAAL−PORT TAs
MODEL CHECKINGformalizedaligned
verified
Counter Example Counter Example 
Counter Example NoSATNoSAT
NoSATverifiedSystem Textual Descriptions
Functional RequirementsBehavioral Constraints
Timing ConstraintsRefines Models
Refines ModelsModifies/Refines Requirements
SATQuality Requirements
Fig.2.Methodology Roadmap
main and safety concerns. In particular, SAVE-CCM is used to create components and
interconnections among them, and supports run-to-complet ion semantics. We use this
architectural framework of SAVE-CCM for mapping from funct ional blocks and their
interconnectors in EAST-ADL2 to components and their inter connections in SAVE-
CCM respectively.
For analysis purpose, an UPPAAL-PORT TA model is assigned to each of the
SAVE-CCM components in order to describe timing and functio nal behaviors of the
component. Since EAST-ADL2 is intended for use with differe nt behavioral notations,
UPPAAL-PORT TA is perfectly appropriate to use. This UPPAAL -PORT TA commu-
nicateswithotheronesthroughportsandthevaluesofthepo rtsdeﬁnedbybindingTA
variables to the ports of components, and supports synchron ous execution with other
regular UPPAAL TA models. Thus, by deﬁning local behaviors o f each EAST-ADL2
function block with UPPAAL-PORT TAs, their synchronous run -to-completion execu-
tion semantics should make it possible to integrate the cont ained TA into a model rep-
resenting the complete system. Since EAST-ADL2 also suppor ts requirements, the in-
variantsandotherlogicalcriteriausedformodelingfunct ionbehaviorswithUPPAAL-
PORTTAsrefertorequirementsinEAST-ADL2.TheSAVE-CCM/U PPAAL-PORTis
not an intermediate step. It is the target model we want to bui ld as a long term goal. So
the behaviors of a given system (functions and their interac tions) will be more effec-
tively analyzed.
3 Approach and Proposed Solution
To achieve our aforementioned goal in section 1, we propose a formal approach which
facilitates the veriﬁcation of system behaviors in EAST-AD L2 by using UPPAAL-
PORT model-checker independently of any hardware constrai nts and topology map-
ping. It mainly focuses on the higher level of functional beh avior of applications at
Analysislevel intermsofits Featurelevel withthreedistinctphases–architecturaland

--- Page 5 ---
behavioralmapping,behaviorspeciﬁcation,andveriﬁcati on(modelchecking).Wewill
discuss thosephases inmoredetail infollowing sections.
3.1 Architecture and Behavioral Semantics Mapping
This architectural mapping step, called A2A, is an architec ture-to-architecture repre-
sentation from (a) to (b) in our methodology roadmap Fig.2. T he EAST-ADL2 model
architectureframeat Analysislevel inthePapyrusUML(Fig.2-(a))ismappedtoSAVE-
CCM architecture frame (Fig.2-(b)). However, this stage is not concerned with the ac-
tual representation ofthe data.
Thisstageperformsasemanticanchoringbetweenthedomain sofEAST-ADL2and
that of SAVE-CCM. The purpose of the semantic anchoring is to map concepts from
EAST-ADL2toSAVE-CCMinawaythatpreservesthesemanticso ftheoriginalmodel
withoutchangingthestructureofthemodelheavily.Eachel ementary AnalysisFunction
(AF) has its own logical execution and no internal concurren cy, therefore it maps well
to a SAVE-CCM component. In this case, there is a convenient a nd obvious mapping
possibility: we design a system model in SAVE-CCM from the gi ven system at Anal-
ysis level in EAST-ADL2. We assign one SAVE-CCM component per AF elemen t in
the EAST-ADL2 system (i.e. BreakController, ABS, etc). The original interconnectors
and associated ports inEAST-ADL2 are mapped tothe intercon nections between ports
of SAVE-CCM components respectively and that enables commu nication with other
componentsaccordingtotheiroriginalAFelement.Oneormo reportsandelementsof
EAST-ADL2 models may be realized by one port and one componen t of SAVE-CCM
models, as these may have several signals or data elements pe r interface that are sim-
pliﬁed(asabstracteddesign)inoneportandonecomponenti nourSAVE-CCMdesign
model.
Insideeach AF, thedatatransformationand itsown behavior s aredescribed asTAs
based on the assumption of synchronous run-to-completion e xecution. There are two
types of function interactions in EAST-ADL2: either a FlowPort interaction whereby
a function performs a computation on provided data, or a ClientServer interaction
whereby the execution of a service is called upon by another f unction. The Flow-
Portinteractions are matched to the interconnections of SAVE-C CM components. The
ClientServer interactions are explained by the execution of the TA inside a component
and itssynchronization withother TAs.
ThetriggeringofeachAFisdeﬁnedeitherastime-drivenore vent-drivenononeof
theinputports.Therearetwotypesoffunctionentities,ti me-discretefunctionandtime-
continuousfunction.Time-discretefunctionisdoneafter acomputationaldelay,i.e.ex-
ecution time. Time-continuous function deﬁnes the transfe r function from input to out-
put,andthecomputationrateisinﬁnite.Sincethesemantic ofAFisrun-to-completion,
thereshouldbenoinﬁnitedelaysinthelocalUPPAAL-TAmode l,thetime-continuous
functionisnotconcernedinoursemanticanchoringandwede alonlywithtime-discrete
function. The time-discrete function is invoked either by t ime-triggered in which time
alone causes execution to start, or event-triggered, which is caused by data arrival or
calls on the input ports. Those trigger conditions are match ed to those of a clockcom-
ponent, trigger ports and data type ports inSAVE-CCM, respe ctively.

--- Page 6 ---
3.2 Behavior Speciﬁcation
Wehaveshownastraightforwardmappingfromtheinformalse manticsofEAST-ADL2
to the formal semantics of SAVE-CCM. Since EAST-ADL2 allows the use of different
behavioral notations, we capitalize on this advantage to sp ecifyFunctionBehavior by
assigninganUPPAAL-PORTTAmodeltoeachSAVE-CCMcomponen tmappedfrom
itscorrespondingAF(especially ADLFunctionPrototype )respectingthetriggeringdef-
inition, and execution time of each AF as well as its requirem ents. This TA model
encapsulates the ”execution behaviors” of AF and is used for veriﬁcation in terms of
real-time properties by using UPPAAL-PORT model-checker. Our tooling composes
such local automata in parallel to a composed TA (network TA) . The purpose of this
phase is to construct a target model (Fig.2-(d)) by ﬁlling th e architectural frame model
(Fig.2-(b))withthecorrespondingUPPAAL-PORTTAs(Fig.2 -(c)).Inthiscase,textual
system description, quality/functional requirements and behavioral/timing constraints
arereferredtospecify FunctionBehavior inUPPAAL-PORT TAs (Fig.2-(c)).
We deﬁne an EAST-ADL2 model below. Essentially, this model i s a tuple/a\}bracketle{tN,CE/a\}bracketri}ht,
whereNis a set of ADLFunctionalPrototypes AFs, and CE⊆N×Nis the set of in-
terconnectors between AFs. Output variables of one AF may be connected to input
variables of another AF. The clock component in SAVE-CCM [18 ] is used to deﬁne
time-triggered activations. It periodically generates th e triggering event to activate the
component and its connected components in a sequence by send ing a trigger signals
through the ports. For detailed semantics of the SAVE-CCM la nguage (the subset of
ProSave), we refer the reader to [18]. These triggering (or d ata) signals arrive at a port
with a one-place buffer. It is stored in that buffer, and for o ther ports it is forwarded to
connected ports.
The behavior Binside an AF, noted /llbracketB/rrbracketAF, is modeled as an UPPAAL-PORT TA
=/a\}bracketle{tL,l0,lf,VC,VD,E,I/a\}bracketri}ht,whereLisasetoflocations, l0∈Listheinitiallocation, lf∈L
is the ﬁnal location, such that no edges in Eare leading out from lf, and is used to
model the termination of an execution of AF. VCandVDis a set of clock and data
variablesrespectively. Iassignsaninvarianttoeachofthelocations. Eisasetofedges,
represented as lg,a,u−→l′, wherelis a source location, l′is a destination location, gis a
guard,aisan action, uisan update.
The execution of behavior inside FA is determined, (i.e, a SA VE-CCM component
istriggered) intermsof triggeringvalues, whichcan be gen erated fromtheclock com-
ponent of SAVE-CCM (named active). When the triggering value is active, the com-
ponent is triggered via its input trigger port and its input d ata ports are mapped to data
variables. VDin TA are updated with those variables by read-input-from-ports action,
noted READ( Pin), (respectively write-output-to-ports , noted WRITE( Pout)), which are
atomicandurgent(inthesensethattimeisnotallowedtopas swhenacomponentreads
orwrites).Acomponentisinitially idleafterthereadactionitswitchestoitsexecuting
locations until its internal computation is done. After the write action, which forwards
data in variables via interconnections from the output port s, the component becomes
idleagain and the trigger port is updated to inactive. Formally the behavior of AF is
deﬁned as follows:
Deﬁnition 1 (Behavior of AF). The behavior of AnalysisFunction AF is a tuple B=
/a\}bracketle{tL∪{l⊥},l⊥,l0,lf,VD∪P,VC,E∪{er,ew},I⊥/a\}bracketri}htwhere

--- Page 7 ---
–l⊥istheidle location.
–P is the set of ports of the component described as P in∪Pout∪Ptrig, where P inis a
set of input ports, P outis a set of output ports, P trig⊆Pinis the set of trigger input
ports.
–er=l⊥g,r,u−→l0,ifgistriggered,risthe”read-input-from-ports”action ,READ(P in),
and uupdatesV Dwithinput values (Pin\Ptrig).
–ew=lfg,w,u−→l⊥,ifgistrue,wisthe”write-outputs-on-ports”action,WRI TE(Pout),
and uresetsP trigto”inactive”
–I⊥(l⊥)=true,I⊥=I(l)for l/nequall⊥
TheTAofacomposition C,TA(C),isdeﬁnedasanetworkoflocalTA.For AFiand
its corresponding component Ci∈C, the write action in TA( Ci) is extended to update
theinputports(noted Pin.j)ofatargetcomponent Cj∈Caccordingtointerconnections
from the out ports of Ci(notedPout.i). An interconnection connects a source port p∈
Pout.ito a target port p′∈Pin.jwhenever variables in PinofCare enabled in a way that
ifp′is a trigger port then p′is activated, otherwise p′=p. The edges eof TA(Ci) are
explained withextended writeactions as follows.
Deﬁnition 2 (ExtendedWriteActions). Thebehavior BinsideAF i,/llbracketB/rrbracketAFi,isTA(C i)
=/a\}bracketle{tL, l0,lf,VD,VC,{XWRITE i(e)|e∈E},I/a\}bracketri}htsuch that
–XWRITE i(lg,a,u−→l′)/defines(lg,w,u−→l′;WRITE(P out.i)),ifa=wandgistriggered(holds).
Notethat ;isdeﬁned as sequential execution
–XWRITE i(lg,a,u−→l′)/defineslg,a,u−→l′,for a/nequalw
The automata TA(C) isthen thenetwork of each TA(C i)forCi∈C.
An environment is modeled as TAEnvin a similar way. The resulting composition
isthusdeﬁnedasthenetwork TA(C)×TAEnv,whereanyedgein TAEnvupdatingports
PinofC,isextendedwithanupdate WRITE(Pout.Env).Thisissimilartotheadaptionof
theXWRITE action that isused tobuild TA(Ci)inDeﬁnition 2.
3.3 Veriﬁcation: Model Checking
The execution of each FunctionBehavior in EAST-ADL2 is speciﬁed by UPPAAL-
PORT TA in SAVE-CCM and its composition is considered as the n etwork TA: the
formal semantics of SAVE-CCM used in this paper was given in s ection 3.2. For the
semantics of the full SAVE-CCM language, we refer the reader to [7]. The entire sys-
tem (network TA) is considered in terms of a timed transition system [18], then this
entiresystemisveriﬁedbyUPPAAL-PORTmodel-checker.Qua lityrequirements(e.g,
timing, safety, deadlock freedom) in terms of functional re quirements (e.g, behavioral
constrains, timing constraints), see Fig.2-Requirements aspect, are formalized in linear
time logics based on the UPPAAL logic, which can be veriﬁed ov er the target model
(Fig.2-(d))by UPPAAL-PORT model checker.
Inparticular,thequalityrequirementsarederivedfromag ivensystem’stextualde-
scriptions. One may verify certain delay, reaction and sync hronization constraints (i.e,
overall behavioral constraints of a system) according to th e quality requirements. For
example, a plausible reaction constraint is 250 ms. In contr ast, functional requirements

--- Page 8 ---
Fig.3.TheBWSarchitectural model (actual screenshotfromtheSAVE-CCM modelingtool)
describe particular constraints of a function such as timin g constraints and trigger ele-
ments linked to an AF block. They deﬁne the triggering and exe cution time of the AF.
UPPAAL-PORTmodelcheckerveriﬁesthosetwotypesofrequir ementsassafetyprop-
erties in a way that (a) if a property is satisﬁed by the target model, then a functional
requirement linked to an AF is updated to a satisfy relation a nd generic constraints of
the AF are stored as valid invariants in the V&V structure (VV Outcome linked to the
explained requirement, VVCase, etc) of the EAST-ADL2 model . (b) If a property is
violated (depicted as NoSAT arrows in Fig.2) then our UPPAAL -PORT model checker
returnssomecounterexamplesthatcanhelpanalyststoreﬁn ethebehavioralconstraints
of the system model or modify generic constraints, and ident ify correct constraints for
the AF that it concerns. Thus, the models in EAST-ADL2 are upd ated with the timing
assumptions analysts make as well as theanalysis results.
4 Current result and Example
Our approach has been applied and demonstrated on a case stud y, the Break-by-Wire
System(BWS),fromourindustrialpartnerVOLVO.Ithasbeenﬁ rstmodeledusingPa-
pyrusUML[11]forEAST-ADL2intheATESST2project [1].Firs t,theBWSPapyrus
UML model at Analysis level in EAST-ADL2 domain is translated to a SAVE-CCM
model. This stepisdepicted inFig. 2-(a)and theresultissh own inFig. 3.

--- Page 9 ---
Fig.4.BWSDeviceSensor TA
Secondly, FunctionBehaviors arespeciﬁedinUPPAAL-PORTTAsandthenareas-
signed to components in the SAVE-CCM model in terms of their c orresponding func-
tion entities in EAST-ADL2. The functional and quality requ irements of the system
were given as either informal description in ATESST2 projec t case study reports or as
timing/triggerconstraintsrequiremententitieslinkedt oAFsinEAST-ADL2.Thearchi-
tecture of the system is represented by SAVE-CCM components ﬁlled with UPPAAL-
PORT TAs.One of theTAs inthis stepisshown inFig.4.
Finally, the requirements formalized in UPPAAL logics over the result from the
secondstepareveriﬁedbymodel-checkingwithsomeassumpt ionswemakeregarding
timing: there is a data ﬂow from a pedal to a brake actuator. Th e functions are periodic
and mutually unsynchronized. A perfect clock is assumed in t he sense that it generates
periodic triggering in order to activate (run) the componen ts with a periodicity of one
timeunit.Eachfunctionhasitsexecutiontimewhichismode ledwithadelaylocationin
itsTA.Basedonthoseassumptions,propertiesofsafety,de adlockfreedomandliveness
areveriﬁed successfully.
Data ﬂows through ports between function blocks of BWS are sim ulated by using
the UPPAAL-PORT plug-in for the Eclipse IDE in Fig.5. The dir ection of data ﬂow is
indicatedbythearrow.Weusethissimulatorinordertotrac eordetectfaultﬂowpaths.
Thisisfacilitatedbyitsintuitivegraphicalinterfaceth atallowsanalyststostepforward
and backward along the simulation. Apart from the simulatio n, we have so far veriﬁed
28propertiesofthesystem.Alistofselectedpropertiesis givenbelowandtheirveriﬁ-

--- Page 10 ---
cation resultsareestablished as valid:
\∗Definitionof each component
C1=Environment
C2=DeviceSensor
C3=BCC:Brake calculator and controller
C4=WheelSpeed
C5=VehicleSpeed
C6=ABS:Anti lock Braking System
C7=Actuator ∗\
–Deadlock freedom :A[ ]1not deadlock
–Leads-to property based on the internal variables of function components: eve ry
timethesystemisinvokedbyitsenvironmentitwilleventua llyexecuteABSwhich
calculatesthebrakeforceaccordingtothebrakepedalposi tion,wheelspeed,vehi-
clespeed:
•(C1.WheelDynamic ∨C1.BrakePedal ∨C1.VehicleDynamic )
→(C6.mode==ABS∧C6.ForceCtr)
–Leads-to property based on the values of ports: if the BrakePedal function devi ce
sendsoutavalueofitspositionthenthevalueshouldberece ivedbytheBrakeCon-
trollerfunction:
•(C1.BrakePedal ∧C1.EBPP==1)→(C3.BrakeCtr ∧C3.BCCin==1)
–Statecorrespondencecheck:oneinternalstateofacompone ntcorrespondstowhat
is happening in the states of other environment components. The following three
propertiesdescribethatwhileoneofthefunctioncomponen ts,BCC,WheelSensor,
VehicleSensor isexecuting, the other twofunction compone nts are not executing:
•A[]C5.VSensormode =⇒(¬C4.WSensormode ∧ ¬C3.BrakeCal )
•A[]C4.WSensormode =⇒(¬C3.BrakeCal ∧ ¬C5.VSensormode )
•A[]C3.BrakeCal =⇒(¬C5.VSensormode ∧ ¬C4.WSensormode )
–Execution time property: each function component should ex ecute within its given
localexecutiontime( t=2),0≤clock≤2.Inotherwords,itshouldnotexceedits
given local execution time:
•A[]C7.exec=⇒(C7.clock≤2∧C7.clock≥0)
Since the current version of UPPAAL tool only provides reach ability analysis, we
ﬁrst veriﬁed a certain delay in an AF component, such as its lo cal execution time, as
an invariant property. In order to verify bounded response time properties formula of
the form f1→≤Tf2, meaning if a request (f1) becomes true at a certain time point,
a response (f2) must be guaranteed to be true within a time bou nd (T), we apply the
early experiments in [9], which showed how to check such prop erties with a certain
syntactical manipulation on the system model, to our work ei ther by (1) adding ob-
server components syntactically to the system model or (2) m aking observer automata
and synchronizing them with the actual system automata. The n we verify if both ob-
servers success states can be reached in parallel with the ma in actual system under the
synchronization constraints.
1A[ ]P:”Pholds forany reachable conﬁguration” is written A[]inUPPAAL format

--- Page 11 ---
Fig.5.BWSdata ﬂow simulationtrace usingUPPAAL-PORT
WeconstructoneobserverTA,illustratedinFig6,whichcon tainsanobserverclock
constraint(obsClock)asaninvariant.Thisobserverrestr ictsthetimeboundofresponse
time (MAX TIME). By applying this observer TA in our experiment, we suc cessfully
evaluate bounded response time properties in a way that the e rror location, which vio-
latestheboundedtimecondition,isneverreachedfromanyl ocationofthemainactual
system model. The veriﬁcation resultisgiven below:
–When the brake pedal mode is activated, the actuator reacts ti mely under its given
timebound (MAX TIME) as afailsafeagainst seriousaccident. i.e.,
•A[ ]C1.BrakePedal =⇒(¬ObsTA.error∧C7.Actuator). The property is
valid. In other words, if the BrakePedal function component is invoked, it
should not reach the error location of the observer TA, which violates the
MAXTIME bounded time condition, while the Actuator component i s exe-
cuting.
Search order is breadth ﬁrst and uses conservative space opt imization. The state
spacerepresentationusesdifferenceboundmatrices(DBM) .Verifyingpropertiestakes
an average of around 2 seconds per veriﬁed property on an Inte l T9600 2.80 GHz pro-

--- Page 12 ---
error
run
obsClock<=MAX_TIMEwaitForAction
obsClock>MAX_TIME_urgent!
obsClock=0active1
_urgent!
obsClock=0
Fig.6.Observer TAof bounded responsetime properties
cessor. The veriﬁcation tool only needs to explore a maximum of 3584 states to verify
properties such as deadlock freedom.
5 Related Work
For safety-driven system development in the automotive dom ain, feature based analy-
sis is prescribed by ISO standard as the state-of-the art app roach to functional safety.
However at early stage it is difﬁcult to see function depende ncies that would result in
updatedfunctionrequirements.Therefore,A.Sandbergeta l.[14]provideoneapproach
thatperformsiterativeanalysistomanage changes inthesa fetyarchitectureatanalysis
level and still meet function speciﬁc safety goals derived a t vehicle level. In Compari-
sontoourwork,theirmainconcernistodeﬁnethesemanticsf orrequirementselection
in order to ensure correct inclusion of requirements for a fu nction deﬁnition. There is
no formalmodeling approach tothebehavioral deﬁnition of t helanguage.
L. Feng et al. [5] bring modeling formalisms to the existing b ehavioral principle of
the system by transforming EAST-ADL2 behavior model to the S PIN model. Thus the
requirements on the system design can be veriﬁed by model che cking. In contrast to
our work, there is no notion for the timing constraints in the behavior model. Indeed,
formal analysis on the real-time properties of the behavior model is not considered at
all.
6 Conclusion and Future work
In this paper, we studied the use of formal modeling and veriﬁ cation techniques at an
early stage in the development of safety-critical automoti ve products which are origi-
nallydescribedintheEAST-ADL2architecturallanguage.Wh ileEAST-ADL2focuses
on the structural deﬁnition of functional block, we propose a method to formally spec-
ify behaviors inside each functional block in TAs mainly at Analysis level in terms of
Feature level in EAST-ADL2, and verify them by using the UPPAAL-PORT model
checker. The formal syntax and semantics of functional beha viors are deﬁned. A com-
positionofthosebehaviorsisconsideredasanetworkofTAt hatallowsustoverifythe
entire system using the UPPAAL-PORT model checker. Moreove r, this paper presents

--- Page 13 ---
atechniquetoverify boundedresponsetimeproperties byaddingobservercomponents
or TA syntactically to the system model and synchronize them in parallel with the ac-
tual system automata. The contribution improves behavior m odeling, veriﬁcation and
analysis capability of EAST-ADL2, and the result shows the a pplicability of model
checking in safety-critical automotive products. We start ed from the informal descrip-
tion of quality and functional requirements in order to mode l the execution behaviors
ofADLFunctions and manually speciﬁed them in TAs. A possible further work wo uld
be to deﬁne a formal, real-time semantics of UML diagrams so t hat engineers can use
thisfamiliarlanguage. They can then be translatedautomat ically toTAs.
In future works, we plan to extend our work: (1) From tooling p erspective, in Pa-
pyrus (an Eclipse based tool platform for EAST-ADL2), UML mo deling tools and
domain-speciﬁc tools, e.g. Simulink, are used as external t ools. They describe the data
transformationinsideeachAFandexchangeinformationvia Plugins.Thus,anUPPAAL-
PORT, which is in fact also an Eclipse based Plugin tool, woul d be developed as an
EAST-ADL2 Plugin and be integrated with other EAST-ADL2 too ls for analysis. The
analysis invariants and outcome should be recorded in the EA ST-ADL2 structure as
valid constraints for requirements and V&V. Ideally this pr ocess should be done fully
automatically. (2) Another future work encludes more elabo rated veriﬁcation of non-
functional properties, and more reﬁned conﬁgurations of th e generated model. For ex-
ample, minimizing the use of certain resources, such as CPU, energy, memory, etc,
while preserving functional correctness, timing requirem ents and other resource con-
straints. The results presented here are promising steps to wards these goals. (3) Since
the current UPPAAL tool only provides reachability analysi s, observer TAs were used
to verifybounded response time properties in this work. In order to extend this restric-
tion, Memory Event Clocks Temporal Logic (MECTL) formula, c reated in our early
work [12,10], will be adapted to improve fully decidable rea l-time expressiveness, us-
ing a tool chain that employs the UPPAAL model checker to veri fy properties on a
system.
Furthermore, we plan to study a new design interface theory f or timed-component
systems[4],consideredasTimedI/Oautomatawithgamesema ntic,thatwouldsupport
compositional design and veriﬁcation of timed component-b ased embedded systems.
We will employ an extended UPPAAL-TIGA, which is an engine fo r solving timed
games inorder tomanipulate thisdesign methodology.
7 Acknowledgement
This work was funded by PROGRESS Research Centre at MDH in Swe den, FUNDP
PRECISE Research Center in Information Systems Engineerin g (CERUNA project)
Namur University, and Belgian Science Policy (MoVES projec t). We also wish to ac-
knowledge the participation of collaborator Volvo Technol ogy Corporation from Swe-
den. Special thanks to Henrik L ¨onn and Lei Feng (Volvo Technology Corporation,
Gothenburg, Sweden) for theirvaluable feedback.
References
1. Advancing Trafﬁc Efﬁciency and Safety through Software Techno logy Phase 2 (European
project),2010. http://www.atesst.org.
2. AUTomotive Open SystemArchitecture, 2010. http://www.autosar.org .

--- Page 14 ---
3. Jan Carlson, John Hkansson, and Paul Pettersson. SaveCCM: An analysable component
model for real-time systems. In Z. Liu and L. Barbosa, editors, Proceedings of the 2nd
Workshop on Formal Aspects of Components Software (FACS 2005) , volume 160 of Elec-
tronicNotesin Theoretical Computer Science , pages 127–140. Elsevier,2006.
4. AlexandreDavid,KimG.Larsen,AxelLegay,UlrikNyman,andAnd rzejWasowski. Timed
i/oautomata:acompletespeciﬁcationtheoryforreal-timesystems. In HybridSystems ,pages
91–100, 2010.
5. Lei Feng, DeJiu Chen, H. L ¨onn, and M. T ¨orngren. Verifying system behaviors in east-
adl2 with the SPIN model checker. In IEEE International Conference on Mechatronics and
Automation ,Xi’an China,August2011.
6. KlausGrimm. Softwaretechnologyinanautomotivecompany-majorch allenges. Software
Engineering,International Conference on ,0:498, 2003.
7. John Hkansson. Design and veriﬁcation of component based real-time systems . PhD thesis,
UppsalaUniversity, 2009.
8. JohnHkansson,JanCarlson,AurelienMonot,andPaulPettersson . Component-baseddesign
and analysis of embedded systems with uppaal port. In Sungdeok Cha, Jin-Young Choi,
Moonzoo Kim, Insup Lee, and Mahesh Viswanathan, editors, 6th International Symposium
on Automated Technology for Veriﬁcation and Analysis , pages 252–257. Springer-Verlag,
October 2008.
9. Magnus Lindahl, Paul Pettersson, and Wang Yi. Formal design and a nalysis of a gear con-
troller. In Proceedingsof4thInternationalWorkshoponToolsandAlgorithmsforT heCon-
struction and Analaysis of Systems , volume 1384 of Electronic Notes in Theoretical Com-
puter Science , pages 281–297. Springer Verlag, 1998.
10. James Jerson Ortiz, Axel Legay, and Pierre-Yves Schobbens. Memory event clocks. In
Proceedings of the 8th international conference on Formal modeling and analysis of timed
systems,FORMATS’10,pages 198–212, Berlin,Heidelberg, 2010. Springer -Verlag.
11. Open SourceToolfor Graphical UML2Modeling, 2010. http://www.p apyrusuml.org.
12. Jean-Franc ¸ois Raskin and Pierre-Yves Schobbens. State clock logic: A decidable real-time
logic. In Proceedings of the International Workshop on Hybrid and Real-Time Sy stems,
pages 33–47, London,UK, 1997. Springer-Verlag.
13. James Rumbaugh and Ivar Jacobson. United Modeling Language User Guide . Addison-
Wesley, 2nd edition,1998.
14. Anders Sandberg, DeJiu Chen, Henrik L ¨onn, Rolf Johansson, Lei Feng, Martin T ¨orngren,
Sandra Torchiaro, Ramin Tavakoli-Kolagari, and Andreas Abele. Mod el-based safety engi-
neering of interdependent functions in automotive vehicles using east-a dl2. InProceedings
of the 29th international conference on Computer safety, reliability, and sec urity, SAFE-
COMP’10,pages 332–346, Berlin,Heidelberg, 2010. Springer-Ver lag.
15. Alberto Sangiovanni-Vincentelli and Marco Di Natale. Embedded sys tem design for auto-
motiveapplications. Computer ,40(10):42–51, 2007.
16. SAVE-IDEproject atsourcenet. http://sourceforge.net/projects/s ave-ide/.
17. Severine Sentilles, John Hkansson, Paul Pettersson, and Ivica Cr nkovic. SAVE-IDE, an
integrated development environment for building predictable componen t-based embedded
systems. In Proceedings of the 23rd IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automa ted
SoftwareEngineering(ASE2008) , September 2008.
18. Jagadish Suryadevara, Eun-Young Kang, Cristina Seceleanu, a nd Paul Pettersson. Bridging
the semantic gap between abstract models of embedded systems. In Lar s Grunske and Ralf
Reussner,editors, 13thInternationalSymposiumonComponentBasedSoftwareEngineerin g
(CBSE).Springer LNCS,vol6092, June2010.
