--- Page 1 ---
 
Model-based system analysis using Chi and UPPAAL : an
industrial case study
Citation for published version (APA): 
Braspenning, N. C. W. M., Bortnik, E. M., Mortel - Fronczak, van de, J. M., & Rooda, J. E. (2006). Model-based 
system analysis using Chi and UPPAAL : an industrial case study . (SE report; Vol. 2006-07). Technische 
Universiteit Eindhoven.
Document status and date: 
Published: 01/01/2006
Document Version: 
Publisher’s PDF, also known as Version of Record (includes final page, issue and volume numbers)
Please check the document version of this publication: 
• A submitted manuscript is the version of the article upon submission and before peer-review. There can be
important differences between the submitted version and the official published version of record. People
interested in the research are advised to contact the author for the final version of the publication, or visit the
DOI to the publisher's website.
• The final author version and the galley proof are versions of the publication after peer review.
• The final published version features the final layout of the paper including the volume, issue and page
numbers.
Link to publication
General rights 
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright owners
and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
            • Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the public portal for the purpose of private study or research.
            • You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit-making activity or commercial gain
            • You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the public portal.
If the publication is distributed under the terms of Article 25fa of the Dutch Copyright Act, indicated by the “Taverne” license above, please
follow below link for the End User Agreement:
www.tue.nl/taverne
Take down policy 
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us at:
openaccess@tue.nl
providing details and we will investigate your claim.
Download date: 31. Mar. 2026

--- Page 2 ---
Systems Engineering Group
Department of MechanicalEngineering
Eindhoven University ofTechnology
POBox513
5600 MB Eindhoven
TheNetherlands
http://se.wtb.tue.nl/
SEReport: Nr.2006-07
Model-based system analysis
using χand UPPAAL:an
industrial casestudy
N.C.W.M. Braspenning,E.M.Bortnik,
J.M.van deMortel-Fronczak,J.E.Rooda
ISSN:1872-1567
SE Report: Nr. 2006-07
Eindhoven, November2006
SE Reportsare availablevia http://se.wtb.tue.nl/sereports

--- Page 4 ---
Abstract
Newmethods and techniques are needed to reduce the integration and test eﬀort (lead time,
costs, resources) in the development of high-tech multi-disciplinary system s. To facilitate
thiseﬀortreduction,amethodcalledmodel-basedintegrationandtestin gisbeingdeveloped.
Themethodallowstointegrateformalexecutablemodelsofsystemcomp onentsthatarenot
yet physically realized with available realizations of other compon ents. The combination of
models and realizations is then used for early analysis of the integra ted system by means of
validation, veriﬁcation, and testing. The analysis enables early d etection and prevention of
problems that would otherwise occur during real integration, resulting in a signiﬁcant re-
ductionofeﬀortinvestedintherealintegrationandtestingphases. Thi spaperillustratesthe
application of the method to a realistic industrial case study, focusing on veri ﬁcation of the
modelsobtained. Weshowhowasystemmodelhasbeendevelopedformode l-basedintegra-
tion and testing in the timed process algebra χ(Chi), and how certain behavioral properties
ofthis model havebeen veriﬁed bytheU PPAALmodel checker.

--- Page 5 ---
1 Introduction
High-tech multi-disciplinary systems like wafer scanners, electronic microscopes and high-
speed printers are becoming more complex every day. Growing system com plexity also in-
creasestheeﬀort(intermsofleadtime,cost,resources) neededforthe,so-call ed,integration
and testing phases . During these phases, the system is integrated by combining component
realizations and, subsequently, tested against the system requireme nts. Existing industrial
practice shows that the main eﬀort of system development is shifting from the design and
implementation phases to the system integration and testing phases [ 1]. Furthermore, ﬁnd-
ingandﬁxingproblemsduringintegrationandtestingcanbeupto100 timesmoreexpensive
than ﬁnding andﬁxing theproblems during therequirements and de sign phases[2].
Literature reports wealth of research proposing a model-based way of working to counter
the increase of development eﬀort, like requirements modeling [3], mod el-based design [4],
model-based code generation [5], hardware-software co-simulation [6], and model-based test-
ing [7]. In most cases, however, these model-based techniques are inv estigated in isolation,
and little work is reported on combining these techniques into an overa ll method. Although
model-based systems engineering [8] and OMG’s model-driven arc hitecture [9] (for software
only systems) are such overall model-based methods, these methods are ma inly focusing on
the requirements, design, and implementation phases, rather than on t he integration and
test phases. Furthermore, literature barely mentions realistic indus trial applications of such
methods, at least notforhigh-tech multi-disciplinarysystems.
Our research within the T ANGRAM project [10] focusses on a method of model-based integra-
tion and testing (MBI&T), introduced in [11]. In this method, formal executable models of
system components (e.g. software, mechanics, electronics) that are not yet re alized are inte-
grated with available realizations of other components, establishin g amodel-based integrated
system. Such a model-based integrated system can be established much earli er compared to
a real integrated system, and it can eﬀectively be used for early model -based system analysis
and system testing, which has three main advantages. First, the f act that it is earlier means
that the integration and test eﬀort is distributed over a wider time frame. This reduces the
eﬀort to be invested during the real integration and testing phases. Secondly, it allows earlier
and thus cheaper detection and prevention of problems that would otherw ise occur during
real integration. Early problem detection and prevention also reduces t he corresponding di-
agnostic and ﬁx eﬀort and increases the quality of the system at an earli er stage. Finally, the
use of formal models enables the application of powerful model-based anal ysis techniques,
likesimulationandveriﬁcation. Theseanalysistechniqueshelptoimp rovetheinsightinthe
system’s behavior fortheengineers, resulting in better system quality as well.
ThispaperillustratestheapplicationoftheMBI&Tmethodtothedev elopmentofapartofa
realistic industrial system, namely theASML [12] waferscanner.
In the case study, a system is formally speciﬁed by means of a process algebr aic language χ
(Chi) [13]. The χlanguage is supported by a toolset that allows simulation of the obtained
χmodel, e.g. for the analysis of system performance and exceptional beha vior handling.
The formal semantics of χenable functional analysis of χmodels, e.g. veriﬁcation of the
correctness of a system model. Combining performance analysis and functional analysis in
χenvironmentistheobjectiveoftheTIPS Yproject[14]. Asapartofthisproject,atranslation
scheme[15]from χtoUPPAALtimedautomata[16,17]hasbeendevelopedandintegratedinto
theχtoolset, allowing veriﬁcation of the translated models by U PPAALmodel checker. The
UPPAALtoolhasbeenusedinanumberofindustrialcasestudies. Thecompleteovervie wcan
be found in [18]. Mostly, the case studies concerned verifying real-time con trollers [19] and
communicationprotocols[20,21]. In[22]theproblemofsynthesizingproducti onschedules
and control programs for the mock-up of the batch production plant was addressed . In [23]
thethroughput ofan ASML waferscanner wasanalyzed withU PPAAL.
The case study described in this paper focuses on veriﬁcation of system propertie s such as
deadlockfreeness,liveness,safety,andtemporalpropertiesusingthe χtoUPPAALtranslation
scheme and U PPAALmodel checker. The goal of the case study and this paper is threefold.
WeshowthepotentialoftheproposedMBI&T method(in whichtheveriﬁca tion techniques
2

--- Page 6 ---
areused)toreducetheintegrationandtesteﬀortofindustrialsystems. W einvestigatetheap-
plicability,scalability,andusabilityofthe χtoolsetasintegratedtoolsupportforallaspectsof
theMBI&Tmethod,particularlyfocusingontheimplementationofthe χtoUPPAALtransla-
tion scheme. Finally, we investigate the applicability and the adv antages of using veriﬁcation
techniques forindustrial systems.
The structure of the paper is as follows. Section 2 describes the MBI&T method in general
with the focus on the use of veriﬁcation within the method. Section 3 introduces th e indus-
trial case study to which the MBI&T method has been applied. The activi ties that have been
performed in the case study are described in Section 4 (modeling and simulation with χ)
and Section 5 (translation to and veriﬁcation with U PPAAL). Although model-based and real
systemtestingarenotthefocusofthispaper,Section6givesashortsummar yofthesesteps.
Finally, theconclusionsare drawn and discussed in Section 7.
2 Model-basedintegrationandtestingmethod
In current industrial practice, the system development process is subdivid ed into multiple
concurrentcomponentdevelopmentprocesses. Subsequently,theresultingcomponents (e.g.
mechanics, electronics, software) are integrated intothesystem.
The development process of a system Sthat consists of ncomponents C1..n(we denote a
set {A1,...,A i,...,A n} byA1..n) starts with the system requirements Rand system design D.
After that each component is developed. The development process of a comp onentCicon-
sists of three phases: requirements deﬁnition, design, and realization. Each of these phases
results in a diﬀerent representation form of the component, namely the req uirements Ri,
the design Di, and the realization Zi. The realization of system Sis the result of the inte-
gration {Z1..n}Iof realizations Z1..nby means of the infrastructure I. Here, infrastructure I
contains everything that is needed to connect the components in order to let them perform
the system’s function, e.g., nuts and bolts (mechanical infrastructure), cable s (electronic in-
frastructure), communication network(softwareinfrastructure).
Fig. 1 shows a graphical representation of the development process of syst emS. The de-
velopment phases are depicted by arrows and diﬀerent representa tion forms of systems and
componentsaredepictedbyboxes. Forsimplicity,theﬁgureshowsa‘sequenti al’development
process, however in practice the development process will have an increme ntal and iterative
nature. This involves multiple versions of the requirements, designs, and realizations, and
feedback loops from certain phases to earlier phases, e.g. from the re alization phase back to
thedesign phase.
designR DR1
Rndefine
definedesign
designD1
DnZ1
Znrealize
realizeintegrate
integratedefine
infrastructure  I
Figure 1: Current system development process
In this way of working, only two types of system level analysis can be app lied. On the one
hand,theconsistencybetweenrequirementsanddesignsonthecomponentl evelandonthe
system level can be checked, i.e. R1..nversusRandD1..nversusD, which usually boils down
to reviewing lots of documents. On the other hand, the integrated syst em realization { Z1..n}I
can be tested against the system requirements R, which requires that all components are
3 Model-basedintegrationandtestingmethod

--- Page 7 ---
realizedandintegrated. Thisrequirementmeansthatifprobl emsoccurandneedtobeﬁxed
during the integration and test phases, the eﬀort invested in these p hases increases and on-
timeshipmentofthesystemisdirectlythreatened. Ifintegrationpr oblemscouldbedetected
and prevented at an earlier stage of development, the eﬀort inves ted in the integration and
test phases would be reduced and valuable test time would be saved. As a re sult, the system
could be shipped earlier (which is critical in the lithography industry), or the saved test time
couldbe used tofurtherincrease thesystem quality.
In [11], we introduced the MBI&T method to reduce the integration and te st eﬀort. This
method takes the design documentation of the components Cias a starting point and rep-
resents them by formal executable models Mi(Fig. 2). The requirements documentation is
used to formulate the properties of the system and components. An infrastructure Iis used
that allows the integration of models M1..nand realizations Z1..n, such that all possible com-
binations of models and realizations can be integrated. As an exampl e, assume that n= 2,
i.e. the depicted components C1andCn=C2are the only components of the system. Then
Fig.2shows,correspondingtothedepictedintegration‘switches’,the model-basedintegrated
system {M1,Z2}I. In the MBI&T method, the infrastructure can be, for example, paralle l
composition(toconnectcomponentmodels)orspeciﬁcsoftware/hardwareinfrastructure (to
connect models and realizations). Note that in this paper, we do not focus on the integration
of models and realizations. Also, we do not discuss the corresponding speciﬁcation and im-
plementationissuesofinfrastructure I,whichispartofourcurrentworkandwillbereported
in thefuture.
designR DR1
Rndefine
definedesign
designD1
DnM1
Znmodel
realizedefine
MnmodelZ1
infrastructure  Iintegrate
realize
integrate
Figure 2: System development process in theMBI&T method
Inprinciple,theMBI&Tmethodallowstheuseofdiﬀerentspeciﬁcationl anguagesandtools,
aslongastheyaresuitableformodeling,analysis,andtestingofthecon sideredaspectsofthe
consideredcomponents. Inthepresentedcasestudy,allcomponentsofthesystema remod-
eled in the process algebraic language χ[24, 25]. The χlanguage is intended for modeling,
simulation, veriﬁcation, and real-time control of discrete-event, continuous or combi ned, so-
calledhybrid,systems,suchasmanufacturingsystems. Thetoolset[26]all owsmodelingand
simulation of χmodels, as well as their translation to diﬀerent formalisms. The χlanguage
andsimulatorhavebeensuccessfullyappliedtoalargenumberofindustrial cases,suchasin-
tegratedcircuitmanufacturingplants,processindustryplants,andmachine controlsystems
[27, 28]. Recentlythe χtoolsetwasextended with thetranslatortoU PPAAL.
When all components of a system have been modeled as χprocesses, the integrated system
modelM1..ncan be obtained by parallel composition of the χprocesses, ( M1/bardbl.../bardblMn),
where theparallelcomposition models theinfrastructure I.
For the analysis of the integrated system model { M1..n}I, several model-based techniques can
be applied. For instance, the χsimulator can be used to simulate speciﬁc behavior scenarios
4

--- Page 8 ---
of the system. The simulation results, then, can be compared with the intend ed system
designDand requirements R.
Due to the complexity of the industrial systems, which often involve both high-level paral-
lelism and non-deterministic behavior, simulation can only show that a sy stem model might
have correct behavior. To prove the correctness of a system model in genera l, veriﬁcation can
beused. Oneofthemostpopularveriﬁcationtechniquesismodelchecking ,whichallowsto
prove automatically the validity of a given property (derived from the sy stem requirements R
andsystem design D), foragiven modelof asystem.
Thetranslatorfrom χtoUPPAALenablesautomatictranslationof χmodelstoU PPAALtimed
automata, which can subsequently be veriﬁed using the U PPAALmodel checker. Model
checking of χmodels with U PPAALis themain topicofthis paper.
Withsimulationandveriﬁcation,itcanbedeterminedwhetherthesyst emmodelisacorrect
representation of the intended system design and whether it satisﬁes ce rtain properties. If
thisisthecase,andcertaincomponentrealizationsbecomeavailable, themodelsofthecom-
ponents can be used for both model-based component testing and for model-base d system
testing.
Model-basedcomponenttestinginvolvesautomatictestingoftherealiza tionofacomponent,
Zi, against a model of that component, Mi. Using techniques and tools from model-based
testing research [7], test cases are automatically generated from the model and automatically
executed on the realization. Model-based component testing using χmodels and the model-
based testing toolT ORX[29]has been reported in previous work[11].
While model-based component testing focuses on single components, model-based sy stem
testingfocuseson integrated modelsandrealizations. Here,theavailablerealizationsandthe
modelsarecoupledviaanappropriateinfrastructure I,usingspeciﬁcsoftwareandhardware
tooling. The resulting model-based integrated system, e.g. { M1,Z2}Iforn= 2, is tested on
system level using test cases derived from the system requirements Rand the system de-
signD. Since this does not require that all component realizations are avai lable, and since
models are usually available earlier than realizations, model-based system testing enables
earlierdetectionandpreventionofproblemswhencomparedtorealsyst emtesting. Further-
more, models allow easier testing of exceptional behavior, because the mod el behavior can
easily be adapted to create exceptional conditions, for example, a broken component. These
advantagesofmodel-basedsystemtestingbothcontributetoareductionoft heeﬀortinvested
during real integration and testing.
The case study described in the following section illustrates the application of the MBI&T
method toan industrial system.
3 Casestudy: ASMLEUVmachine
To show proof of concept and to evaluate the MBI&T method, particularly focusin g on the
veriﬁcation of χmodels using U PPAAL, the method was applied to a part of an ASML wafer
scanner [12]. In an ASML wafer scanner, laser light transfers a lithog raphic image onto the
surface of a silicon waferwith nanometer accuracy. The laser light passes thr ough an optical
system that scales down the pattern image before it is projected onto t he wafer. Currently,
a new type of wafer scanner is under development within ASML, which use s extreme ultra
violet(EUV)lightforexposingwafers. Oneofthemostimportanttechn icalchallengesinthe
development of this lithography system is the need for strict vacuum condi tions, since EUV
lightis is absorbed bynearlyallmaterials, includingair.
Inthecasestudypresentedinthispaper,thefocusisontheinteractionbe tweenthevacuum
system component Cvthat controls the vacuum conditions and the source component Cs
that generates the EUV light. These components need close cooperation to pro vide correct
vacuum conditions and correct EUV light properties at all times. Since the int ernal states
of these components are interdependent (e.g. the source may only be active und er certain
vacuum conditions to avoid machine damage), some combinations of component state s are
notallowedand shouldbeprevented.
5 Casestudy: ASMLEUVmachine

--- Page 9 ---
Fig.3showsthecomponentsandinterfacesinvolvedinthecasestudy. Toe xchangeinforma-
tion about their internal states, the vacuum system Cvand the source Csare connected by
an interface consisting offourlatches1, three latchesfrom vacuumsystem to sourceand one
latchfromsource tovacuumsystem:
• ‘vented’: whenactive, this latchindicates that thevacuumsystem i s vented.
• ‘pre-vacuum’: whenactive,thislatchindicatesthatthevacuumcondition saresuﬃcient
toactivatethesource, howevernot suﬃcient forexposure.
• ‘exposure’: when active, this latch indicates that the vacuum conditions a re right for
exposure.
• ‘active’: when active, this latch indicates that the source is active and that the vacuum
system is not allowedtogo tothe vented state(to avoid machined amage).
Besidesthelatchinterfacewiththesource,thevacuumsystemhasanothe rinterfacetocom-
municate with the environment Ce, e.g. a control component or a vacuum system operator.
The environment can request the vacuum system to go to either the vacuum or the vented
state by sending a ‘request’ message. After handling a request, the vacuum system notiﬁes
theenvironment bysending a‘reply’ message.
vacuum system
Cvsource
Cspre-vacuumvented
exposure
activerequest
replyenvironment
Ce
Figure 3: Components andinterfaces involvedin the casestudy
The behavior of the integrated system under nominal conditions is depi cted in message se-
quence chart (Fig. 4). Initially, the vacuum system is vented (accordingly , the ‘vented’ latch
is active) and the source is inactive. When the vacuum system receives a reque st from the
environment to go to the vacuum state it deactivates the ‘vented’ la tch and starts the vacuum
pumps. Thesourceobservesthatthe‘vented’latchisinactiveandexecutes someinitialprepa-
ration steps. While pumping down, the vacuum system measures the vacuum condi tions.
Whenthevacuumconditionsaresuﬃcienttoactivatethesource(thepre-vacuumconditi ons
are reached), the vacuum system activates the ‘pre-vacuum’ latch. When t he source observes
thissignal,itﬁrstactivatesthe‘active’latch,andsubsequentlyperf ormsthenecessaryactions
toreachtheactivestate. Afterfurtherpumpingdown,whentheva cuumconditionsareright
for exposure, the vacuum system activates the ‘exposure’ latch. Then, via th e ‘reply’ interface
the vacuum system notiﬁes the environment that it is in the vacuum state . After the source
observes the active ‘exposure’ latch, it goes to the exposure state and bot h components are
ready for exposure. For the other way around, going from vacuum/exposure conditi ons to
vented/inactive conditions, asimilar, reversed sequenceis speciﬁed.
The nominal sequence described above does not cover preemption. The env ironment can
interrupt the sequence at any time by a new request, and the vacuum system sh ould handle
these interrupts. For instance, the vacuum system operator decides to go ba ck to the vented
state, while the vacuum system is performing the vacuum sequence (i.e. goin g from vented
tovacuumasdescribedabove),thevacuumsystemshouldimmediatelyinterr uptthevacuum
sequence andstart withthe venting sequenceto go tothevented state .
Finally, errors can be raised by the source if, for instance, an unexpecte d communication
event occurs. The severity of an error is indicated by error levels. Depend ing on the severity
1Latch: electronic circuit with inputs ‘set’ and ‘reset’ that i s capable of storing one bit of information, i.e., a high
or alow voltage
6

--- Page 10 ---
pre-vacuum = 1vacuum
systemsource
request: go to vacuum
exposure = 1p
u
m
p
d
o
w
nvented = 0
p
r
e
p
a
c
t
i
v
a
t
e
e
x
pactive = 1environment
reply: OKstate = vented state = inactive
state = vacuumstate = prepared
state = active
state = exposurestate = pre-vacuum
Figure 4: Nominal system behavior forthevacuumsequence
of an error, the source might need to perform certain actions to avoid furthe r problems. For
example, the source should leave the expose state but remain active for a low level error,
howeverit shouldgo totheinactivestate as soon aspossiblein thecaseofa hi gh levelerror.
Themost important requirements to thesystem are:
1. The actions and communications in the vacuum and venting sequences are execute d
in correct order.
2. The behavior of the system can be interrupted at any time, and these interrupts are
handled correctly.
3. Thesource does notraise unnecessary errors, i.e. notduring nominal beha vior.
4. The source may not be active while the vacuum system is vented in order to prevent
machine damage.
5. The duration of the vacuum and venting sequences is at most 6 hours and 1 hour,
respectively.
Usingtheobtaineddesigndocumentationofthecomponentsasastartingpoint, theMBI&T
method wasappliedaccording to thefollowingsteps, corresponding to F ig. 5:
Step1:Modeling of the system components as χprocesses Me,Mv, andMs, based on the
ASML design documents De,Dv,andDs.
Step2:Model-basedanalysisoftheintegratedsystemmodel{ Me,Mv,Ms}I,modeledas( Me/bardbl
Mv/bardblMs):
a. Simulation using the χsimulator, i.e. analyzing certain scenarios derived from R
andDof{Me,Mv,Ms}Iandcomparing theresulting behavioragainst RandD.
7 Casestudy: ASMLEUVmachine

--- Page 11 ---
b. VeriﬁcationusingtheU PPAALmodelchecker,i.e. translatingthe χsystemmodel
to UPPAALtimed automata and verifying all traces of { Me,Mv,Ms}Iagainst prop-
erties derived from RandD.
Step3:As soon as the realization of a component becomes available (in the case study, t his
wasthesourcerealization Zs):
a. Model-basedcomponenttestingofthecomponent’srealizationwithresp ecttoits
model,i.e. Zswithrespectto Ms,usingautomaticmodel-basedtestingtechniques
andtools,e.g. T ORX.
b. Replacing the model of the source Msby the source realization Zsusing an in-
frastructure Ithat enables the integration of Zswith the models MeandMv. This
results in themodel-based integrated system { Me,Mv,Zs}I.
c. Model-basedsystemtestingof{ Me,Mv,Zs}Iusingtestcasesderivedfrom RandD.
Step4:Afterallmodelshavebeensubstitutedbyrealizations: testingofthecomp letesystem
realization { Ze,Zv,Zs}Iby executing test cases derived from RandD. Note that only
this step is performed in thecurrent system development process as we ll.
designR DRe
Rvdesign
designDe
DvMe
Zvmodel
realizedefineMvmodelZe
infrastructure  Iintegrate
realize
integrate
RsdesignDs
ZsrealizeMsmodel
integrate   definedefine
define
Figure 5: MBI&T method appliedtothecasestudy
Inthispaper,weparticularlyfocusontheapplicationofsteps1,2a,and 2b. Furthermore,we
give a summary of the application of steps 3b and 3c and the eﬀects of apply ing the MBI&T
methodontherealintegrationandtestinginstep4. Applicationofste p3awasnotperformed
inthecasestudy,althoughasimilarcasestudyinvolvingmodel-basedcomponen ttestinghas
been performed andreported in [11].
4 Modelingandsimulationwith χ
As mentioned in Section 2, a system development process will be more increm ental and
iterative in nature than it is depicted in Fig. 5. This was also expe rienced in the case study,
especially during the modeling (step 1) and simulation (step 2a) activitie s described in this
section.
8

--- Page 12 ---
Step1: Modelingthecomponentsin χ
The informal design documentation was taken as a starting point for model ing the vacuum
system and the source as χprocesses. The system level design documentation (correspond-
ingtoD)describedtheinterfacesbetweenthevacuumsystemandsourceasshowninF ig.3.
Thedesigndocumentationforthesourcecomponent, Ds,wasrathercompleteandcontained
a good overview of the behavior in the form of a state diagram including most of the possi-
bleactionsandcommunications. However,thedesigndocumentationofthevacuumsys tem
component, Dv, only described the internal actions for the vacuum and venting sequences,
and did not contain information about the communication with the source. It becam e clear
that the designers of the vacuum system were not yet fully aware of the com munication be-
haviorbetweentheircomponentandthesourcecomponent. Ingeneral,thede signdocumen-
tation for both components described the nominal behavior only and hardly mentioned the
handlingofexceptionalbehavior,andalsotheactiondurationswerenotcom pletelyspeciﬁed.
During our modeling activities, we obtained the missing information about the component
designs by combining knowledge of both components and by discussion with the engineers
involved. For example, the speciﬁcations of the communication of the vacuum syste m that
wasmissingin Dvcouldbederivedfromthesystemandsourcedesigndocuments DandDs.
Theresultingdesignspeciﬁcationswerevalidatedfortheircorrectnessbyd iscussionwiththe
designers ofthevacuumsystem and source.
We experienced that in most cases, the issues that arose during the modelin g activities in
fact indicated unknown or incomplete design issues, like missing states, obsol ete states, and
errors in the communication sequence. By incremental modeling, intermed iate simulation,
discussion,anddesignreview,thesystemspeciﬁcationwasfurthercorrecteda ndcompleted,
whichalsohelpedtheengineers toobtain abetter system overvie w.
Thereweresomeremainingmodelinganddesignissues,forwhichnosolutionw asavailable
orforwhichthecorrespondingbehaviorwasnotknownatall,evenbyt heengineersinvolved.
According to the engineers, the system behavior concerning these remai ning issues was not
important because it would never be experienced in the real system. Th erefore, the behavior
concerningtheseissueshasbeenabstractedinthemodelbyputtinganexpli citindicationof
‘undeﬁned behavior’. In step 2b of the case study, it will be veriﬁed w hether this undeﬁned
behavior indeed can neverbeexperienced.
The next paragraphs describe how the source Cs, the vacuum system Cv, and the environ-
mentCewere modeled as χprocesses. Fig. 6 shows the process layout of the system model,
which is based on the system design layout from Fig. 3. In the ﬁgure, the environment is
modeled as a single sequential process Me, the vacuum system Mvis modeled as a parallel
composition of the processes ( v1/bardblv2/bardblv3), and the source Msis modeled as the parallel
composition of the processes ( s1/bardbls2/bardbls3/bardbls4). The arrows depict the channels that model
the communication between processes of diﬀerent components, and the bold lines d epict
variables thatare shared betweenprocesses ofonecomponent.
pre-vacuumvented
exposure
activerequest
replyv2v1s3Me
vacuum systems1s4s2
v3
source environmentMv Ms
Figure 6: Process layout ofthe χsystem model
As an example of a χprocess, Fig. 7 shows a part of the source model Ms. For simplicity, the
declaration and initialization of the variables are omitted and only a p art of the core process
s1 is shown. The processes s2,s3, ands4 model the interaction with the vacuum system via
9 Modelingandsimulationwith χ

--- Page 13 ---
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22Ms= ( ∗(src_state= 1 →...
[]src_state= 2 →...
[]src_state= 3 →skip
; ( error= 5 →skip; ∆60;manual:= true
[]error= 4 →manual:= true
[]error < 4→skip
;newvalue →newvalue := false
; ( vnt →error:= 5
[] ¬vnt ∧pre ∧exp →src_state:= 4
[] ¬vnt ∧¬pre ∧exp →undefined := true
[] ¬vnt ∧pre ∧¬exp →skip
[] ¬vnt ∧¬pre ∧¬exp →∆60
;src_state:= 2
;active!!false
)
)
[]src_state= 4 →...
)
/bardbl ∗ (vented??vnt;newvalue := true)
/bardbl ∗ (pre_vacuum??pre;newvalue := true)
/bardbl ∗ (expose??exp;newvalue := true)
)
Figure 7: Part ofthesource model Msinχ
the latches ‘vented’, ‘pre-vacuum’, and ‘exposure’, respectively. In Fig. 7,s1 is shown on lines
1-18, and s2,s3,s4are shownon lines 19, 20, 21, respectively.
The core process s1 speciﬁes the internal behavior of the source. The state of process s1 is
modeled by the variable src_state, which can take on the value 1 (inactive), 2 (prepared), 3
(active) or 4 (exposure). The variable erroris used to model an error; error= 0 means that
there is no error, the values 1 ,2,3,4,5 indicate diﬀerent error levels. The boolean variables
vnt,pre,exp indicatethestatesofthecorrespondinglatches. Whenthevacuumsystemse nds
asignalviaalatchchannel,thenewvalueisassignedtothecorrespond ingvariable vnt,preor
expintheprocesses s2,s3,ands4,respectively. Thevariable newvalue indicatesthatthestateof
somelatchwaschanged. Finally,thevariables manualandundefined indicatethatthesource
has reached a state whereit is in manual modeorforwhichthebehav ior is undeﬁned.
The core process repetitively checks its state and performs the correspond ing actions. As an
exampleletusconsiderthecaseifthesourceisinitsactivestate,whichis thepartof s1shown
in Fig. 7. In this case the guard src_state= 3 is true and the process makes an undelayable
internal action (skip). After that the process checks if there is an err or and, depending on
the severity of the error, it takes certain actions to prevent further p roblems. If error= 5,
the source performs a delay for 60 time units ( ∆60) and then switches to manual mode
(manual:= true). Thedelayof60timeunitsmodelsthetimewhichisneededtoproce ssthe
error. Iferror= 4, thesourceimmediately switchesto manualmode.
If there is no severe error ( error <4), the source process performs an internal action (skip).
Subsequently, it checks if any of the latch values has been changed, i ndicated by the variable
newvalue. Ifnewvalue is true, it is reset to false without a delay and the process continues. If
thenewvalue guard is false, the process waits until it becomes true (i.e. until a new value is
received via oneofthelatches).
Subsequently, thecurrent states of allfourlatches arechecked. If vnt= true(vacuumsystem
is vented), the variable erroris set to the highest error level 5, since the source is still in its
active state. Otherwise, if preandexpare true, the state of the source is switched to 4, the
exposure state. If preis false and expis true, the behavior is undeﬁned, undefined := true. If
preis true and expis false, the process performs an internal action skip and remains in th e
active state. If both preandexpare false, the process delays for 60 time units, modeling the
tasks needed to go back to the prepared state ( src_state:= 2). After that the source process s1
deactivatesthe‘active’latchchannelto v3ofthevacuumsystem. Thisismodeledbysending
thevaluefalsevia thechannel active(active!!false).
10

--- Page 14 ---
Thevacuumsystemcomponent Cvismodeledasa χprocessMv,andconsistsofthreeparallel
processes (Fig. 6). The process v1 is the core process and describes the internal behavior of
thevacuumsystem, similartoprocess s1 ofMs.
Theprocess v2modelstheinteractionwiththeenvironment. Receivingrequestsfrom theen-
vironment is modeled by communication actions along the channel request. Upon receiving
a new request, v2 decides which actions should be performed, e.g. start a new sequence or
interrupt the current sequence. Accordingly, v2 changes the corresponding variables shared
withv1.
Theprocess v3modelstheinteractionwiththesourceviathe‘active’latch. Itreceive ssignals
from the source via the channel activeand changes its state correspondingly. Similar to the
sourcemodel Ms,the stateofthe latchis modeled bythevariableshared with v1.
Theenvironmentcomponent Ceismodeledasa χprocessMe. Itcansendarequesttochange
thestateofthevacuumsystemviathechannel request,andreceiveareplyviathechannel reply
(Fig. 6). For the analysis in the next steps of the case study we model the e nvironment Meas
a generic environment that can be conﬁgured to send requests and receiv e replies at certain
points in time, depending on the analysis technique. For simulation and t esting, speciﬁc
scenarios with speciﬁc delays between the requests will be used, while f or veriﬁcation, all
scenarios (with anypossibledelay)willbeanalyzed.
Finally, the system model { Me,Mv,Ms}Iis modeled in χas the parallel composition of the
component processes: ( Me/bardblMv/bardblMs). The parallel composition synchronizes the compo-
nents on time andon communication.
Step2a: Simulationoftheintegratedsystemmodel
Inthisstep,thegoalistoinspectthebehavioroftheintegratedv acuumsystem-sourcemodel
bymeans of simulation.
The simulation experiments require diﬀerent scenarios to analyze diﬀ erent aspects of the
system. A good source for possible scenarios is the intended system behavior spe ciﬁed in
the system requirements and design documentation, RandD. Unfortunately, in the case
study only one scenario could directly be derived from the documentation. This sce nario
corresponds tothenominal behavior ofthesystem.
From ASML testing experience, it is known that analyzing only the nominal behavior is not
suﬃcient. In most cases, it is the exceptional behavior which gives the prob lems, since this
behavior is less documented and thus less clear when compared to the nomin al behavior.
Therefore, it is veryimportant to analyzetheexceptional behavi or assoon as possible.
In this case study, the exceptional behavior of the system is also poorly docume nted. No
simulation scenarios could be directly derived from the documentation. However , based on
our system overview obtained by modeling the components, and by discussion wit h the in-
volved engineers, four additional scenarios for exceptional behavior anal ysis have been de-
rived. These scenarios cover the behavior of the system when the vacuum an d venting se-
quences are interrupted at certain pointsin time.
Besidesincompletedocumentation,thereisanotherproblemwiththea nalysisofexceptional
behavior in the current way of working. Since only realizations can be used for system anal-
ysis, it may be diﬃcult or expensive to create the non-nominal circumstance s that are neces-
sarytoanalyzetheexceptionalbehavior,forexample,abrokencompone nt. SincetheMBI&T
methodusesmodelsforsystemanalysis,creatingthesenon-nominalcircumsta ncesismuch
easierand cheaper.
In the case study, we used speciﬁc conﬁgurations of the environment model Meto analyze
theintegratedsystembehaviorfortheﬁvescenariosmentionedabove ,onewithnominaland
fourwithexceptionalbehavior. Thesimulationresultswerevisualizedbyme ansofanimated
automata,message sequence charts,and Ganttcharts.
Thesimulationresultsrevealedonesituationwithincorrectbehavior. Thissitua tionsurpris-
ingly also occurred in the nominal behavior scenario. The incorrect behavi or occurs during
the venting sequence, in which the vacuum system ﬁrst deactivates the ‘e xposure’ and ‘pre-
vacuum’ latches. According to its design, the source should ﬁrst observe the deactiv ated ‘ex-
posure’ latch and perform some actions before observing the deactivated ‘pre -vacuum’ latch.
11 Modelingandsimulationwith χ

--- Page 15 ---
However, since the vacuum system has been designed to deactivate both l atches at the same
time, the source can also receive the deactivated ‘pre-vacuum’ latch during t he actions it per-
forms to reach the prepared state, or even before receiving the de activated ‘exposure’ latch.
In both cases, the source raises an error and switches to manual mode, which i s certainly
not acceptable for nominal behavior. Further diagnosis showed that th is incorrect behavior
indeedwasanintegrationproblembetweenthevacuumsystemandthesource ,whichcould
now besolvedearlyin the design phase.
5 TranslationtoandveriﬁcationwithU PPAAL
During simulation (validation) some problems were discovered and solved. Th at increases
theconﬁdence,butdoesnotprovethecorrectnessofthemodel. Tocheckwhe therthemodel
behaves correctly in all possible scenarios and to gain more knowledge ab out the system, it
has tobeveriﬁed. This corresponds tostep 2b oftheMBI&T method.
Step2b: Veriﬁcationofthe χsystemmodelusingU PPAAL
UPPAALisatoolformodeling,simulation,andveriﬁcation. Asystem, modeledasan etwork
of UPPAALtimed automata, can be simulated by U PPAALsimulator and veriﬁed by U PPAAL
model checker. To be able to verify χmodels in U PPAAL, the translation scheme from the
process algebraic language χto UPPAALtimed automata has been formally deﬁned and the
proofs of its correctness have been given [30]. The translation scheme is deﬁ ned for a subset
ofχandconsistsofall χmodels,speciﬁedasparallelcompositionofoneoremoresequential
processes. The translatable subset of χhas been deﬁned according to the following require-
ments:
• Make the translation as simple as possible. For this reason, a minimal subse t ofχ
was translated. For instance, in χboth undelayable ( h!!en) and delayable ( h!en) send
process terms are deﬁned. Delayable send is a syntactic extension, whi ch is formally
deﬁned as [ h!!en]. Replacing h!enwith [h!!en] does not change behavior of the model
but makes it translatable. While performing this case study, we also wa nted to check if
thedeﬁned subset is expressive enough.
• Makethetranslationasgeneralaspossible. Forinstance,wecouldnotde ﬁneageneral
translation of the guard operator, but there are many speciﬁc cases, for which guarded
processtermscanbetranslated. Welimitourselvestoguardedskip,multi- assignment,
send and receive.
• Make the translated U PPAALmodels as readable as possible. For example, nested par-
allel composition can be translated as alternative composition of all possible tran si-
tions [24],but it wouldmake resulting automataless readable.
The translation scheme from χto UPPAALhas been implemented and integrated into the χ
toolset,enablingautomatic translation of χmodels to U PPAALtimed automata [26].
Makingthe χmodeltranslatable
Since the original model was created without considering its translation to UPPAAL, it uses
some constructs, for which translation is not deﬁned, such as modeling scope operator , pro-
cess instantiation, delayable send and receive, nested parallelism , and guarded delay. That
means thatthe model hastobe transformed tomake it translatable.
The modeling scope operator is a syntactic extension, which is used to declar e a scope, con-
sistingoflocalvariable,channels,etc. AlthoughinU PPAALthereareglobalandlocalscopes,
they are not deﬁned formally, and so the modeling scope operator cannot be translated. The
same holds for the process instantiation. To remove these operators from th eχmodel, all
thevariableshavebeenliftedtotheglobalscopeandgivenuniquen ames. Afterthatthelocal
scopeoperators andthe process instantiations can besafelyremoved.
12

--- Page 16 ---
Alldelayablesendandreceive processterms ( h!en,h?xn)havebeen replaced bytheirdeﬁni-
tions ([h!!en],[h??xn]). Thebehavior ofthemodel is not changed.
In the original model guarded delays have been used in following constr uct:b→a[]
¬b→∆d, wherea∈{skip,xn:=en}. It can be shown that this process term is bisimilar
tob→a[]∆d, in away,similar totheproofs ofthe χproperties in [24].
Thevacuumsystemprocesscontainsaconstructoftheform p1;(p2;p3/bardblp4);p5. Sincenested
parallelism is not allowed, this part of the model has to be re-wr itten. Here, the process p2
changes a value of a variable x. As soon as it happens, the process p4should perform an
undelayable action and terminate. The analysis of the system has show n that this particular
casecanbe alsomodeled without usageofthenested paralleloperatoras p1;p2;p4;p3;p5.
The case study has shown that the translatable subset of χshould be extended with the
translation of modeling scope operator and process instantiation. Since it is no t possible to
make a general translation of nested parallelism, guarded delay and real-valued delays, these
constructs have to be avoided while creating a model for veriﬁcation, otherw ise they have to
transformed manually.
After transforming the original χmodel, the corresponding translatable model has been
translated automaticallytoU PPAALautomata.
Fig.8showsthegeneratedU PPAALautomataforthesource,whichcorrespondstothepartial
χsourcemodel MsofFig. 7.
VeriﬁcationofthegeneratedU PPAALmodel
Thefollowingproperties oftheresulting U PPAALmodel havebeen veriﬁed:
(1) Deadlock freeness: A[]deadlockimplyenv.end , whereenv.enddenotes the location of
the environment automatonthat indicates successfultermination.
(2) Livelock freeness: A<>env.end. The system model is created in such way that the
vacuum system and the source components get requests from the environment com-
ponent;whenallrequestsareprocessedandconﬁrmationisreceived,thee nvironment
process terminates. Based on this we can state that if the environment automaton
reaches its end state, there is no livelockin thesystem.
(3) No undeﬁned behavior: A[] undeﬁned == 0 . While modeling we discovered that in
some particular situations the system behavior was unknown, since it can never occur.
Thesesituationsweremodeledbyassigninganon-zerovaluetothevariab leundeﬁned
(Fig. 7, line10).
(4) No errors: A[] error == 0 , whereerroris the variable indicating the error severity level
of thesource( error>0),or theabsenceof anerror ( error==0 ).
(5) Vacuum system may not be vented while source is active to avoid machine d amage:
A[] not (vnt and act) , where the variables vntandactindicate the vented state of the
vacuumsystem andtheactivestate ofthesource, respectively.
(6) The duration of the vacuum and vacuum sequences is at most 6 hours and 1 hour,
respectively: A[]vacuumimplyclk ≤21600andA[]ventingimplyclk ≤3600,wherethe
variables vacuumandventedindicatewhichsequenceisbeingperformed,and clkisa
clockvariableused to determine theduration oftheperformed sequence(in seconds).
ThetranslatedmodelhasbeenveriﬁedinU PPAALusingthefollowingoptions: generationof
the fastest trace, breadth ﬁrst search order, conservative space optimiz ation, and state space
representation uses minimal constraint systems. The biggest number of st ates (20510) was
explored whileverifying theﬁrst property.
During veriﬁcation of properties 1 and 2, two design errors have been found . Both errors
are causing deadlock and concern non-determinism in the interleaving of the main process
and the interrupt handling process of the vacuum system (v1 and v2 in Fig. 6, respectively).
The way to handle this non-determinism in general has not been sp eciﬁed in the design
13 TranslationtoandveriﬁcationwithU PPAAL

--- Page 17 ---
S8
cA0<=60S10
trueS16
trueS28
trueS32
trueS36
cA0<=60
S38
trueS43
true
cA0= =60manu al = 1newvalue == 1
dumm y!
newvalue = 0,
cA0 = 0src_stat e = 2
active!
active0= 0
vnt == 1
dumm y!
error = 5
vnt == 0 && pre == 1 && e xp == 1
dumm y!
src_stat e = 4vnt == 0 && pre == 0 && e xp == 1
dumm y!
undeﬁne d = 1
vnt == 0 && pre == 1 && e xp == 0
dumm y!cA0= =60
(error  == 5)dumm y!
cA0 = 0error == 4
dumm y!
manu al = 1error < 4
dumm y!src_stat e == 1
dumm y!
src_stat e == 2
dumm y!
src_stat e == 3
dumm y!src_stat e == 4
dumm y!
s1
s2S46
trueS47
truevente d?
vnt= vented0
newvalue = 1 s3S51
trueS52
truepre_vacuum?
pre=pre_vacuum0
newvalue = 1 s4S56
trueS57
trueexpose?
exp=expose0
newvalue = 1.........
Figure 8: Generated U PPAALautomata forthesource
documentation, and model veriﬁcation has indicated this design incomplet eness. After in-
forming the involved engineers, an alternative design for the inte rrupt handling process has
been proposed.
This alternative design has also been applied to the χmodel (and subsequently translated
to UPPAAL). Besides this general issue, another deadlock occurred in the speciﬁc situa tion
wheretheinterruptrequestwassentexactlyatthestartofthesequen ce. Again,thisindicated
anincompletenessinthedesigndocumentation,whichdidnotmentionthe assumptionthat
aninterruptcouldonlyoccurafterthestartofasequence. Withthealterna tivedesignforthe
interrupt handling process, and after restricting the test environme nt such that interrupts
can onlyoccurafterthestart ofa sequence, themodel satisﬁes bothproperties 1and2.
Property 3 is satisﬁed by the model, indicating that the engineers wer e correct when they
claimedthattheundeﬁnedbehaviorpartswouldneverbereached. Ve riﬁcationofproperty4
detected the same design error as found by simulation (incorrect behavior in t he venting
sequence, resulting in an error level larger than zero). Finally, two mi nor errors have been
discovered by veriﬁcation of property 4 and 5, one modeling mistake and on e mistake in the
manual transformation fromtheoriginal χmodel tothetranslatable χmodel.
To verify the property 6, a method similar to the decoration method descri bed in [19] was
used. We added the boolean variables vacuumandventedto indicate which sequence is
14

--- Page 18 ---
being performed and a clock clkto determine the duration of a sequence. Whenever the
environment sends a request to the vacuum system to start a sequence, the corresponding
variableissettotrueandthe clkisreset. Whenthesequenceisﬁnished,thevacuumsystem
sends a reply back to the environment and both variables are set t o false. No new edges,
locations, invariants or guards were added. It can be shown that the beha vior of the system
was not changed. The properties A[] vacuum imply clk ≤21600andA[] venting imply clk ≤
3600are bothsatisﬁed.
Alldesignerrorsfoundwithsimulationandveriﬁcationhavebeendiscussedwi ththeASML
engineers, and subsequently ﬁxes have been applied to the design and , correspondingly, to
the model in order to avoid these errors. The ﬁxed model has been veriﬁ ed again and now
all properties as described above are satisﬁed by the model. For the ﬁxe d model the biggest
number of states (9961) was explored while verifying the ﬁrst prop erty. The diﬀerence in
statespacesizebetweentheoriginalmodel(20510states)andtheﬁxe dmodel(9961states)is
partiallycausedbytheﬁxesappliedtothemodel,andpartiallybym akinguseofanimproved
versionofU PPAAL. UPPAAL3.6betawasusedfortheoriginalmodel,andU PPAAL4.0.2was
used forthe ﬁxed model.
Theveriﬁcationresultsoftheﬁxedmodelgiveenoughconﬁdencethatthemode lisacorrect
representation ofthe system design, making it suitableformodel-based system testing.
6 Model-basedandrealsystemtesting(summary)
Although model-based system testing and real system testing are not t he focus of this paper,
this section gives a summary ofthese steps ofthecasestudy.
The model of the vacuum system was integrated with the realization of th e source using an
appropriate infrastructure, including a software/hardware adapter th at translates communi-
cation actions in the models into electronic signals for the source realization a nd vice versa.
For model-based system testing, the same environment model and scenari os as in the sim-
ulation step were used, however now the scenarios and models were execute d in real-time
(using a real-time χsimulator), since the source realization, by deﬁnition, is also running in
real-time. With this setup, early system testing was performed 20 we eks before real integra-
tion,in aless stressful and much cheaperperiod ofthedevelopment process.
Similar to the simulation step of the case study, creating non-nominal circums tances was
easy in a model environment compared to a realization environment. In a ddition, setting
upandswitchingbetweendiﬀerenttestcasescanbeperformedalmostin stantlywhenusing
models. Real system testing experience shows that this can take up to m ore than half of the
total test time due to, for example, long setup times of the system and initi alization errors in
parts of the system that are not involved in the tests (which would be ab stracted away in the
system model). As a result, the tests performed took half a day of test time com pared to an
estimated fourdaysof testing during thereal integration and test ph ases.
Severalintegrationproblemsinthesourcerealizationwerediscovered . Themodelsimproved
the diagnosis of the errors, which appeared to be caused by implementa tion errors in the
source. Theseerrorswouldhavecausedseveraldaysofveryexpensivedowntim eintheclean
roomwhentheywouldbediscoveredduringrealsystemtesting. Finally ,noadditionalerrors
inthesourcerealizationwerefound(andnoﬁxingwasnecessary)duringrea lsystemtesting,
atleast not forthe aspectsthat wereanalyzed and tested usingtheM BI&T method.
These results clearly show that early model-based system testing using χmodels that have
beenveriﬁedwithU PPAALhassavedsigniﬁcantintegrationandtestingtimeandcostsinthe
casestudy.
7 Conclusions
The goal of the case study and this paper was threefold: (1) to show the po tential of the
proposed MBI&T method (in which the veriﬁcation techniques are used) to r educe the in-
15 Conclusions

--- Page 19 ---
tegration and test eﬀort of industrial systems; (2) to investigate the a pplicability, scalability,
andusabilityofthe χtoolsetasintegratedtoolsupportforallaspectsoftheMBI&Tmethod,
particularlyfocusingonthetranslatorfrom χtoUPPAAL;(3)toshowtheapplicabilityandthe
advantages of usingveriﬁcation techniques forreal-size industrial sys tems.
Application of the MBI&T method (and veriﬁcation as its part) in the case study has shown
many advantages. First, the modeling activities helped to clarify, correct, and complete the
design documentation. By simulation and veriﬁcation, a number of design and in tegration
errors were detected and ﬁxed earlier and cheaper when compared t o current system devel-
opment. Finally, a part of the model was integrated with a realize d component to enable
early, fast, and cheap model-based system testing. Again, multiple errors in realization were
detected and ﬁxed. This clearly shows the applicability and value of the MBI&T method for
industrial system development.
In total, ﬁve errors have been found by simulation and veriﬁcation of the sy stem model.
Three of these errors were design errors; only one of them has been discove red by means
of simulation. The other two design errors, discovered by veriﬁcation only, b oth concern the
non-deterministicbehaviorofparallelprocesses. Thisisdiﬃcult,ifno timpossible,tounder-
stand and to analyze by simulation or reviewing the design documentation . This illustrates
that veriﬁcation should be used for designing real industrial systems, whic h often involve
both high-levelparallelismandnon-deterministic behavior.
The other two errors were modeling errors introduced in the modeling an d model trans-
formation step. To prevent model transformation errors, the translation sche me from χto
UPPAALshould be extended with the scope operator and process instantiation. With t hese
extensions, the translation scheme is well suited for translating most χmodels. Unfortu-
nately, the guarded delay and nested parallelism cannot be transl ated in the general case and
these constructs should be avoided while modeling; otherwise they have to b e transformed
manually.
Theχtoolset,extendedwiththeU PPAALtranslator,issuitableforallactivitiesoftheMBI&T
method: modeling, simulation, veriﬁcation, component testing, and integ rated system test-
ing. Thesystemaspectsthatweremodeledinthecasestudy(supervisorymach inecontrolin
software, interrupt behavior, electronic communication) can easilybemodele d in χ.
Although the state space explosion remains being the main obstacle in v eriﬁcation of the
real-size industrial systems, the performed case study shows that continued research work
and tools improvements allow to use model checking in wider applicati on area. The fact
that the state space of our system is rather small indicates that the χtoolset and the U P-
PAALmodel checker are well suited for modeling and analysis of similar size or even more
complex industrial systems. Our current work on the MBI&T method concentrates on the
integration and testing of models and realizations, in particular on the b ehavior relation of
theimplemented infrastructure Iand theparalleloperatorin the system model).
16

--- Page 20 ---
Acknowledgements
ThisworkhasbeencarriedoutaspartoftheT ANGRAM projectundertheresponsibilityofthe
Embedded Systems Institute, partially supported by the Netherland s Ministry of Economic
Aﬀairs under grant TSIT2026, and as part of the TIPS Yproject, supported by the Dutch Or-
ganization for Scientiﬁc Research (NWO), project number 612.064.205. T he authors would
like to thank the engineers of the ASML EUV group for their support in t he case study, Ton
Geubbels for his modeling and veriﬁcation activities in the case study, and Esmée Bertens
forhereﬀortintransformingthe χmodeltomakeitsuitablefortranslationtoU PPAAL. Fur-
thermore,wewouldliketothankallT ANGRAM andTIPS Yprojectmembersfortheirvaluable
comments andfruitfuldiscussions.
17

--- Page 21 ---
18 Acknowledgements

--- Page 22 ---
Bibliography
[1] L. Bratthall, P. Runeson, K. Ädelsward, W. Eriksson, A survey of lead- time challenges in
the development and evolution of distributed real-time systems, Informa tion and Soft-
wareTechnology 42(13) (2000) 947–958.
[2] B. Boehm, V. Basili, Software defect reduction top 10 list, IEEE Compute r 34 (1) (2001)
135–137.
[3] M.Broy,O.Slotosch,Fromrequirementstovalidatedembedded systems,in: Embedded
Software: First International Workshop, EMSOFT 2001, Tahoe City, CA, USA, Springer-
Verlag,2001, pp.51–65.
[4] X.Liu,J.Liu,J.Eker,E.A.Lee,Heterogeneousmodelinganddesi gnofcontrolsystems,
in: Software-Enabled Control: Information Technology for Dynamical Sys tems, Wiley-
IEEE Press, 2003, Ch.7, pp.105–122.
[5] F. J. Budinsky, M. A. Finnie, J. M. Vlissides, P. S. Yu, Automatic code g eneration from
design patterns,IBMSystems Journal35(2) (1996) 151–171.
[6] J. A. Rowson, Hardware/software co-simulation, in: DAC ’94: Proceedin gs of the 31st
annualconference on Design automation,ACM Press, 1994, pp.439–440.
[7] E. Brinksma, J. Tretmans, Testing transition systems: An annotated bibliography, in:
MOVEP 2000 – Modelling and Veriﬁcation of Parallel Processes, Vol. 2067 of Lecture
Notesin Computer Science, Springer-Verlag, 2001, pp.187–195.
[8] I.Ogren,Onprinciplesformodel-basedsystemsengineering, SystemsEngineering3(1)
(2000) 38–49.
[9] A.Kleppe,W.Bast,J.Warmer,MDAExplained: TheModelDriv enArchitecture: Practice
and Promise, 1st Edition, Addison-Wesley Professional, 2003.
[10] TANGRAMProject, Website, http://www.esi.nl/tangram.
[11] N. C. W. M. Braspenning, J. M. van de Mortel-Fronczak, J. E. Rood a, A Model-based In-
tegration and Testing Method to Reduce System Development Eﬀort, in: P roceedings of
the 2nd workshop on Model-Based Testing (MBT2006), Electronic Notes in Th eoretical
Computer Science 164 (4)(2006) 13–28.
[12] ASML, Website, http://www.asml.com.
[13] D. A. van Beek, K. L. Man, M. A. Reniers, J. E. Rooda, R. R. H. Schi ﬀelers, Syntax and
consistent equation semantics of hybrid Chi, Journal of Logic and Algebraic Program-
ming 68 (1-2) (2006) 129–210.
[14] TIPSyProject, Website, http://homepages.cwi.nl/ ∼wijs/TIPSy.
[15] E. M. Bortnik, D. A. van Beek, J. M. van de Mortel-Fronczak, J. E . Rooda, Veriﬁcation
of timed Chi models using U PPAAL, in: ICINCO 2005, Proceedings of the Second In-
ternationalConferenceonInformaticsinControl,AutomationandRobotics,Barce lona,
Spain,September 14-17, INSTICCPress, 2005, pp.486–492.
[16] G. Behrmann, A. David, K. G. Larsen, A tutorial on U PPAAL, in: Formal Methods for
the Design of Real-Time Systems: 4th International School on Formal Me thods for the
DesignofComputer,Communication,andSoftwareSystems,SFM-RT2004,no. 3185in
LNCS,Springer-Verlag, 2004, pp.200–236.
[17] J.Bengtsson,W.Yi,Timedautomata: Semantics,algorithmsandtools, in: LectureNotes
on Concurrency and Petri Nets,no. 3098 in LNCS,Springer-Verlag, 2004 .
[18] UPPAAL,Website, http://www.uppaal.com.
19

--- Page 23 ---
[19] M. Lindahl, P. Pettersson, W. Yi, Formal Design and Analysis of a G earbox Controller,
Springer International Journal of Software Tools for Technology Transfer (STTT) 3 (3)
(2001) 353–368.
[20] J.Bengtsson,W.O.D.Griﬃoen,K.J.Kristoﬀersen, K.G.Larsen,F .Larsson,P.Petters-
son, W. Yi, Automated analysis of an audio control protocol using UPPAAL, Journal of
Logicand Algebraic Programming 52–53 (2002) 163–181.
[21] A. David, W. Yi, Modelling and analysis of a commercial ﬁeld bus p rotocol, in: Proceed-
ings of the 12th Euromicro Conference on Real Time Systems, IEEE Compute r Society,
2000, pp.165–172.
[22] T. Hune, K. G. Larsen, P. Pettersson, Guided Synthesis of Control Progr ams Using U P-
PAAL, in: Proceedings of the IEEE ICDCS International Workshop on Distribute d Sys-
tems Veriﬁcation and Validation,IEEE Computer SocietyPress, 2000, pp.E 15–E22.
[23] M. Hendriks, B. van den Nieuwelaar, F. Vaandrager, Model ch ecker aided design of a
controller for a wafer scanner, International Journal on Software Tools for Tec hnology
Transfer (STTT) - Special Section on Quantitative Analysis of Real-time Em bedded Sys-
tems (2006) 1–15.
[24] K. L. Man, R. R. H. Schiﬀelers, Formal speciﬁcation and analysis of hy brid systems,
Ph.D.thesis, Eindhoven University ofTechnology (2006).
[25] D. A. van Beek, K. L. Man, M. A. Reniers, J. E. Rooda, R. R. H. Schi ﬀelers, Syntax
and semantics of timed Chi, Tech. Rep. 05-09, Eindhoven University of Technology,
Department of ComputerScience (2005).
[26] Systems Engineering Group, Eindhoven University of Technolog y, Chi language and
toolswebsite, http://se.wtb.tue.nl/sewiki/chi/start.
[27] D. A. van Beek, A. van der Ham, J. E. Rooda, Modelling and control of process indus-
try batch production systems, in: 15th Triennial World Congress of the Inte rnational
Federation of Automatic Control, Barcelona,Spain, CD-ROM, 2002.
[28] J. M. van de Mortel-Fronczak, J. Vervoort, J. E. Rooda, Simulation-b ased design of ma-
chine control systems, in: Proceedings of the 15th European Simulation Multicon fer-
ence, June6-9, Prague, Czech Republic,2001.
[29] J. Tretmans, E. Brinksma, TorX : Automated model based testing, in : 1st European
Conference on Model-Driven SoftwareEngineering, 2003.
[30] E. M. Bortnik, J. M. van de Mortel-Fronczak, J. E. Rooda, Verifyi ng Chi models in U P-
PAAL,toappearin Systems Engineering Report(2006).
20 Bibliography
