--- Page 1 ---
Aalborg Universitet
Energy-Efficient Motion Planning for Autonomous Vehicles Using Uppaal Stratego
Naeem, Muhammad; Gu, Rong; Seceleanu, Cristina; Guldstrand Larsen, Kim; Nielsen, Brian;
Albano, Michele
Published in:
Theoretical Aspects of Software Engineering
DOI (link to publication from Publisher):
10.1007/978-3-031-64626-3_21
Creative Commons License
Unspecified
Publication date:
2024
Document Version
Accepted author manuscript, peer reviewed version
Link to publication from Aalborg University
Citation for published version (APA):
Naeem, M., Gu, R., Seceleanu, C., Guldstrand Larsen, K., Nielsen, B., & Albano, M. (2024). Energy-Efficient
Motion Planning for Autonomous Vehicles Using Uppaal Stratego. In W.-N. Chin, & Z. Xu (Eds.), Theoretical
Aspects of Software Engineering: 18th International Symposium, TASE 2024, Guiyang, China, July 29 – August
1, 2024, Proceedings (pp. 356-373). Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-64626-3_21
General rights
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright owners
and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
            - Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the public portal for the purpose of private study or research.
            - You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit-making activity or commercial gain
            - You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the public portal -
Take down policy
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us at vbn@aub.aau.dk providing details, and we will remove access to
the work immediately and investigate your claim.
Downloaded from vbn.aau.dk on: April 01, 2026

--- Page 2 ---
Energy-Optimized Motion Planning for
Autonomous Vehicles Using Uppaal Stratego⋆
Muhammad Naeem1, Rong Gu2, Cristina Seceleanu2, Kim Guldstrand
Larsen1, Brian Nielsen1, and Michele Albano1
1Department of Computer Science, Aalborg University, Aalborg, Denmark
{mnaeem, kgl, bnielsen, mialb}@cs.aau.dk
2Division of Networked and Embedded Systems, M¨ alardalen University, Sweden
{rong.gu, cristina.seceleanu}@mdu.se
Abstract. Energy-efficient motion planning for autonomous battery-
powered vehicles is crucial to avoid frequent battery recharge. This pa-
per proposes algorithms for synthesizing energy- and time-efficient mo-
tion plans for battery-powered autonomous construction equipment. We
use priced timed games to model an appropriate abstraction of the au-
tonomous vehicle and the environment. Based on the model, we synthe-
size energy- and time-optimal motion plans by using Q-learning in Up-
paal Stratego . Via experiments, we show that pure Q-learning is insuf-
ficient when the problem becomes complex, e.g., motion planning in large
environments. To address this issue, we introduce Concatenated Motion
Planning (CoMOP), which divides the environment into several regions,
synthesizes a motion plan in each of the regions, and concatenates them
into an entire motion plan for the whole environment. CoMOP enhances
the applicability of Q-learning to large and complex environments, re-
duces the synthesis time, and provides efficient navigation and precise
motion plans. We conduct experiments with our approaches in an indus-
trial use case. The results show that CoMOP outperforms simple Motion
Planning regarding synthesis time and the ability to deal with complex
models. Moreover, we compare the energy- and time-optimal strategies
and visualize their differences on different terrains.
Keywords: Motion planning ·UPPAAL Stratego ·Q-learning
1 Introduction
Autonomous vehicles are equipped with advanced sensors, cameras, and com-
munication devices, which enable them to perceive the environment and perform
various tasks autonomously. In particular, the use of autonomous vehicles in con-
struction sites can lead to increased productivity, safety, and reduced costs. One
⋆The research was supported by the ERC Advanced Grant LASSO and Villum Inves-
tigator Grant S4OS, and the Swedish Knowledge Foundation via the synergy project
ACICS – Assured Cloud Platforms for Industrial Cyber-Physical Systems, grant nr.
20190038, and the profile project DPAC - Dependable Platform for Autonomous
Systems and Control, grant nr: 20150022.
This version of the article has been accepted for publication, after peer review (when applicable) and is subject to Springer Nature’s AM terms of use, 
but is not the Version of Record and does not reflect post-acceptance improvements, or any corrections.  
The Version of Record is available online at: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-64626-3_21

--- Page 3 ---
2 M. Naeem et al.
of the key challenges in the design and operation of autonomous vehicles is to
ensure their energy efficiency. This is particularly important for battery-powered
vehicles, where the limited energy capacity of the battery constrains the vehicle’s
operating range and duration. Therefore, an energy-optimal motion-planning
algorithm is crucial for the deployment of autonomous vehicles in real-world
scenarios. However, motion planning with energy optimization is not trivial. In-
tuitively, a time-optimal motion plan should be energy-optimal, which means a
path-finding algorithm like A* [16] is sufficient. However, our experiments show
that these two kinds of motion plans are not necessarily the same on different
terrains. For instance, when slopes exist, the fastest motion plan can be very
energy-consuming, but traveling in a curve might cost less energy.
In recent years, reinforcement learning [17] has become popular for solving
the motion-planning problem [1][3]. The idea is simple and attractive: let the
machine run by itself and accumulate its actions’ reward gathered from the
environment. Given enough episodes of learning, the machine would solve the
problem automatically without human intervention. However, the reality is that
reinforcement learning algorithms are extremely data-hungry, and tuning a re-
ward function can be very difficult and time-consuming, especially when multiple
factors are considered at the same time. For example, according to our experi-
ments, synthesizing an energy-optimal motion plan by using Q-learning [18] in a
20×20 environment with 2 obstacles costs almost 2 hours. This motivates us to
develop a new method that is able to solve real-world motion-planning problems
in a reasonable time and provide a systematic way of evaluating the learning
results, such as the probability of finishing a job before the energy consumption
exceeds a threshold.
In this paper, we present a study on the development of energy-optimal mo-
tion planning for battery-powered autonomous vehicles. First, we model the
autonomous vehicles and the environment as priced timed games (PTG) [5]. By
using this modeling language, we can construct the control logic as timed games
(TG) and encode the vehicle’s nonlinear dynamics and energy consumption as or-
dinary differential equations (ODE) in the TG. Next, we design methods for solv-
ing the PTG by using Q-learning, that is, synthesizing time- and energy-optimal
motion plans of the model. We construct the model and conduct the synthesis
in UPPAAL Stratego [6], which is a toolset of modeling, simulation, verification,
and synthesis of timed games. As aforementioned, motion planning by Q-learning
is restricted by the scale of the problem, such as the environment size and obsta-
cle numbers. Therefore, we design a novel algorithm, called concatenation-based
motion planning (CoMOP), which splits the environment into sub-components,
synthesizes a sub-motion plan in each of the sub-components, concatenates the
sub-motion plans into a complete one, and verifies the complete plan by using
statistical model checking. When concatenating two motion plans, we must en-
sure the validity andautomation of the concatenation, that is, the final set of
states of the first motion plan is equivalent to the initial set of states of the second
motion plan, and the work must be done automatically by our tool, such that
CoMOP does not break the autonomy of the system. To achieve these, we realize
This version of the article has been accepted for publication, after peer review (when applicable) and is subject to Springer Nature’s AM terms of use, 
but is not the Version of Record and does not reflect post-acceptance improvements, or any corrections.  
The Version of Record is available online at: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-64626-3_21

--- Page 4 ---
Motion Planning for Autonomous Vehicles Using Uppaal Stratego 3
the concatenation as an external library that is invoked by UPPAAL Stratego, in
which assertions are used for checking the validity of the concatenation. We eval-
uate CoMOP in an industrial environment, an autonomous quarry. We design
several groups of experiments that have different sizes of quarry and obstacles,
and different numbers of obstacles. Via the experiments, we show the profound
difference in performance between CoMOP and MOP (motion planning without
concatenation), and the difference between time- and energy-optimal trajecto-
ries of motion plans on various terrains. In summary, our contributions are as
follows:
1. This paper proposes a novel concatenation-based motion planning (CoMOP)
by reinforcement learning. CoMOP is much more efficient than MOP when
the scale of the problem is large.
2. We demonstrate the use of statistical model checking (SMC) in motion plan-
ning that uses learning. Via experiments, we show the qualitative evaluation
of the synthesized motion plans by using SMC, which exposes the correct
rate of the resulting motion plan before testing it on an actual system im-
plementation.
3. Our method can generate time- and energy-optimal motion plans that are
not necessarily the same on different terrains. Our large-scale evaluation in
an industrial environment shows the efficiency of obtaining these two kinds
of motion plans.
2 Related Work
In recent years, there has been a growing interest in developing energy-optimized
motion planning algorithms for autonomous vehicles. Energy consumption can
be minimized by a parametric curve fit [13], by applying machine learning [14,
15], or by employing physics-based models of energy consumption [4, 9]. The en-
ergy prediction method used by Quann et al. [14, 15] abstracts from kinematic
considerations such as velocity and acceleration. Physics-based modeling [9] that
accounts for these assumes mostly flat terrains. In Wallace et al. [4], the authors
consider elevation and a detailed kinematic model, however, their model is an-
alytical, being validated via simulation. In our work, we model both vehicle
kinematics, although not as detailed as in Wallace et al.’s work [4], and consider
environments that include slopes, employing a learning-based model-checking
technique for synthesizing energy-efficient motion plans automatically.
Compositional reinforcement learning is a promising approach for training
policies to perform complex long-horizon tasks. Jothimurugan et al. [11] propose
a novel framework based on two reinforcement learning algorithms by formu-
lating the learning problem of choosing what tasks to perform from an existing
set, as an adversarial reinforcement learning problem. Although close in spirit,
our approach does not focus on robust task choices w.r.t. functionality, but
rather w.r.t. optimizing time- and energy usage by combining task learning with
assertion-based space decomposition within priced timed games.
This version of the article has been accepted for publication, after peer review (when applicable) and is subject to Springer Nature’s AM terms of use, 
but is not the Version of Record and does not reflect post-acceptance improvements, or any corrections.  
The Version of Record is available online at: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-64626-3_21

--- Page 5 ---
4 M. Naeem et al.
3 Preliminaries
In this section, we overview reinforcement learning, priced timed games and
Uppaal Stratego, which form the paper’s necessary background information.
3.1 Reinforcement Learning
Reinforcement learning (RL) [17] is a machine-learning method that trains a
machine’s behavior by letting it interact with the environment, collecting scores
of the machine’s actions at different states, and calculating the state-action pairs’
values. Q-learning [18] is a classic RL algorithm that uses the Bellman-optimal
equation to calculate the values of state-action pairs, shown as follows.
q∗(s, a) =E[R(s, a) +γmax
a′q∗(s′, a′)], (1)
where q∗(s, a) represents the expected value of performing action aat state
s,Edenotes the expected value function, R(s, a) is the reward returned from
the environment by taking aats,γ∈[0,1] is a discounting value indicating
how much the future reward is evaluated in the calculation, s′is the next state
originating from sby taking a, and max
a′q∗(s′, a′) is the maximum reward that
can be obtained by any possible next state-action pair ( s′, a′).
3.2 Uppaal Stratego
Priced Timed Games (PTG) are two-player games played on priced timed au-
tomata [2]. We recall the formal definition of PTG as follows. A HA is defined
as the following tuple:
HA=< L, l 0, X, Σ, E, F, I >, (2)
where: Lis a finite set of locations, l0∈Lis the initial location, Xis a finite
set of continuous variables, Σ=Σi⊎Σois a finite set of actions that are
partitioned into inputs ( Σi) and outputs (Σ o),Eis a finite set of edges of the
form ( l, g, a, φ, l′), where landl′are locations, gis a predicate on RX,a∈Σis
an action label, and φis a binary relation on RX,F(l) is a delay function for the
location l∈L, and Iassigns an invariant predicate I(l) in/of L, which bounds
the delay time in the respective location.
Definition 1. A Priced Timed Game G=< L, l 0, C, Σ, E, Inv > is a tuple,
where Lis a finite set of locations, l0is the initial location, Cis a finite set
of non-negative real-valued variables named clocks, Σ=Σc∪Σuis a finite set
of actions (Σ candΣudenote a set of controllable and uncontrollable actions,
respectively), E⊆L×B(C)×Σ×2C×Lis a finite set of edges, where B(C)is
the set of guards over C, that is, conjunctive formulas of constraints of the form
c1▷ ◁ n orc1−c2▷ ◁ n, where c1, c2∈C,n∈N,▷ ◁∈ {<, ≤,=,≥, >},2Cis a
set of clocks in Cthat are reset on the edge, and Inv:L→ B(C)is a partial
function assigning invariants to locations. □
This version of the article has been accepted for publication, after peer review (when applicable) and is subject to Springer Nature’s AM terms of use, 
but is not the Version of Record and does not reflect post-acceptance improvements, or any corrections.  
The Version of Record is available online at: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-64626-3_21

--- Page 6 ---
Motion Planning for Autonomous Vehicles Using Uppaal Stratego 5
(a)
 (b)
Fig. 1: An example of NPTG templates in Uppaal Stratego
Intuitively, controllable actions are performed by the system, e.g., autonomous
vehicles in this paper, and uncontrollable actions are performed by the environ-
ment. Uppaal Stratego [6] is a powerful tool for modeling, strategy synthesis,
and (statistical) model checking of PTG, in which PTG can be composed in
parallel as a network of PTG (NPTG) synchronized via channels. Fig. 1 depicts
PTG templates that can be instantiated into NPTG models by assigning con-
crete values to the parameters of the template, such as VBin TG1. Blue circles
arelocations that are connected by directional edges. Double-circled locations
are the initial locations (e.g. Stay). In Uppaal Stratego , there are two special
kinds of locations: urgent locations (i.e., encircled “u”), and committed locations
(i.e., encircled “c”). UTG require that time does not elapse in those two kinds
of locations, and committed locations are even stricter, that is, the next edge to
be traversed must start from one of them. On the edges, there are assignments
resetting clocks (e.g., t=0) and updating data variables, guards (e.g., t>=14),
and synchronization channels (e.g., arrive! andarrive?). On location Bike in
Fig. 1b, an invariant t<=17 means that clock tmust never exceed 17. Deriva-
tives of clocks can be specified by ordinary differential equations (ODE), such
aspos’==VB in Fig. 1a.
A solution of an NPTG is a winning strategy, which shows the “system”
player what controllable actions to choose at each location, such that it can
eventually reach the desired goal. For example, Fig. 1 models a driver taking
different transportation tools to go to his office. In Uppaal Stratego , we can
synthesize a strategy that guides the system player (e.g., the driver) to reach its
goal (e.g., the office) by using the following query.
strategy s = minE(cost){ExpList1}->{ExpList2}:<> goal (3)
where minE(exp) means that strategy sis to minimize the value of expression
cost, which is a formula that is referred to as a cost function in the machine-
learning domain. ExpList1 andExpList2 are lists of expressions that are passed
to a learning algorithm, which is Q-learning [18] in this paper. Past studies [10][8]
indicate that it is preferable that expressions in ExpList1 are discrete variables
and the ones in ExpList2 are continuous variables (i.e., clocks). When running
this query in Uppaal Stratego , the tool randomly simulates the model and
This version of the article has been accepted for publication, after peer review (when applicable) and is subject to Springer Nature’s AM terms of use, 
but is not the Version of Record and does not reflect post-acceptance improvements, or any corrections.  
The Version of Record is available online at: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-64626-3_21

--- Page 7 ---
6 M. Naeem et al.
Fig. 2: An example of an autonomous vehicle working environment
samples its execution traces, which are passed to the learning algorithm. At the
end of the query, <> goal specifies the criteria for selecting simulation traces,
that is, the ones that reach a state where goal is satisfied are selected. Note that
the learning algorithm only gets controllable actions in those traces, which is the
so-called partial observation of the state space [8]. Last but not least, the latest
version of Uppaal Stratego supports calling external C libraries during the
learning, simulation, and verification of models, which is an important feature
that is utilized in this work.
4 Use Case and Models
In this paper, we demonstrate the applicability of our method on an industrial
case study provided by Volvo Construction Equipment, Sweden. The use case
focuses on optimizing the energy consumption of autonomous wheel loaders used
for transporting materials within a construction site. An example is shown in Fig
2, where the autonomous wheel loader needs to transport stones to a primary
crusher to crush them into smaller pieces. After that, it transports the crashed
stones to the secondary crusher, which is the destination of the stones. We aim
to develop energy-optimal motion planning for battery-powered autonomous ve-
hicles to extend the vehicle’s operating time on a single charge.
4.1 Vehicle’s kinematic Model
In Figure 3, one can see a simple kinematic model that illustrates the configu-
ration of a vehicle using seven parameters: (x, y,ϕ,α,V,θ,T), where xandy
model the vehicle’s current position in a 2D environment, ϕthe steering angle,
αthe acceleration, Vthe velocity, θthe vehicle’s orientation, and Tthe time.
△X △y 
∅
V
△V = 𝑉°+△T∗𝜃 
Fig. 3: Kinematic vehicle modelThe model allows calculating the evolution
of the vehicle’s status, as follows:
△X=X+V·cos(θ )· △T
△Y=X+V·sin(θ)· △T
△θ=θ+△T·ϕ
△V=V+△T·α(4)
This version of the article has been accepted for publication, after peer review (when applicable) and is subject to Springer Nature’s AM terms of use, 
but is not the Version of Record and does not reflect post-acceptance improvements, or any corrections.  
The Version of Record is available online at: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-64626-3_21

--- Page 8 ---
Motion Planning for Autonomous Vehicles Using Uppaal Stratego 7
The trajectory of the vehicle must satisfy a
reach-avoid requirement, that is, eventually
reaching the destination and always avoiding
obstacles. It can be seen that by controlling
acceleration αand steering angle ϕ, one can determine the vehicle’s position.
Therefore, our motion planning is about controlling parameters αandϕ. In
Section 4.2, we introduce how energy optimization is considered in our motion
planning.
4.2 Energy Model
The tractive power model described by Lascurain et al. [12] and Gao et al. [7] is
widely used to calculate the power required by a vehicle powertrain. The tractive
power is the amount of energy required to overcome the vehicle’s resistance to
motion, and it considers various factors that affect the vehicle’s performance,
including the environment. The following equation can be used to calculate the
vehicles’ tractive power:
Wtract =m·V·dV
dt+m·g·Crr·V+m·g·V·sin(θ) (5)
Table 1: Energy
Parameters
Name Value
m 7−22Ton
Crr 2−3%
θ 12%
Wacc 3.75
ηwh 0.99
ηfd 0.98
ηmot 0.88
ηbatt 0.98where Wtractis the tractive power, mis the total mass of the
vehicle, Vis the velocity, gis a constant for gravitational
acceleration, Crris a coefficient of rolling resistance, θis
the road grade. Parameters values obtained from the Volvo
project are shown in Table 1.
In this study, we use the energy model presented in the
literature [12]. The authors propose a model for estimating
the electric power output of an electric vehicle (EV), which
considers the efficiencies of the electric components, such as
the motor and battery, and the related drive-train compo-
nents, such as the final drive and wheel efficiencies shown in
Eq 6. The equations for calculating the driving power and
breaking power of an EV are as follows.
Driving Power :Wdrive =Wacc+Wtract
ηwh·ηfd·ηmot·ηbatt
Breaking Power :WBreaking =Wacc
TotalPower :W=Wdrive +WBreaking
(6)
where Waccis a conventional vehicle’s accessory load (kW), ηwhis the wheel
efficiency, ηfdis the final drive efficiency, ηmotis the motor efficiency, ηbattis the
battery efficiency. Table 1 depicts the values of coefficients used in this paper.
This version of the article has been accepted for publication, after peer review (when applicable) and is subject to Springer Nature’s AM terms of use, 
but is not the Version of Record and does not reflect post-acceptance improvements, or any corrections.  
The Version of Record is available online at: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-64626-3_21

--- Page 9 ---
8 M. Naeem et al.
Decision 
making by 
Q-learning
Select:
∅	𝑎𝑛𝑑 	𝛼
BreakingDrive
End
unittime
arrivedInitial Hitinitialise
close to 
destination
reduce speed 
based on required 
∅option :
reconsider decision
after every unittimehit
required speed 
achieved no need to 
reduce speed
Fig. 4: Vehicle Model in Uppaal Stratego
4.3 Abstract View of Vehicle Model
We develop a framework for simulating a vehicle’s movement to find a path to the
destination while avoiding obstacles, which includes a dynamic decision-making
process based on the Q-learning algorithm. Specifically, we construct a PTG
model of an autonomous wheel loader in Uppaal Stratego , which can navigate
along the x and y axes. The vehicle’s movement is controlled by selecting the
right steering angle (ϕ) and acceleration ( α), chosen from a strategy synthesized
by the Q-learning algorithm. To illustrate our PTG model in an abstract way,
Figure 4 depicts a graphical representation of the vehicle model.
The decision-making process of the vehicle is controlled by the Q-learning
block, which determines the appropriateness of the chosen ϕandαvalues for
each time unit during the vehicle’s movement, that is, the evolution of xand
y. Additionally, when a large ϕis chosen, and the vehicle’s current velocity
exceeds a predefined comfortable threshold for that specific ϕ, the model enters
theBreaking block. In this block, the vehicle can move to the Drive block when
the velocity is reduced to a required level, or return to its decision-making block
for a reconsideration of whether the destination is close. Alternatively, the model
also enters the Breaking block as it approaches the destination, where it keeps
braking until the vehicle fully arrives and stops. Furthermore, if the vehicle hits
an obstacle or crosses a boundary of the environment, it enters the Hitblock to
indicate a collision or boundary violation.
Now, we define the problem of motion planning as follows:
Definition 2 (Motion Planning). Given an autonomous vehicle whose kine-
matics and energy model are in the form of equations (4) and (6), respectively,
a motion plan for the vehicle is a function (θ, v) =f(x, y, t ), where θ, v, x, and
yare the state variables of the vehicle in equation (4), t∈[0, T]is a time point
within 0andT, and T∈R+is the time of reaching the destination. The goal
of motion planning is to synthesize motion plans that are time-optimal, i.e., T
being minimal, or energy-optimal, i.e., total power W being minimal. □
This version of the article has been accepted for publication, after peer review (when applicable) and is subject to Springer Nature’s AM terms of use, 
but is not the Version of Record and does not reflect post-acceptance improvements, or any corrections.  
The Version of Record is available online at: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-64626-3_21

--- Page 10 ---
Motion Planning for Autonomous Vehicles Using Uppaal Stratego 9
5 Vehicle Model In Uppaal Stratego
This section demonstrates how we use Uppaal Stratego to model the vehicle’s
actions. Figure 5 depicts a PTG model that implements the abstract vehicle
model in Figure 4. Stratego handles this motion planning problem as a PTG.
The model contains two types of components (Locations and Edges), and the
edges are further divided into controllable (solid line) and uncontrollable ones
(dotted line). The locations of the model represent the system’s processes like
Breaking and Driving, and edges are the actions controlling these processes.
Table 2 presents some important variables used in the model.
Locations Breaking and Drive are two important locations in our model.
All other locations are used to help in taking different actions between or on
these locations. The edge associated with the Initial location invokes the
Table 2: Variables used in the model. C, D, I, and B represent clock, double,
integer, and boolean variables, respectively
Variable Type Description
X,Y C These variables represent the vehicle’s position on x and y axis.
V C It represents the vehicle’s velocity.
agl C It represents vehicle’s orientation labelled as θin Figure 3.
W C It is used to calculate the energy consumed by the vehicle.
ar I It represents steering angle labelled as ϕin Figure 3.
VR I It represents acceleration labelled as αin Figure 3.
vSafe D It controls the velocity under a safe range.
Initialise() function to initialize variables such as the initial position and
angle. The edge from T7is controllable and includes a statement of selections ,
which allows the vehicle model to select an acceleration from a defined range from
0 to 10. Within the Drive location, clocks evolve according to the differential
equations defined in the model, e.g., agl’==ar defines the rotational acceleration
of the vehicle.
Now, we describe the movement of the vehicle defined at the Drive location.
First, the coordinates of the vehicle, x and y, begin to change in the direction
specified by agl(the orientation of the vehicle) while consuming energy. Second,
the loops in the Drive location control the value of aglbetween 0 and 360,
and restrict the acceleration when it reaches the maximum safe speed ( vSafe
). Third, the model should leave the Drive location and move to T3when the
xoryvalue evolves a step on the map. The duration spent in a location is
determined by the location’s invariants and the guard on the outgoing edge.
Therefore, the invariants in location Drive, such as x-xp≤UNIT, and the guard
onestep() regulate the duration in Drive to be one step. The length of the step
is a constant defined in the model.
This version of the article has been accepted for publication, after peer review (when applicable) and is subject to Springer Nature’s AM terms of use, 
but is not the Version of Record and does not reflect post-acceptance improvements, or any corrections.  
The Version of Record is available online at: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-64626-3_21

--- Page 11 ---
10 M. Naeem et al.
InvariantsGuardsUpdatesSelectionsLearning Acceleration ForceLearning Steering AngleT7
Fig. 5: Vehicle’s PTG model in Uppaal Stratego

--- Page 12 ---
Motion Planning for Autonomous Vehicles Using Uppaal Stratego 11
The model moves from location T1toFail, if an obstacle or boundary is
encountered. Otherwise, it offers two controllable actions to choose from: con-
tinuing to drive or moving to the Breaking2 location to check if the destination
has been reached. The edge from T1toBreaking2 is guarded by the ArriveDest
variable, enabling it only when the vehicle is close to the destination, thus avoid-
ing unnecessary execution towards the final braking.
On the path toward the Drive location, there are two controllable actions:
changing the steering angle or moving to the Drive location with the same
steering angle. On route to the T3location, another controllable edge includes
a statement of selections to choose a steering angle value ranging from -45 to
45. In this model, we assume that changing the steering angle takes no time.
When updating the steering angle, the maximum safe speed also needs to be
adjusted based on the new steering angle. If the current velocity exceeds the new
maximum safe velocity, the model should transition to the Braking1 location to
reduce the speed before moving to the Drive location. Otherwise, it can directly
proceed to the Drive location.
Fig. 6: Optimization
functionPenalties and rewards are used in our model to opti-
mize the training process. The model imposes penalties
such as HitPlty for reaching the hitlocation, VmPlty
for arriving at the destination with a non-zero vehicle
speed, and VzPlty for stopping without arriving at the
destination. In contrast, a reward is given for success-
fully arriving at the destination. The model learns to
minimize penalties and maximize rewards by incorpo-
rating these feedback mechanisms and developing effec-
tive motion-planning strategies.
The automaton shown in Figure 6 is used to model the cost function. Dis a
clock variable, and its growth depends on a set of variables ( Time, W, HitPlty
, VzPlty, VmPlty, and reward). These variables are used as a directive of the
cast function. The variable time is used for the time-optimal strategy, and Wis
used for the energy-optimal one. C1andC2are coefficients for balancing time and
Win developing strategies. Variable reward is updated with a negative value when
it reaches the goal and starts reducing the cost function. Uppaal Stratego
should minimize this cost function to generate an efficient strategy.
5.1 Strategy Synthesis
This section focuses on the strategy queries employed for motion-plan synthesis.
The basic structure of the query is described in section 3.2. Equation 7 is the
query for strategy synthesis. Here, Dis the value of the cost function, and minE
means the goal of synthesis is to minimize D. The query passes the set of discrete
and continuous variables (described in section 3.2) to the Q-learning algorithm
embedded in Uppaal Stratego to develop a strategy.
strategy GoFast =minE(D) [ time≤T]{location, ar,VR,VzPlty, VmPlty
,HitPlty, reward} → {agl, x,y,v,W}:<> ptg.end &&time <=T(7)
This version of the article has been accepted for publication, after peer review (when applicable) and is subject to Springer Nature’s AM terms of use, 
but is not the Version of Record and does not reflect post-acceptance improvements, or any corrections.  
The Version of Record is available online at: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-64626-3_21

--- Page 13 ---
12 M. Naeem et al.
Obstacle2Obstacle1StartFinal GoalMap1Map2Map3
X-coordinatesY-coordinatesVirtual Goals for map1 and start point for map2Virtual Goals for map2 and start point for map3
Fig. 7: Abstract view of a map and sub-maps
simulate [≤T;1]{x,y}under GoFast (8)
After constructing the strategy, it can be analyzed through the statistical model-
checking approach. We use query 8 to simulate the model under the control of
the synthesized strategy, and the query prints the values of variables xand y,
which are used to depict the moving trajectory of the vehicle. We also use this
query to assess other trajectories of variables formed by simulating the model.
6 Assertion-Based Concatenated Motion Planning
We implement the vehicle model in Uppaal Stratego . Next, we use two meth-
ods to synthesize motion plans (a.k.a., strategies in Uppaal Stratego ) for
moving to the destination safely and energy-optimally.
Method 1: MOtion Planning (MOP). MOP considers the entire environment
(a.k.a., map) as a single entity and learns a holistic motion plan from the starting
point to the destination, while taking into account time or energy consumption.
Method 2: Concatenated MOtion Planning (CoMOP). CoMOP’s goal is also to
synthesize time- or energy-optimal motion plans. The difference is that CoMOP
divides the map into small sub-maps. Each sub-map represents a distinct area
of the environment. Figure 7 depicts the subdivision of a map into sub-maps.
As shown in the figure, an overlapped region exists between two sub-maps, and
these regions serve as a virtual destination for one sub-map and the starting
region for the next.
To initiate the synthesis of a motion-planning strategy, we employ a reverse
calculation approach, starting from Map3 , where the final goal is located. The
objective is to determine the optimal starting point within the overlapped region,
which allows us to establish a precise virtual goal point. Furthermore, we analyze
the suitable vehicle’s orientation required for the forward path strategy in Map3 .
ForMap2 , a similar approach is employed. However, in this case, we also ensure
that the model concludes at the starting points previously determined in Map3 .
This sequential process allows us to establish a motion planning strategy that
considers both maps and incorporates consistent starting points and orientations.

--- Page 14 ---
Motion Planning for Autonomous Vehicles Using Uppaal Stratego 13
Simulation 
Results
...
.External 
C-library
Assertion
Python 
ScriptFinal 
GraphsExternal 
C-library
Assertion
Fig. 8: Cascaded execution of model for CoMOP simulation
In each of the sub-maps, we run forward motion planning, where we use a
sequential execution approach for the sub-maps. As illustrated in Figure 8, we
first develop a strategy for a sub-map. Subsequently, under the control of the
developed strategy, we simulate the vehicle model and obtain the trajectories of
variables (such as x, y, agl, W, V, and T, as described in Section 5). The final
values of those variables are then forwarded to the following strategy using an
external C library, ensuring a continuous flow of information for consecutive sub-
maps. We use assertions in the external C library to ensure smooth transitions
between the concatenated strategies, that is, the final values of variables in a
sub-map are within the valid regions of variables for the following sub-map.
7 Experimental Evaluation
In this section, we introduce the experiments that we have conducted to evaluate
the performance of our method. Next, we explore the following research questions
and answer them according to the experimental results.
– RQ1: Considering map size, slope, obstacle size, and obstacle number, what
is their impact on the performance of our synthesis methods?
– RQ2: Does CoMOP outperform MOP?
– RQ3: Is the time-optimal motion plan significantly different from the energy-
optimal motion plan of the same problem?
7.1 RQ1: Impact Factors on the Synthesis Methods’ Performance
Based on the industrial use case, we explore the influential factors in this series of
experiments by systematically varying three key parameters: map size, number of
obstacles, and obstacle size. The experimental design encompasses three different
map sizes, namely 10, 20, and 30 units, with each map configuration simulated
under two obstacle conditions: one obstacle and two obstacles. Additionally, we
examine the effect of obstacle size. Note that the unit of a map is not specified
because one step in a map (i.e., the guard onestep() in Fig.5) represents the
granularity of decision making.
The obtained results, as depicted in Figure 9, provide valuable insights into
the impact of these dominating factors. The figure presents the learning time
This version of the article has been accepted for publication, after peer review (when applicable) and is subject to Springer Nature’s AM terms of use, 
but is not the Version of Record and does not reflect post-acceptance improvements, or any corrections.  
The Version of Record is available online at: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-64626-3_21

--- Page 15 ---
14 M. Naeem et al.
0102030405060708090
020406080100120140160
0 5 10
Strategy synthesis Time CoMOP (s)Strategy synthesis Time MOP (s)
Obstacle Size (meters)MOP
CoMOP
(a) 10x10 & 1 Obstacle
00.511.522.533.544.5
051015202530354045
0 5 10
Strategy synthesis Time CoMOP (s)HundredsStrategy synthesis Time MOP (s)
Hundreds
Obstacle Size (meters)MOP
CoMOP
 (b) 10x10 & 2 Obstacles
00.511.522.533.5
051015202530
0 10 20
Strategy synthesis Time CoMOP (s)HundredsStrategy synthesis Time MOP (s)
Hundreds
Obstacle Size (meters)MOP
CoMOP
 (c) 20x20 & 1 Obstacle
024681012
0102030405060708090
0 10 20
Strategy synthesis Time CoMOP (s)HundredsStrategy synthesis Time MOP (s)
Hundreds
Obstacle Size (meters)MOP
CoMOP
(d) 20x20 & 2 Obstacles
012345678
010203040506070
0 10 20 30
Strategy synthesis Time CoMOP (s)HundredsStrategy synthesis  Time MOP (s)
Hundreds
Obstacle Size (meters)MOP
CoMOP
 (e) 30x30 & 1 Obstacle
0510152025
-101030507090110130
0 10 20 30
Strategy synthesis Time CoMOP (s)HundredsStrategy synthesis Time MOP (s)
Hundreds
Obstacle Size (meters)MOP
CoMOP
 (f) 30x30 & 2 Obstacles
Fig. 9: Strategy Synthesis time with different map sizes, obstacle heights, and
number of obstacles
required to synthesize a motion plan for each combination of experiments. By
analyzing the results, we can discern the influence of each factor on the simulation
outcomes. Increasing the complexity in terms of obstacle size, map size, and the
number of obstacles generally resulted in longer simulation times for both the
MOP and CoMOP models. Comparatively, CoMOP needs less time to find a
strategy, except in the experiment shown in Figure 9a, having a small map with
a small obstacle. However, it is essential to note that in certain experiments, the
MOP algorithm encounters difficulties in finding a strategy. For example, in the
experiment conducted on a 20-size map with a single obstacle of size 18, MOP
fails to generate any result (see the red cross in Fig. 9c). CoMOP, on the other
hand, demonstrates its ability to address complex motion-planning problems by
employing the sub-map division approach.
7.2 RQ2: Performance Improvement of Learning with CoMOP
Figure 10 shows a subset of the experiments of Figure 9, highlighting the impact
of obstacle height and the number of obstacles on path trajectories. Increasing
obstacle height complicates strategy synthesis, particularly for two obstacles;
learning a second sharp turn to reach the goal is more challenging. In Fig. 10b,
although the margins between the obstacles to the map edges are quite large,
MOP fails to generate any result.
We conduct simulations on a 20-size map with two obstacles to investigate the
accuracy of the CoMOP compared to the standalone MOP. CoMOP combines
multiple strategies generated by MOP into a holistic strategy for the entire map.
This version of the article has been accepted for publication, after peer review (when applicable) and is subject to Springer Nature’s AM terms of use, 
but is not the Version of Record and does not reflect post-acceptance improvements, or any corrections.  
The Version of Record is available online at: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-64626-3_21

--- Page 16 ---
Motion Planning for Autonomous Vehicles Using Uppaal Stratego 15
Y-coordinatesX-coordinatesPath with Obstacle Height H1Path with Obstacle Height H2
H1
H2
H3
H4No strategy
StartEnd
(a) 1 obstacle
Y-coordinatesX-coordinatesPath with Obstacle Height H1Path with Obstacle Height H2
H1
H2
H2
H3StartEndNo strategy (b) 2 obstacles
Fig. 10: Path trajectories generated by MOP
Y-coordinatesX-coordinatesCoMOPMOPStartEnd
Fig. 11: Comparison of successful strategies developed by MOP and CoMOP
Figure 11 depicts the path trajectories of executing motion plans. It can be
observed that CoMOP produces smoother trajectories toward the destination
with less dramatic turnings compared to the trajectories generated by MOP
alone. In summary, CoMOP improves overall motion-planning performance. It
can even solve problems that cannot be addressed by MOP alone.
7.3 RQ3: Time-Optimal and Energy-Optimal Motion Plans
We synthesize energy- and time-optimal strategies and generate path trajectories
to the destination by simulating the strategies. In Figure 12a, it can be seen
that there are distinct trajectories for time and energy. Figure 12b illustrates
that the time-optimal strategy is fast but consumes more energy than that of
the energy-optimal strategy. Figures 12c and 12d show that the energy-optimal
strategy involves choosing a lower acceleration value and driving at a low speed
to conserve energy. Driving at a low speed allows the vehicle to take sharp turns
for energy-optimal strategy comparatively, which can be seen in figure 12a.
We further run an experiment in an environment having an obstacle and
a 12% slope on the x-axis. Figure 13a depicts that CoMOP develops different
trajectories for time and energy, and Figure 13b represents the cost of energy
and time for both strategies.
By considering time and energy factors in strategy synthesis, we can generate
balanced trajectories that optimize both time utilization and energy usage, by

--- Page 17 ---
16 M. Naeem et al.
Y-coordinatesX-coordinatesEnergy Optimal PathTime Optimal PathStartEnd
(a) Path Trajectory
024601020Energy Consumption (w/s)Time (s) (b) Energy Consumption
05101505101520Velocity (m/s)Time (s)
(c) Vehicle’s Velocity
0123405101520Acceleration (value)Time (s) (d) Vehicle’s Acceleration
Fig. 12: Energy- and time-optimal path trajectories and behavior of velocity,
Acceleration, and Energy consumption
Y-coordinatesX-coordinatesEnergy Optimal PathTime Optimal PathStartEnd
(a) Path trajectories with 12% slope on the x-axis.
0510152025
Energy OtimalStrategyTime OtimalStrategyTime ConsumptionEnergy Consumption (b) Energy and time
Fig. 13: Syntheses of time- and energy-optimal strategies to reach the destination
by avoiding the obstacle.
controlling the constant factors (C1 and C2 shown in figure 6) in the optimization
function.
8 Conclusions
In this paper, we propose automatic synthesis strategies for time-efficient and
energy-efficient motion planning for autonomous vehicles, using priced timed
games in Uppaal Stratego . We present two techniques for motion planning
based on the model: MOtion Planning (MOP) and Concatenated MOtion Plan-
ning (CoMOP). For CoMOP, we develop an assertion-based method to execute

--- Page 18 ---
Motion Planning for Autonomous Vehicles Using Uppaal Stratego 17
theUppaal Stratego model in a cascaded fashion. The results show that the
CoMOP performs better than MOP for complex models.
We demonstrate the method’s applicability on an industrial use case: energy-
efficient path planning for an autonomous vehicle provided by Volvo CE, Swe-
den. The results show that our method can synthesize time-efficient and energy-
efficient path trajectories.
In future work, we plan to extend the model to manage multiple operational
vehicles in the environment and concurrent execution of each map sub-part.
References
1. Aradi, S.: Survey of deep reinforcement learning for motion planning of autonomous
vehicles. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems 23(2), 740–759
(2020)
2. Behrmann, G., Fehnker, A., Hune, T., Larsen, K., Pettersson, P., Romijn, J.,
Vaandrager, F.: Minimum-cost Reachability for Priced Timed Automata. In: Hy-
brid Systems: Computation and Control: 4th International Workshop, HSCC 2001
Rome, Italy, March 28–30, 2001 Proceedings 4. pp. 147–161. Springer (2001)
3. Bouton, M., Karlsson, J., Nakhaei, A., Fujimura, K., Kochenderfer, M.J., Tumova,
J.: Reinforcement learning with probabilistic guarantees for autonomous driving.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.07189 (2019)
4. D. Wallace, N., Kong, H., J. Hill, A., Sukkarieh, S.: Energy Aware Mission Planning
for WMRs on Uneven Terrains. IFAC-PapersOnLine 52(30), 149–154 (2019), 6th
IFAC Conference on Sensing, Control and Automation Technologies for Agriculture
AGRICONTROL 2019
5. David, A., Jensen, P.G., Larsen, K.G., Legay, A., Lime, D., Sørensen, M.G.,
Taankvist, J.H.: On time with minimal expected cost! In: International Symposium
on Automated Technology for Verification and Analysis. pp. 129–145. Springer
(2014)
6. David, A., Jensen, P.G., Larsen, K.G., Mikuˇ cionis, M., Taankvist, J.H.: Uppaal
Stratego. In: Tools and Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis of Systems:
21st International Conference, TACAS 2015, Held as Part of the European Joint
Conferences on Theory and Practice of Software, ETAPS 2015, London, UK, April
11-18, 2015, Proceedings 21. pp. 206–211. Springer (2015)
7. Gao, Z., Lin, Z., LaClair, T.J., Liu, C., Li, J.M., Birky, A.K., Ward, J.: Battery
capacity and recharging needs for electric buses in city transit service. Energy 122,
588–600 (2017)
8. Gu, R., Jensen, P.G., Seceleanu, C., Enoiu, E., Lundqvist, K.: Correctness-
guaranteed Strategy Synthesis and Compression for Multi-agent Autonomous Sys-
tems. Science of Computer Programming 224, 102894 (2022)
9. Henkel, C., Bubeck, A., Xu, W.: Energy Efficient Dynamic Window Approach
for Local Path Planning in Mobile Service Robotics. IFAC-PapersOnLine 49(15),
32–37 (2016), 9th IFAC Symposium on Intelligent Autonomous Vehicles IAV 2016
10. Jensen, P.G., Larsen, K.G., Mikuˇ cionis, M.: Playing Wordle with Uppaal Stratego.
In: A Journey from Process Algebra via Timed Automata to Model Learning:
Essays Dedicated to Frits Vaandrager on the Occasion of His 60th Birthday, pp.
283–305. Springer (2022)
This version of the article has been accepted for publication, after peer review (when applicable) and is subject to Springer Nature’s AM terms of use, 
but is not the Version of Record and does not reflect post-acceptance improvements, or any corrections.  
The Version of Record is available online at: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-64626-3_21

--- Page 19 ---
18 M. Naeem et al.
11. Jothimurugan, K., Hsu, S., Bastani, O., Alur, R.: Robust Subtask Learning
for Compositional Generalization. In: 40th International Conference on Machine
Learning (ICML2023) (2023)
12. Lascurain, M.B., Franzese, O., Capps, G., Siekmann, A., Thomas, N., LaClair,
T., Barker, A., Knee, H.: Medium truck duty cycle data from real-world driving
environments: project final report. ORNL/TM-2012/240. Oak Ridge, TN: Oak
Ridge National Laboratory (2012)
13. Mei, Y., Lu, Y.H., Hu, Y., Lee, C.: Energy-efficient motion planning for mobile
robots. In: IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation, ICRA
’04. vol. 5, pp. 4344–4349 Vol.5. IEEE (2004)
14. Quann, M., Ojeda, L., Smith, W., Rizzo, D., Castanier, M., Barton, K.: Chance
constrained reachability in environments with spatially varying energy costs.
Robotics and Autonomous Systems 119, 1–12 (2019)
15. Quann, M., Ojeda, L., Smith, W., Rizzo, D., Castanier, M., Barton, K.: Power Pre-
diction for Heterogeneous Ground Robots Through Spatial Mapping and Sharing
of Terrain Data. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 5(2), 1579–1586 (2020)
16. Rabin, S.: A* aesthetic optimizations, in: Game programming gems. Charles River
Media (2000)
17. Sutton, R.S., Barto, A.G.: Reinforcement learning: An introduction. MIT press
(2018)
18. Watkins, C.J.C.H.: Learning from delayed rewards. King’s College, Cambridge
United Kingdom (1989)
This version of the article has been accepted for publication, after peer review (when applicable) and is subject to Springer Nature’s AM terms of use, 
but is not the Version of Record and does not reflect post-acceptance improvements, or any corrections.  
The Version of Record is available online at: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-64626-3_21
