--- Page 1 ---
Hindawi Publishing Corporation
EURASIP Journal on Wireless Communications and Networking
Volume 2010, Article ID 712525, 13pages
doi:10.1155/2010/712525
Research Article
A Cooperative Congestion Control Approach within V ANET s:
Formal V eriﬁcation and Performance Evaluation
Mohamed Salah Bouassida and M. Shawky
Laboratoire HEUDIASYC, Centre de Recherche de Royallieu, Universit ´ed eT e c h n o l o g i ed eC o m p i `egne,
B.P. 20529, 60205 Compi `egne, France
Correspondence should be addressed to Mohamed Salah Bouassida, mbouassi@utc.fr
Received 1 June 2009; Revised 27 October 2009; Accepted 15 December 2009
Academic Editor: Christian Ibars
Copyright © 2010 M. S. Bouassida and M. Shawky. This is an open access article distributed under the Creative Commons
Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distributio n, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is
properly cited.
The main objective of congestion control is to best exploit the available network resources while preventing sustained overloads
of network nodes and links. Appropriate congestion control mechanisms are essential to provide e ﬀcient operation of a network.
Ensuring congestion control within vehicular ad hoc networks faces special challenges, due to the speciﬁcities of such environment(High mobility of nodes, high rate of topology changes, high variability in nodes density and neighborhood conﬁguration,broadcast/geocast communication nature, etc.). In this context, we present in this paper a cooperative and fully distributed
congestion control approach, based on dynamic scheduling and transmission of priority-based messages, to ensure reliable and safe
communication architecture within V ANET. Messages priorities a re dynamically evaluated according to their types, the network
context, and the neighboring nodes conﬁguration. Considering the context of high reliability and real-time response required
for intervehicular communications (including emergency breaking notiﬁcation for example), we propose a complete validation
method of our congestion control algorithms, taking into acc ount reliability, temporal, and operational aspects.
1. Introduction
Vehicular ad hoc networks (V ANET) are a type of MANETs
used for communication among vehicles and between vehi-cles and roadside equipment (cf. Figure 1 [1]). In addition
to the challenging characteristics of MANETs (such aslack of established infrastructure, wireless links, multi-hopbroadcast communications), V ANET brings new challengesto realize safe communication architecture within suchenvironment. Indeed, within V ANET networks, nodes arecharacterized by high dynamic and mobility, in addition tothe high rate of topology changes and density variability.
Zang et al. [ 2] evaluate the neighboring nodes conﬁguration
of vehicular networks within a four highway lanes context(two lanes for each direction). They carried out simulationsand analysis showing that the average number of potentialcommunication neighbors is optimally four. In addition, in50% of all occurrences, the maximum potential commu-nication duration is 1 second; in 90% of the occurrences,the upper boundary for the communication time is 5 s.Another important constraint in the multi-hop inter-
vehicular communications is the limited bandwidth withina such environment. Indeed, the wireless channel can beoccupied by competitive nodes for many reasons (collisions,interferences, insu ﬃcient signal strength, duration of the
transmission sequence, etc.) [ 3].
T o deal with this environment constraints, and in order
to ensure safe and optimized communication architecture(to guarantee required services on a “best e ﬀort” network),
setting up quality of service policies becomes mandatory,which inspires a congestion control approach within V ANET(cf. Figure 2 ). We propose in this context a cooperative
and fully distributed congestion control approach, dedicatedto operate within vehicular networks, integrated withinthe 802.11p underway standard, and based on dynamicallyscheduling packets according to their priorities. Moreover,the available bandwidth is shared among neighbors sothat vehicles sending higher priorities packets are favored.Considering the high real-time and reliability level needed bythe inter-vehicular safety communications, we undertook a

--- Page 2 ---
2 EURASIP Journal on Wireless Communications and Networking
Figure 1: Vehicular Ad hoc Network.
complete model based validation approach of our congestion
control algorithms, taking into account reliability, temporal
and operational aspects.
T o present our contributions, this paper is structured as
follows. In Section 2 , we present related work concerning
congestion control approaches within MANETs. Section 3
presents our cooperative congestion control approach. The
real applicability of our approach is validated through formal
veriﬁcation, simulations and performance evaluations, that
we present in Section 4 . Finally, Section 5 concludes this
paper, presenting the implementation of our congestion con-
trol scheme in the context of the European Integrated Project
SAFESPOT ( http://www.safespot-eu.org/ ), and details our
future work concerning the real tests methodology we
envisage to validate this implementation.
2. Congestion Control Approaches
within MANET s
Congestion control is a challenging subject in mobile ad
hoc networks, mainly because of the shared nature of the
wireless multihop channel and the frequent changes of the
network topology. Indeed, routes changes due to dynamic
and mobility of nodes result in unsteady packet delivery
delays and packet losses, which should not be considered as
congestion control faults. In addition, the use of a shared
multihop channel allows only one data transmission at a time
within the interference range of a node. Thus, congestion in
ad hoc networks a ﬀects a whole area and not only overloaded
nodes [ 4]. During the last years, several congestion control
approaches have been presented, dedicated to operate within
ad hoc networks. In this section, we cannot claim to
present an exhaustive study of these approaches. However,
we distinguish two congestion control techniques for wireless
networks: end-to-end and hop-by-hop families. End-to-end
protocols aim to ensure ﬂows ﬂuidity between senders and
receivers, without worrying about the internal relay nodes,
whereas hop-by-hop congestion control methods take into
consideration the capacities of the internal links. We present
hereafter some protocols belonging to these two approaches.
2.1. End-to-End Congestion Control Approaches within
MANETs. The TCP-F (TCP-Feedback) approach, proposedReliability
and integrityBandwidth and
computation
limitations
Tem p or a l
constraints:
response
delays,
transit
delays,
messages
treatment
delays...Diﬀerent
Messages
Priorities:
control,
services,
emergency...Quality
of
serviceVehicular
ad hoc
networks
Mobility and
dynamics of
modesCapacities of
treatments,
messages
r a t e s ...Congestion
control
Figure 2: Congestion Control Context within V ANET.
by Chandran et al. [ 5], consists of disabling the TCP
congestion mechanisms in case of network-induced, non-
congestion related, losses and time-out events. Each sender is
notiﬁed when routing failure or route change occur, to freeze
its TCP state values (timers and window sizes).
In the proposal of Rath et al. [ 6], an end-to-end con-
gestion control technique is presented, carried out by TCP
and physical layers. The adaptive windows based congestion
control mechanism used by TCP for wired network may
not be appropriate for wireless network. This is due to the
time varying nature of a wireless channel and interference
from other nodes causing packets loss, which is di ﬀerent
from packets loss due to congestion. But TCP’s congestion
control mechanism does not distinguish between packets
loss due to congestion and that due to bad channel or
interferences; it rather applies the same congestion control
mechanism for both. For this reason, within the proposed
cross layer approach, the MAC layer changes transmission
power as per the channel condition and interference received
from the neighboring nodes, whereas the TCP layer controls
congestion using Reno-2 windowing ﬂow control.
The protocol presented in [ 7] updates the ﬂow control
model for a TCP-like method and extends it to the context
of wireless network. It proposes two new congestion control
schemes. The ﬁrst one employs a static algorithm while
the second applies a dynamic one. Both algorithms modify
the number of connections that a single user has with
the network and thus provide an appropriate number of
connections, opened at the application layer by a sender.
2.2. Hop-by-Hop Congestion Control Approaches within
MANETs. The authors in [ 8] show that congestion control
techniques intended to operate within wired networks are
not suitable for wireless environment, and that a cross layer
hop-by-hop redesign is needed to consider the nature of

--- Page 3 ---
EURASIP Journal on Wireless Communications and Networking 3
wireless communications. Indeed, with TCP , a ﬂow can only
obtain congestion feedback from every directed link alongits path. However, nearby links not directly on the path caninterfere with this ﬂow because the fundamental di ﬀerence
between wireless and wired environment is that wirelesscommunications are of a broadcast nature.
In the same point of view, Yi et al. argue in [ 9] that hop-
by-hop schemes are feasible over a wireless network. Suchtechniques provide feedback about the congestion state ata node to the hop preceding it. This preceding node thenadapts its transmission rate according to this feedback. Feed-back is typically provided according to the queue length atthe congested node. If the queue length exceeds a threshold,congestion is indicated and the preceding node is notiﬁed inorder to decrease its transmission rate. Consequently, hop-by-hop schemes require to have per-ﬂow state managementfor intermediate nodes, which induces scalability problems.However, in a wireless network, the number of ﬂows pernode is of much smaller order than in the Internet. Further,wireless networks usually have per-ﬂow queuing because ofpacket scheduling, and the fact that di ﬀerent users are at
diﬀerent locations, thus requiring di ﬀerent physical layer
strategies (such as the channel coding and modulation ofthe power level). The congestion control proposed in thispaper is thus based on a hop-by-hop approach, which isshown to converge in the absence of delay and allocatesbandwidth to various users in a proportionally-fair manner.The proposed hop-by-hop algorithm is established accordingto the queue length and the feedback delays. However, theutility and validity of the sent data are not considered within
this technique, hence it is not adapted to the speciﬁc context
of vehicular ad hoc highest transmission priority.
Another congestion avoidance protocol, named C3TCP
[10], is also founded on link capacity measurements and
adjustment of the outgoing data rate according to thesemeasurements, at each sender node side. This solutionrequires the introduction of an additional module within theIEEE 802.11 protocol stack in order to carry out the capacitymeasurements. The same principle was used by Rangwalaet al. in [ 11] to establish a congestion control scheme for
static wireless mesh networks: a distributed rate controllerestimates the available capacity within each neighborhoodand divides it to contending ﬂows.
Zhang et al. [ 12] investigate congestion control problems
in multihop wireless networks, with time varying linkcapacities. By modeling time variations of capacities as per-turbations of a constant link, the authors propose a primal-dual congestion control algorithm and prove its trajectorystability without feedback delays consideration. However, inthe presence of delay, they deﬁne theoretical conditions forthe technique to be locally stable. Both proposals presentedin [9]a n d[ 12] are derived from the studies carried out
by Kelly et al. [ 13]. In the context of vehicular ad hoc
networks, the same authors (Zang et al.) present in [ 14]
a congestion control approach for safety applications. The
basic idea of this scheme is to identify congestions usingevent-driven detection and measurement, and to manipulateMAC transmission queues for IEEE 802.11p, in order toensure the safety messages sent on the control channel.The event-driven congestion detection is triggered reactively
whenever a high priority safety message is recognized toguarantee the QoS of the safety applications, while the mea-surement based congestion detection consists of measuringthe channel usage and comparing it with a deﬁned threshold.However, the e ﬀective transmission of the safety messages is
not guaranteed because the neighborhood context and the
eﬀective bandwidth sharing are not considered.
The congestion control approach proposed in [ 15],
dedicated to operate within vehicular ad hoc networks,consists of adapting transmissions to the available band-width in a hop-by-hop manner. Thus, nodes transmittinginformation with a high utility for V ANET will be allowedto consume a larger share of the available bandwidth. Apriority is evaluated for each packet, depending on its utilityand size. Then, an instantaneous data rate is determined,according to the computed priority. The utility of messagesis evaluated at the application layer and do not consider theneighborhood context in terms of density and dynamics ofnodes. In addition, this approach generates a communicationoverhead, due to the context exchange between neighbornodes in order to share the available bandwidth betweenthem, without considering the capacity and the congestionstate of the forwarder nodes.
T orrent-Moreno et al. present in [ 16] a fair bandwidth
sharing approach for V ANETs. This approach consists of lim-iting the wireless load resulting from the periodic messages,by requiring a strict fairness among the vehicles. The authorsassume a constant packet generation rate, and propose acentralized power control algorithm that provides the opti-
mum transmission range of every node. This proposal was
formally validated. However, simulations have been carriedout under idealistic conditions, assuming that interferencesbetween nodes transmissions follow a deterministic model.Moreover, the proposed algorithm requires synchronizationbetween vehicles, which generates communication overhead.
2.3. Summary. In order to deﬁne a congestion control
approach within vehicular ad hoc networks, several con-straints should be considered, related to the characteristicsof the environment and also to high quality of service(QoS) required for the safety-oriented data. On one hand,as argued in [ 9], end-to-end congestion control approaches
are not suitable for wireless ad hoc networks. Indeed, withinthese approaches, relay nodes context are not considered,and thus, interferences, collisions and transmission problems
are neglected. However, the required quality of service of a
transmission can be deﬁned by the sender.
On the other hand, hop-by-hop approaches su ﬀer from
lack of scalability, when the number of transmitted ﬂowsincreases within the network. However, it is known thatthe size of the transmitted data within V ANET is small,due to the dynamic nature of this environment, and tothe nodes limitations in terms of storage and computationcapacities. It is thus admitted that hop-by-hop congestioncontrol approaches are more suitable for V ANET, whileconsidering the required quality of service of the transmitteddata, as for the end-to-end approaches. Hop-by-hop con-gestion control approaches, described above, present some

--- Page 4 ---
4 EURASIP Journal on Wireless Communications and Networking
disadvantages (communication and computation overheads,
reactive congestion control techniques, idealistic veriﬁcationframeworks, etc.). In addition, several parameters are notcompletely considered within these protocols, such as thevelocity of the sender node, the appropriate choice of the nextforwarders, the validity and the utility of the sent messages
according to the neighborhood context and the required
QoS.
We propose in the next section a congestion control
approach for vehicular ad hoc networks, considering thesedrawbacks, whose design should ensure the following objec-tives.
(i) Cooperative and adaptive congestion control
approach: approach dynamically adaptable to the
neighborhood and the context of V ANET, while
taking into consideration the required QoS metrics(in terms of reliability and delays) especially foremergency and safety messages.
(ii) Hop-by-hop approach: to deal with the capacity of
relay/forwarders nodes and in order to e ﬃciently
share the e ﬀective bandwidth between neighbors
nodes, while considering the required quality ofservice as for the end-to-end congestion controlapproaches.
(iii) Cross-layered approach in order to ensure a dynamic
and reliable messages scheduling and transmissionsprocesses, while remaining adapted to the IEEE802.11p underlying standard.
(iv) Applicative layer congestion control approach, in
order to deﬁne packets priorities according to theirapplication, their utilities and validities in the net-work and the neighborhood context.
3. Cooperative Congestion Control Approach
within V ANET
3.1. Overview. The basic idea of our applicative-layer con-
gestion control approach is to deﬁne policies, in order
to dynamically and cooperatively schedule messages trans-mission in the network. Messages scheduling is carriedout according to priorities, evaluated as a function of theutility of the concerned messages, the sender applicationand the neighborhood context. The messages transmissionin the vehicular network is carried out in an e ﬃcient
and cooperative manner, by favoring vehicles holding thehighest-priority messages to send. Therefore, our approachis divided into three steps that we present hereafter: dynamicpriority assignment, message scheduling and cooperativemessage transmission.
3.2. Priority Assignment. Messages will be assigned a priority
by application initiating. The relative time of transmissionof each priority level will however vary as network densityincreases: medium and low priority packets being delayedto allow high priority packets to be sent without delays.The priority of a packet is composed of 2 ﬁelds: the
ﬁrst is static, deduced from the application type and thesecond is dynamic, obtained from the speciﬁc context ofthe V ANET (neighborhood density) and determined bythe congestion control module. The size of the message,the dynamic and static ﬁelds are combined to obtain the
overall priority indicator (Pri
message=Dynamic factor×
Static Message Priority/Message size).
3.2.1. Static Factor from Application Class. The static priority
factor is deﬁned according to the sender application, and thecontent of the message. Five priority levels are adopted by theC2C Communication Consortium, deﬁned hereafter.
(i) PRI
Emergency is the priority a ﬀected to single hop
emergency messages to notify an important eventwithout delay. The safety of vehicles depends on thiskind of messages. Regarding Multihop and Geocastcommunication it is assumed that only the ﬁrst hopcan have the priority PRI
Emergency .
(ii) PRI VA N E T is the priority a ﬀected to the network layer
beacons.
(iii) PRI HIGH is the priority a ﬀected to high priority safety
applications.
(iv) PRI MID is the priority a ﬀected to normal safety
applications.
(v) PRI LOW is the priority a ﬀected to low priority appli-
cations.
3.2.2. Dynamic Factor from Network Context. We present in
the following how our congestion control approach evaluatesthe dynamic priority factor of sent messages (a part of thiswork has been carried out jointly with the V ANET research
group in the HEUDIASYC laboratory).
Node Speed Consideration. The Dynamic factor takes into
account the node speed, according to the covered zone ateachdt,a si l l u s t r a t e di n Figure 3 . The priority of a message
increases when the speed of the sender increases. Thus, ateachdt, the dynamic factor is re-evaluated as follows:
Speed
factor=πR2+2RV·dt
π·R2,( 1 )
whereRis communication range and, V: mean speed.
Message Utility Consideration. The dynamic factor considers
also the utility of the sent message, according to the numberof its retransmissions by the neighborhood, in case ofperiodic or geocast messages. Thus, when a node Ahas to
send a periodic or geocast message M, and receives the same
messageM, sent by another node B(cf.Figure 4 ), it should
calibrate the dynamic factor of the message M,i no r d e rt o
take into account the zone covered by the node B,c o m p a r e d
to its communication range zone (
=π·R2with Ris the

--- Page 5 ---
EURASIP Journal on Wireless Communications and Networking 5
At t At t +dtAARV.dt
Figure 3: Node Speed Consideration.
ABCD
Oα
Figure 4: Message Utility Consideration.
communication range). The smaller is the covered zone, the
higher is the priority to send the message. The dynamic factor
is thus equal to the ratio between the total zone covered by
the receiver and the already covered zone (CZ):
Utilityfactor=T otal Zone
Covered Zone=ΠR2
CZ. (2)
We demonstrated that the covered zone CZ by the node
B (doubly hatched in Figure 4 ) at the side of the node A is
evaluated as follows (we note dthe distance between A and
B ,a n dRt h er a n g eo fAa n dB ) :
CZ=4×⎛
⎝arccos/parenleftbiggd
2R/parenrightbigg
×R2
2−d
2×/radicalBigg
R2−/parenleftbiggd
2/parenrightbigg2⎞
⎠.(3)
Message Validity Consideration. The dynamic factor consid-
ers the message validity (maximum duration of the message).
As for the EDF scheduling approach (Earliest Deadline
First), the message whose deadline is earliest, holds the
highest priority. The ﬁnal dynamic factor is thus computed,
according to the speed, utility and validity factors, as follows:
ifremaining time todeadline /=0
Dynamic factor=Speed factor×Utility factor
remaining time todeadline(4)
else
Dynamic factor=Speed factor×Utility factor (5)
end if .3.3. Messages Scheduling. Each node schedules its messages
according to their priorities, in the appropriate channel. The
Car to car Communication Consortium (C2C CC) considers
two V ANET wireless channels (control and service channels),
each used for di ﬀerent tra ﬃc[17].
Control Channel (CCH). T h ec o n t r o lc h a n n e li sp r i m a r i l y
used to transmit beacons and high/ﬁrst hop priority tra ﬃc.
All messages that are necessary to maintain the V ANET are
transmitted on this channel, especially the network layer
beacons. Furthermore, high priority messages (emergency
notiﬁcations) are sent on this channel. Normally, such
messages occur on an event basis. With multihop commu-
nications, only the ﬁrst hop will require high priority.
Service Channel (SCH1). This channel is available for safety
applications with lower priority. Here periodic messages
could be sent. This channel should also be used by forwarders
of multihop and geocast messages. A second service channel
(SCH2) is intended to short distance peer to peer V ANET
communications, with reduced power level. However, this
service channel is currently unused.
Hence, we split the scheduling process into two phases:
static and dynamic, presented hereafter.
3.3.1. Static Scheduling. The static scheduling process con-
sists of dispatching messages according to their priorities,
into the suitable communication channel queues. Thus,
PRI Emergency ,P R I VA N E T and PRI HIGH priority messages are
aﬀected to the control communication channel queue,
whereas PRI MID and PRI LOW priority messages are a ﬀected
to the service queue.
3.3.2. Dynamic Scheduling. Periodically, each node triggers
a rescheduling process, which scans the messages queues,
and computes the overall priority indicator for each message
(considering the dynamic factor of each priority, presented
above). The rescheduling process then reorders the messages
according to their new computed priorities.
Considering that the number of messages sent within the
control channel is smaller than the number of messages sent
within the service one, we adopt the following policy: when
the service channel is overloaded and the control channel is
free, messages within the service queue are switched to the
control one, and considered as high priority messages. We
estimate that the service channel is overloaded if the number
of messages in the queue exceeds a deﬁned threshold, called
“Service Channel Congestion Threshold” .
3.4. Cooperative-Based Messages Transmission. Messages
transmission process sends the highest priority message
within the corresponding channel, whenever it is free.
However, sending high priority packets via the control
channel is preemptive, compared to packets sent via service
channel. Indeed, in order to send high priority packets
with the minimum delay, lower priority packets emission
is freezed, even if their corresponding channel is free. We
divide our cooperative transmission technique into two
main mechanisms that we present hereafter: the available

--- Page 6 ---
6 EURASIP Journal on Wireless Communications and Networking
bandwidth sharing and the next forwarder selection for the
multihop communication case. These procedures requirethe modiﬁcation of the periodic beacon structure, that wepresent later.
3.4.1. Bandwidth Sharing. Concerning the dynamic use of
the bandwidth within V ANET, the IEEE 802.11p underwaystandard supports three mandatory user data rates 3 Mbit/s,6 Mbit/s and 12 Mbit/s within a 10 Mhz channel, and someoptional data rates up to 27 Mbit/s. The most robust datarate is the 3 Mbit/s one. This rate must be shared amongall applications and vehicles inside the interference range.
In order not to saturate the provided bandwidth and to
allow a reliable transmission of the emergency messages, thebandwidth o ﬀered to V ANET application per 10 Mhz is equal
to the half of the total bandwidth.
The simplest way to share the available bandwidth to
the neighbors is to divide it equitably between them, asfollows. Let ndenotes the number of neighbors of a node.
The e ﬀective bandwidth that a vehicle can use within the
vehicular network is thus computed as
Eﬀective
Bandwidth=Selected Bandwidth
2(n+1). (6)
However, such a solution treating all the neighbors
equitably does not favour higher-priority messages holdersto use the available bandwidth, nor avoids eventual collisionsand interferences. The suitable solution to eliminate thesed r a w b a c k si st oo ﬀer the available bandwidth to the transmit-
ter node whose message holds the highest priority comparedto the messages of its neighbors.
In order to notify its neighbors about the priority of the
ﬁrst message it has to send, each vehicle includes this infor-mation in its beacon structure, as presented in Section 3.4.3 .
Therefore, as for the token ring communication protocol,a node can use the available bandwidth only if it holdsthe highest-priority message (it does not receive any beaconnotifying the occurrence of a higher-priority message holder
within its neighborhood). In the same way, when a node
receives beacons notifying the presence of higher-prioritymessages than messages that it will send (the ﬁrst messagesin its queues), it freezes its transmission.
When two vehicles have to send two messages with
the same priority, as for the FIFO scheduling model, theavailable bandwidth will be devoted to the ﬁrst vehicle whonotiﬁes the priority of its message. The time of a ﬁrstnotiﬁcation corresponding to a message priority should thusbe included in the beacon structure. Note that generally,messages corresponding to a vehicular application have thesame priority; consequently, the priority notiﬁcation sentwithin beacons is not frequently modiﬁed.
3.4.2. Next Forwarder Selection. In the case of multi-hop
inter-vehicular communications, the choice of the nextforwarder is essential in order to enhance the performancesof the communication architecture. Therefore, the nextforwarder should be chosen as the less congested node withinthe neighborhood. In this context, we propose to deﬁne thecongestion level principle as follows.IdentityGeographical
localizationMessage
priorityFirst
notiﬁcation timeCongestion
control level
Figure 5: Structure of a Beacon.
Deﬁnition 1. The congestion level of a node (expressed in
seconds) is evaluated as the ratio between the total size ofmessages to send by the available theoretical bandwidth (cf.Equation ( 6)). This parameter evaluates the required time (in
seconds) in order to send all the waiting messages stored inthe queues, using the e ﬀective bandwidth (according to the
number of neighbors).
Therefore, a vehicle chooses the neighbor with the
smallest congestion control, as a next forwarder. In order tonotify its neighbors about its congestion level, each vehicleincludes it within its beacon structure, as presented inSection 3.4.3 . The congestion control level can also be used
by each node to control its internal congestion: for example,if this level exceeds a deﬁned threshold, the lowest-priority
messages will be deleted.
3.4.3. Periodic Beacon Structure. Beacons messages are sent
periodically by each node of the network, to enable neighborsdiscovery and the network maintenance. Within vehiculararchitectures, the beacon contains mainly the identity ofthe node and its geographical localization. In order to takeinto account the bandwidth sharing and the next forwarderselection procedures, the beacon structure should include, ina piggybacking manner, the priority of the ﬁrst message ithas to send, the time of the ﬁrst notiﬁcation of this priorityand the last evaluated congestion level, as shown in Figure 5 .
Note that the increase of the beacon structure could generatea communication overhead. This overhead should remainnegligible compared to the messages sending load.
4. Analysis and V alidation
4.1. Objectives. In order to validate the real applicability of
our congestion control approach and its operability withinvehicular networks, while considering the criticality andhostility of such an environment, we followed a completeQoS validation approach, according to two main steps.
(i)Formal modeling and veriﬁcation . This validation step
deals with the reliability and operational aspects ofour congestion control approach, to verify reachabil-ity, safety, liveness and no deadlock properties.
(ii)Simulations and performance analysis . This second
step veriﬁes temporal and operational constraints bymeasuring the delays of messages before their sendingon the appropriate queue, and the service packets-loss rate.
4.2. Formal Veriﬁcation. Formal veriﬁcation of a hardware
or software system consists of proving or disproving thecorrectness of intended algorithms/approaches underlyinga system with respect to a certain formal speciﬁcation orproperty, using formal methods of mathematics.

--- Page 7 ---
EURASIP Journal on Wireless Communications and Networking 7
In our context, the quality of service of a system is
composed of a constraints set (delays, response time, datarate, etc.). The system operation ensures the required QoSif it satisﬁes the needed constraints. Automata allow tomodel dynamic control aspects of a system operation.These models, in addition to temporal mechanisms (called
temporized automata), are suitable to specify temporal QoS
constraints [ 18,19].
In this context, and in order to verify and validate
formally our congestion control technique, we propose tospecify it using temporized automata, through the UPPAAL(http://www.uppaal.com/ ) integrated tool environment for
modeling, validation and veriﬁcation of real-time systems.UPPAAL is developed in collaboration between the Depart-ment of Information T echnology at Uppsala University,Sweden and the Department of Computer Science at AalborgUniversity in Denmark. T o present our validation process, weﬁrst start by presenting an overview of temporized automataand the UPPAAL tool. Then, we present our objectives,simulations and results.
4.2.1. Temporized Automata. In a temporized automaton,
transitions between states are conditioned by temporalconstraints on clock variables. An elementary temporalconstraint is a boolean property in which a clock variableis compared to a constant integer. Extended temporizedautomata enhance temporized automata by providing thepossibility of manipulation of non-temporal variables. In thefollowing description, we do not distinguish between “tem-porized automata” and “extended temporized automata” .
A temporized automaton is a sextuplet (
/summationtext,S,S0,C,V,E),
where
(i)/summationtextis a ﬁnite set of actions,
(ii)Sis a ﬁnite set of states,
(iii)S0∈Sis the initial state,
(iv)Cis a ﬁnite set of clocks,
(v)Vis a ﬁnite set of variables,
(vi)Eis the set of transitions. A transition is a tuple
(s,μ,γ,λ,λ/prime,s/prime) indicating that, starting by the state s,
the automaton executes the action μ, if the constraint
γis satisﬁed; clocks of λare reset, variables of λ/primeare
updated and the new state is s/prime.
4.2.2. The UPPAAL Modeling, Validation and Veriﬁcation Tool
of Real-Time Systems. UPPAAL is a toolbox for validation
(via graphical simulation) and veriﬁcation (via automaticmodel-checking) of real-time systems. It consists of two mainparts: a graphical user interface and a model-checker engine.The idea is to model a system using temporized automata,simulate it and then verify properties on it. A real-timesystem in UPPAAL is composed of concurrent processes,each of them modeled as an automaton. The automaton hasa set of locations. Transitions are used to change location.T o control when to ﬁre a transition, it is possible to havea guard and a synchronization. A guard is a condition onthe variables and the clocks precizing when the transitionAdd High[id]!
Add Low[id]!StartToCtrl
ToService
Figure 6: Message Manager.
is enabled. The synchronization mechanism in UPPAAL
is a hand-shaking synchronization: two processes take atransition at the same time in the synchronization channela, one will have a !a, and the other a?. The veriﬁcation tool
provided by UPPAAL, checks for the following properties.
(i) Reachability properties. These properties ask whether
for a given state formula ϕ, there exists a path starting
at the initial state, such that ϕis eventually satisﬁed
along that path. Reachability properties do not bythemselves guarantee the correctness of the system,but they validate the basic behavior of the model.
(ii) Safety properties. These properties ask whether a
bad result will never happen, or an awaited result isinvariantly true.
(iii) Liveness properties. These properties are of the form
“an awaited result will eventually happen” . Withthis type of properties, response conditions can beveriﬁed as follows “whenever ϕis satisﬁed, eventually
ψwill be satisﬁed” .
(iv) No Deadlock property. This property veriﬁes if there
is no any state where there are no outgoing actiontransitions, neither from the state itself or any of itsdelay successors.
4.2.3. UPPAAL Simulations and Results. T o simulate via
UPPAAL our priority-based scheduling mechanism withinV ANET, we divide our system into four independent sub-systems, represented each by an automaton that we describehereafter.
(i) The message manager automaton (cf. Figure 6 ): this
subsystem is responsible for generating messages andsending them to the congestion control module,which will process them according to their priorities.T o simplify our simulation platform, and withoutloss of generality, we consider hereafter two levelsof priorities (high priority packets sent through thecontrol channel and low priority packets transmittedin the service channel).

--- Page 8 ---
8 EURASIP Journal on Wireless Communications and Networking
Enqueue Ctrl(m) Enqueue Serv(m)m:i d tm : i d tm : i d t
Delete(m)
lenServ>20 len Serv>20m:i d t
Add High[m]?m:i d t
Add Low[m]?
Prob=(Prob+1) %4 Prob =(Prob+1) %4
Prob %4==0
m:i d t
IenServ>10 & len Ctrl==0
Dequeue2 Serv()Prob %>0Idle
LossDenied Serv Accepted Ctrl Accepted ServNew Ctrl Msg New Srev Msg
Figure 7: Congestion Control Message Enqueueing.
Idle
Dequeue Ctrl Dequeue Serv
ToTransmit ctrl T o Transmit ServlenCtrl>0l e n Serv>0&l e n Ctrl==0
m:i d t
Send Ctrl[m]!
Dequeue1 Ctrl()m:i d t
Send Serv[m]!
Dequeue1 Serv()
Figure 8: Congestion Control Message Dequeueing.
(ii) The congestion control message enqueueing automa-
ton (cf. Figure 7 ): this sub-system is responsible for
the reception of messages from the message managerand for their addition to the appropriate queues.AA d d
High synchronization message is required to
transit from the Idle state to the New Ctrl Msg one.
The automaton switch to the Accepted Ctrl state after
adding the high priority message to the appropriatequeue. The addition of a low priority messagefollows the same process, with the di ﬀerence that
the congestion control module can deny sending amessage if the service channel is overloaded (numberof low priority messages >20). Note that when the
service channel is overloaded and there is no highpriority packets to send, a low priority message canbe sent via the control channel. This message is thusdequeued from the service queue list and enqueuedin the control channel one.erreur=(erreur + 1) %20
erreur %20==0
Send Ctrl[id]?
Send serv[id]?
erreur %20==0
erreur=(erreur + 1) %20)Occ Ctrl
Error Free
Occ Serv
Figure 9: Transmission Engine.
(iii) The congestion control message dequeueing automa-
ton (cf. Figure 8 ): this subsystem is responsible
for withdrawing messages from the control and
service queues and transmit them to the transmission
engine. The synchronization messages between thecongestion control message dequeueing automatonand the transmission engine one are Send
Ctrl and
Send Serv.
(iv) The transmission engine automaton (cf. Figure 9 ):
this sub-system is responsible for the messageseﬀective transmission on the appropriate channels.
A sending error rate of 5% (The sending error rateis deﬁned in the context of the SAFESPOT EuropeanIntegrated project.) is chosen. When an error occursduring message sending, the automaton switches tothe Error state.
The ﬁrst step of validation is the simulation. We thus
randomly simulate all the possible transitions of the four

--- Page 9 ---
EURASIP Journal on Wireless Communications and Networking 9
Msg Manager(0) Congestion Ctrl Enqueue Congestion Ctrl Dequeue Tx Engine
Start
ToServiceIdle Idle Free
New Service Msg
Accepted Serv
IdleDequeue Serv
ToTransmit Serv
IdleOcc Serv
Free
StartSend Serv[m]Add Low[id]
Figure 10: Service Packet Sending Diagram.
automata. Figure 10 illustrates an example of the execution
of a low priority packet sending (activity diagram generatedby UPPAAL).
The veriﬁcation step validates the following results:
(i) No deadlock in the operation of our messages
priorities-based scheduling approach. All states of themodeled automata have successors.
(ii) All states of the modeled automata are eventually
reachable.
(iii) All the high priority messages are e ﬀectively sent
on the control channel. However, some low prioritypackets can be deleted, due to service channelcongestion (bounded service messages queue).
(iv) The transmission of high priority messages is pre-
emptive comparing to the emission of low prioritymessages. Service messages are sent only when thereis no any control message in the queue of the controlchannel.
(v) In addition, the emission of a high priority message
is carried out without delay. All the high prioritymessages are considered as emergency, requiring thusto freeze the emission of lower priority messages.We tried then to carry out the second validation step
provided by UPPAAL: the model checking veriﬁcation,after specifying our veriﬁcation objectives (queries) via adescription language. However, this veriﬁcation step did notsucceed due to memory limitations. Indeed, the numberof states and variables in UPPAAL can make the model-checking veriﬁcation process very constraining and complex[20]. Although the success of the model checking veriﬁcation
step may validate explicitly the correctness of the veriﬁcationobjectives (by exploring all the possible paths in the graph),we can a ﬃrm nevertheless that our priority-based scheduling
approach is correct, considering the results of the ﬁrstveriﬁcation step (consisting of validating with success theuse-cases corresponding to the congestion control schemeoperation: sending high-priority and low-priority messageson the control and service channels resp.).
4.3. Performance Evaluation and Analysis. We developed a
simulator, in C language, in order to validate the perfor-mances of our congestion control approach, according to themetric of service packets-loss rate, and the delays of the mes-sages before their e ﬀective transmission on the appropriate
queues. Note that service messages are considered lost whenthe number of waiting service messages exceeds a deﬁned

--- Page 10 ---
10 EURASIP Journal on Wireless Communications and Networking
0102030405060
10 20 50 100 1500.511.522.533.54Waiting delay (ctrl
packets) (ms)
Waiting delay (service
packets) (ms)
Messages generation rate (msgs/s)
Ctrl packets
Serv packets×103
Figure 11: Delay versus Messages Generation Rate (mean message
size=500 bytes and mean number of neighbors =50).
01020304050607080
10 20 50 100 150
MessageGeneration Rate (msgs/sec)Loss Rate for
Service Packets (%)
Figure 12: Service Packets-Loss Rate versus Messages Generation
Rate (mean message size =500 bytes and mean number of
neighbors=50).
0102030405060
100 200 300 400 5000.511.522.533.54Waiting delay (ctrl
packets) (ms)
Waiting delay (service
packets) (ms)
Mean size of a message (byte)
Ctrl packets
Serv packets×103
Figure 13: Delay versus Mean Message Size (message generation
rate=150 msgs/s and mean number of neighbors =50).
threshold; the service messages with the lowest priorities
are thus dropped. The parameters of our simulations arepresented hereafter:
(i) messages generation rate: number of messages gener-
ated by the messages manager per second,
(ii) mean message size, in order to consider the necessary
delay to send each message, according to the e ﬀective
bandwidth,01020304050607080
100 200 300 400 500
Mean size of message (byte)Loss Rate for
service packets (%)
Figure 14: Service Packets-Loss Rate versus Mean Message Size
(message generation rate =150 msgs/s and mean number of
neighbors=50).
0102030405060
10 20 30 40 500.511.522.533.54Waiting delay (ctrl
packets) (ms)
Waiting delay (service
packets) (ms)
Mean number of neighbors
Ctrl packets
Serv packets×103
Figure 15: Delay versus Mean Number of Neighbors (message
generation rate =150 msgs/s and mean message size =500 bytes).
01020304050607080
10 20 30 40 50
Mean number of neighborsLoss Rate for
service packets (%)
Serv packets
Figure 16: Service Packets-Loss Rate versus Mean Number of
Neighbors (message generation rate =150 msgs/s and mean
message size=500 bytes).
(iii) mean number of neighbors, in order to evaluate
the e ﬀective theoretical bandwidth available for each
node.
The results of our simulations are presented in Figures
11,12,13,14,15and16. Figures 11and12show the delay for
the service and control packets, and the service packets-lossrate, by the messages generation rate chosen by the messagemanager. Figures 13and 14present the impact of the mean
messages size on the delays and the service packets loss rate.And ﬁnally, Figures 15and 16show the impact of the mean

--- Page 11 ---
EURASIP Journal on Wireless Communications and Networking 11
Infrastructure based
warningExtended sale distance and speedCooperative
warningV2V & V2l
Extended rear
detection &
blind spot Lane change
assistanceLanesupportSide crash
Road side equipment (local or remote)
Figure 17: SAFESPOT European Integrated Project Context.
I n t e r f a c ew i t hm s g
manager
Reception engine
Input
Neighbor table
managementQoS policies
Parameterscog send (message)
Beacon
conﬁguration
cog send (message)Main
threadBeacon
thread
Period/
event
msgs
thread
Emergency
msgs
threadCongestion control
Reschedule()
Control channel queue
Reschedule()
Service channel queuePhy send (message)Phy send (message)Transmission
engine
Control channel
Service channelStored geocast
Output
Figure 18: V ANET Router Architecture.
number of neighbors on the delays and the service packets-
loss rate.
From these simulations, we show that the service packets-
loss rate is a ﬀected by the three parameters of our analysis.
Indeed, it increases with the increase of the messages
generation rate, the mean size of messages and the mean
number of neighbors. However, the service packets-loss rate
remains almost negligible in most cases of the network
context and the ego node charge. Note that messages sent
on the control channel cannot be lost or dropped. Their
transmission is preemptive comparing to messages sent on
the service channel.The delays of the control and service packets before their
eﬀective emission are also a ﬀected by the three parameters
of our simulations. These delays increase with the increase
of messages generation rate, the mean size of messages and
the mean number of neighbors. We note that the delays
concerning the control messages are low, and do not exceed
in the worst cases 60 ms. QoS requirements for the high
priorities messages are thus satisﬁed, which is a challenging
issue for the emergency alerts dissemination within V ANETs.
However, the delays of the service messages is almost 1 s for
the “normal” context of network and charge, and can reach
3 s in the worst cases.

--- Page 12 ---
12 EURASIP Journal on Wireless Communications and Networking
In addition, our priority-based congestion control tech-
nique is dynamically adaptable to the context of the neigh-borhood, taking into consideration the local density andmessages priorities in order to evaluate the optimal band-width sharing process between neighbor mobiles. Indeed,Figure 15 and Figure 16 illustrate the adaptability of our
congestion control method to the variation of the mean
number of neighbors: its performances in terms of delays andservice packets loss-rate are very promising in the “normal”context of vehicular environment (e.g., the average numberof potential communication neighbors within a four highwaylanes context is appreciatively four [ 2]).
As a conclusion of the performance evaluation step, we
believe that our congestion control approach within V ANETssatisﬁes the objectives identiﬁed in Section 2.3 . Mainly, fast
and reliable communication scheme is guaranteed for thecontrol channel, and an acceptable communication rate isensured through the service one, according to the prioritiesof the messages and the QoS policies established by theapplicative layer.
5. Conclusions and Future W ork
We considered in this paper the congestion control issuewithin vehicular ad hoc networks. We summarized in aﬁrst step existing research work on this topic, then wepresented our cooperative congestion control approach,based on dynamic messages scheduling and transmission,considering the network load and the neighborhood context.Then, we validate the e ﬃciency and the real operability
of our congestion control technique through two principal
steps: formal veriﬁcation and validation, and performance
evaluation and analysis. The formal veriﬁcation step, car-ried out via the UPPAAL tool, proved the reliability ofour congestion control technique in terms of reachability,safety, liveness, and no-deadlock properties, whereas theperformance evaluation step considers the delays of messagesbefore their e ﬀective sending in the appropriate queue, and
the service packets-loss rate.
We elaborated our congestion control approach in the
context of the SAFESPOST European project. This projectaims to establish a reliable communication architecturewithin vehicular ad hoc networks by conceiving an intelligentcooperative system able to ensure safety services to vehiclesdrivers, such as line change assistance, safe distance andspeed evaluation, ...(cf.Figure 17 ).
In this context, we have developed a congestion con-
trol module, setting up the priority-based scheduling andtransmission techniques within V ANET. Figure 18 shows our
congestion control module, and its interaction with theother modules of a V ANET SAFESPOT router. We presenthereafter the principles of our module and its interactions.
Congestion Control Module. Within the congestion control
module, two queues are implemented, one for the controlchannel messages and one for the service channel messages.The dotted edge in Figure 18 represents the possibility of
switching messages from the service channel queue to thecontrol channel one, when needed. In addition, four threadsare implemented, a main thread receiving messages from the
input modules, and the others are intended to schedule andsend messages, and control the charge of the node.
Input Modules. Input modules redirect messages to the
congestion control module. The message manager modulegenerates new messages, to be sent within the control orservice channel, and the reception engine sends receivedmessages to be forwarded by the congestion control module.
Output Module. The output module that receives messages
from the congestion control module is the transmission
module. Each message received from the congestion control
module is a ﬀected to the corresponding channel to be
eﬀectively aired.
Parameters Modules. The congestion control module inter-
acts with the parameters modules. From the neighbortable module, the congestion control module evaluatesthe network and the neighborhood context, to recomputedynamically the messages priorities. The congestion controlmodule interacts also with QoS policies module in viewof the general quality of service policies, according to thepriority of the transmitted messages.
As future work, we plan to carry out real tests and
measurements, in order to validate the implementation ofour approach, and its interactions within the other modulesof the V ANET SAFESPOT router, according to the followingsteps.
(i) Subsystem tests. This ﬁrst step consists of testing the
congestion control component individually (tests ofeach method according to its expected values and realresults).
(ii) Integrated system tests. This step consists of testing
the V ANET router architecture, and the interactionsbetween the di ﬀerent sub-systems.
(iii) Vehicles tests. This ﬁnal step consists of testing
several V ANET routers to validate the operationaldistributed behaviour of all the V ANET network. A
special attention will be given to the evaluation of
the bandwidth consumption and the charge of thenodes, in order to validate the reliable transmissionof emergency messages within V ANET.
References
[1] Y. Zang, “Study on message dissemination algorithms for
cooperative danger warning applications based on inter-vehicle communications,” in Proceedings of the 3rd Interna-
tional Workshop on Wireless Community Networks (COMNETS
’08), Hangzhou, China, 2008.
[2] Y. Zang, L. Stibor, and H. J. Reumerman, “Neighborhood
evaluation of vehicular ad-hoc network using IEEE 802.11p,”
inProceedings of the 8th European Wireless Conference ,p .5 ,
Paris, France, 2007.
[3] E. Minack, Evaluation of the inﬂuence of channel conditions
on Car2X communications , Ph.D. thesis, Chemnitz University,
November 2005.

--- Page 13 ---
EURASIP Journal on Wireless Communications and Networking 13
[4] C. Lochert, B. Scheuermann, and M. Mauve, “A survey on
congestion control for mobile ad hoc networks,” Wireless
Communications and Mobile Computing , vol. 7, no. 5, pp. 655–
676, 2007.
[5] K. Chandran, S. Raghunathan, S. Venkatesan, and R. Prakash,
“Feedback based scheme for improving TCP performance
in ad-hoc wireless networks,” in Proceedings of the 18th
International Conference on Distributed Computing Systems ,
pp. 472–479, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, May 1998.
[6] H. K. Rath, A. Sahoo, and A. Karandikar, “Cross layer based
congestion control in wireless networks for TCP Reno-2,” in
Proceedings of the 12th National Conference on Communica-
tions (NCC ’06) , Delhi, India, April 2006.
[7] M. Chen, A. Abate, and S. Sastry, “New congestion control
schemes over wireless networks: delay sensitivity analysis and
simulations,” in Proceedings of the 16th IFAC World Congress ,
Prague, Czech Republic, January 2005.
[8] V . Raghunathan and P . R. Kumar, “A counterexample in
congestion control of wireless networks,” in Proceedings of the
8th ACM Symposium on Modeling, Analysis and Simulationof Wireless and Mobile Systems (MSWiM ’05) , pp. 290–297,
Montreal, Canada, October 2005.
[9] Y. Yi and S. Shakkottai, “Hop-by-hop congestion control over
a wireless multi-hop network,” IEEE/ACM Transactions on
Networking , vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 133–144, 2007.
[10] D. Kliazovich and F. Granelli, “Cross-layer congestion control
in ad hoc wireless networks,” Ad Hoc Networks ,v o l .4 ,n o .6 ,
pp. 687–708, 2006.
[11] S. Rangwala, A. Jindal, K.-Y. Jang, K. Psounis, and R.
Govindan, “Understanding congestion control in multi-hop
wireless mesh networks,” in Proceedings of the 14th Annual
International Conference on Mobile Computing and Networking(MOBICOM ’08) , pp. 291–302, San Francisco, Calif, USA,
September 2008.
[12] G. Zhang, Y. Wu, and Y. Liu, “Stability and sensitivity for
congestion control in wireless networks with time varyinglink capacities,” in Proceedings of the 13th IEEE International
Conference on Network Protocols (ICNP ’05) , pp. 401–411,
Boston, Mass, USA, November 2005.
[13] F. Kelly, “Charging and rate control for elastic tra ﬃc,”
European Transactions on Telecommunications , vol. 8, no. 1, pp.
33–37, 1997.
[14] Y. Zang, L. Stibor, X. Cheng, H.-J. Reumerman, A. Paruzel,
and A. Barroso, “Congestion control in wireless networks
for vehicular safety applications,” in Proceedings of the 8th
European Wireless Conference , p. 7, Paris, France, 2007.
[15] L. Wischhof and H. Rohling, “Congestion control in vehicular
ad hoc networks,” in Proceedings of IEEE International Confer-
ence on Vehicular Electronics and Safety Proceedings , pp. 58–63,
Xian, China, October 2005.
[16] M. T orrent-Moreno, P . Santi, and H. Hartenstein, “Fair
sharing of bandwidth in V ANETs,” in Proceedings of the Second
ACM International Workshop on Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks
(VANET ’05) , pp. 49–58, Cologne, Germany, September 2005.
[17] IEEE P1609.4, “Wireless access in vehicular environments
(wave) multichannel operation,” in Draft Standard ,N o v e m b e r
2005.
[18] R. Alur and D. L. Dill, “A theory of timed automata,”
Theoretical Computer Science , vol. 126, no. 2, pp. 183–235,
1994.
[19] A. Cavalli, Ing´enierie des protocoles et qualit ´ed es e r v i c e ,R ´eseaux
et T´el´ecoms , Lavoisier Hermes, Paris, France, 2001.
[20] A. David, “Uppaal2k: small tutorial,” Report Version 3.2.11,
October 2002.
