--- Page 1 ---
Discretization of continuous dynamical systems
using UPPAAL
Stefano Schivo and Rom Langerak
Formal Methods and Tools Group, Faculty of EEMCS, University of Twente,
Enschede, The Netherlands
Abstract. We want to enable the analysis of continuous dynamical sys-
tems (where the evolution of a vector of continuous state variables is
described by dierential equations) by model checking. We do this by
showing how such a dynamical system can be translated into a discrete
model of communicating timed automata that can be analyzed by the
UPPAAL tool. The basis of the translation is the well-known Euler ap-
proach for solving dierential equations where we use xed discrete value
steps instead of xed time steps. Each state variable is represented by a
timed automaton in which the delay for taking the next value is calcu-
lated on the y using the dierential equations. The state variable au-
tomata proceed independently but may notify each other when a value
step has been completed; this leads to a recalculation of delays. The ap-
proach has been implemented in the tool ANIMO for analyzing biological
kinase networks in cells. This tool has been used in actual biological re-
search on osteoarthritis dealing with systems where the dimension of the
state vector (the number of nodes in the network) is in the order of one
hundred.
Keywords: discretization; Euler method; model checking; timed automata; sys-
tems biology
1 Introduction
In this introduction we rst motivate our interest in discretizing continuous
systems using UPPAAL, then we give a short characterization of our approach,
and nally we give an overview of the paper.
Many important and interesting phenomena in nature and technology can
be adequately modeled as continuous dynamical systems where the evolution
of a vector of real state variables is governed by dierential equations. The
mathematical theory of continuous dynamical systems is a mature eld with a
history of centuries, and occupies a rm position in any science or engineering
curriculum.
The last decades have seen a great interest in the analysis of continuous
dynamical systems using techniques from computer science developed in the
context of discrete systems. A prominent example of such a technique is model

--- Page 2 ---
checking as originated in the '80s [14, 9], where properties (often given in some
kind of logical formalism) are checked against a model of a system, usually
in the form of a discrete state transition system. The attractiveness of model
checking lies in the fact that large and complex systems can be automatically
and exhaustively checked. Model checking has fruitful applications to scheduling
and control synthesis: reachability analysis may yield witness traces that contain
the relevant information for a schedule or a control strategy. Our interest in
model checking dynamical systems theory is aimed at biological applications; we
refer to [5, 23] for an overview of model checking biological systems.
Systems where timing aspects are critical can be modeled by enhancing state
transition systems by real time clocks, leading to the timed automata model [1].
The application of symbolic techniques to (networks of) timed automata has led
to eective model checking tools, most notably UPPAAL [20]. The UPPAAL
website [36] contains an ample collection of applications of UPPAAL to e.g.
protocol analysis, hardware verication and model checking, controller design,
and scheduling. The fact that UPPAAL is a mature and powerful tool that is
widely used makes it an attractive infrastructure for model checking continuous
dynamical systems.
When modeling continuous dynamical systems by timed automata two prob-
lems have to be addressed. Firstly, timed automata can directly model only very
simple dynamics: clock variables with a slope of 1. And secondly, timed automata
are basically a discrete model. So some abstraction technique has to be found in
order to represent continuous dynamics and values by using simple clocks and
discrete values. The literature on abstractions of continuous dynamics is too vast
to be dealt with here (we refer to [2] for an early overview); moreover, here we
are primarily interested in those approaches that aim at timed automata as a
target model. We identify two possible types of approaches.
One type of approach is to exploit knowledge of special properties of the
dynamics (possibly restricted to a special class of dynamics) in order to obtain
a discrete abstraction of the dynamical system. An example of this approach
is given by [33, 34, 38] where the state space is partitioned by level sets of a
kind of Lyapunov function. Another recent example is [4] where an abstraction
technique based on time-varying regions of invariance (so-called control funnels)
is applied to linear systems.
A second type of approach takes as a starting point a partitioning of the state
space into rectangular cells and uses the dierential equations to obtain infor-
mation about reachability between cells. Examples of this approach are [22, 32,
6, 8, 15] (they will be discussed in Section 2 of this paper). The approach in this
paper falls in this category: we assume a discretization of a bounded part of the
state space, even if we do not explicitly create cells in our approach. Conceptu-
ally our approach is just a slight modication of the well-known Euler approach
for solving dierential equations, where we take xed value steps instead of xed
time steps. This leads to an arbitrary precision approximation of the dynamical
system.
2

--- Page 3 ---
Our approach originated in the context of a biological application, viz. the
analysis of kinase networks in living cells [29, 37, 30]. This means that we should
be able to model check dynamical systems with dimensions in the order of 50-
100. We do not just want to use model checking for the purpose of analyzing
our systems (along the lines of e.g. [23]) but we also want to use model checking
in the following way. Suppose we model a network with all possible stimuli
on the network, and we express a certain therapy target as a property on the
network. Now model checking that the target cannot be reached may lead to a
counterexample, representing exactly the stimuli leading to the desired target. In
this way model checking is being used for drug synthesis, which is becoming even
more important in the context of personalized therapies. Prerequisite for this is
that our models are amenable to model checking in an ecient way. Many of the
existing approaches in the literature are mathematically sophisticated but do not
(yet) scale up to systems with large dimensions. Our approach is conceptually
simple, but has proven to be very ecient for a range of biological network
models.
The eld of nonlinear dynamical systems is complex and challenging. We
would like to stress that our aim is not primarily to develop theory leading to a
better understanding of this eld. Instead, we obtain a discretization of a system
using the Euler method, after which UPPAAL does most of the work. This tool{
based approach works for an interesting application area (biological networks);
it will be interesting to see whether it will work for other applications as well.
This paper is structured as follows. In Section 2 we describe the problem and
discuss related approaches. In Section 3 we discuss the Euler method and our
adaptation of it. In Section 4 we implement our version of the Euler method
using timed automata and show an example. In Section 5 we discuss the cor-
rectness and make our implementation ecient. In Section 6 we describe how
our approach has been implemented into the tool ANIMO that has already been
used in biological research [28, 27, 26, 31], and Section 7 contains conclusions and
directions for further research.
2 Problem statement and
related work
We assume a dynamical system has a state vector x2Rn, with x= (x1; : : : ; x n);
xi(1in) is called a component of x. We consider xas a function of time,
and assume the dynamics of xto be governed by the dierential equation
dx
dt=f(x) ()
The function f:Rn!Rndenes a vector eld, i.e. it associates a vector
f(x) = ( f1(x); : : : ; f n(x)) to each point in Rn(note that fdoes not explicitly
depend on t).
Atrajectory of the dynamical system starting in initial state x0is a function
x(t) :R0!Rnsuch that x(0) = x0anddx(t)
dt=f(x(t)) for all t0.
3

--- Page 4 ---
In this paper we are only interested in a bounded (and closed) part Mof
Rn; for convenience we assume M= [0; max 1]: : :[0; max n]. This restricts
trajectories to remain within M, which means that the time domain on which
a trajectory is dened may be restricted: if a trajectory tries to leave Mit has
to be truncated (but we will show in Section 4 a pragmatic way of dealing with
this).
We assume fis continuously dierentiable on M, which is sucient to guar-
antee the existence of a unique solution of the dierential equation ( ) for each
initial value in M.
We dene a grid on Mby dening a grid step difor each component of the state.
We assume that max i=di=miis an integer. Let k= (k1; : : : ; k n) be a vector of
integers with 0kimifor all i; we denote a cell in the grid by
C(k1; : : : ; k n) = [k1d1;(k1+ 1)d1]: : :[kndn;(kn+ 1)dn]
The possibility to have dierent grid steps for dierent components is quite
convenient (and this is what we have implemented); however, for ease of expo-
sition we assume we have a step size di= 1 for all components. By a slight
abuse of notation we denote a cell C(k1; : : : ; k n) by ( k1; : : : ; k n) ork. Two cells
are called neighbors if their dierence is 1 in exactly one component, so e.g.
(k1; : : : ; k i; : : : ; k n) and ( k1; : : : ; k i+ 1; : : : ; k n) are neighbors.
Fig. 1. A simple dynamical system with naive abstraction
Now the most simple idea for a discrete abstraction of the dynamical system
would be to create a transition system with cells as locations, and transitions
kp!kqbetween neighboring cells if there is a trajectory going from cell kpto
cellkq. A simple example (taken from [22]) shows that this naive abstraction
contains too much spurious behavior (i.e. behavior that does not correspond to
behavior in the original dynamical system) to be useful. Consider the simple
dynamical system in Figure 1 with state in R2and dynamics given bydx
dt=
(1;1). Trajectories starting in cell (0 ;0) may only reach the gray area, but in the
abstracted transition system all cells are reachable from (0 ;0).
Moreover, this is independent from the granularity of the grid: no matter
how small the grid step, the entire state space will always be reachable from
cell (0 ;0). The reason for this inherent spurious behavior is that time has been
completely disregarded in the abstraction. For instance, when going from cell
4

--- Page 5 ---
(0;0) to (0 ;100) at least 99 grid steps are taken in the vertical direction, and
not even 1 grid step in the horizontal direction, which is impossible since the
horizontal and vertical speeds are the same. This observation lies at the basis
of [22]. In order to solve the problem, to each dimension of a cell a maximum
dwell time is associated. This maximum dwell time is obtained by calculating
the extremal values of the components of the derivative function (which can be
eciently calculated for the class of functions considered in [22]), an idea already
presented in [35]. This may considerably reduce spurious behavior; however, as
the authors remark, problems may arise when components of the derivatives
are zero. In that case no bound on dwell times can be given, which still allows
spurious behavior. Some of these problems have been solved in [8] in the context
of inevitability analysis, but only for linear systems and low dimensions.
A dierent approach is presented in [6] where an analysis is made on the
facets of a cell: by analyzing from which parts of facets other facets are reachable
(taking the dynamics into account) cells are rened and spurious behavior is
greatly reduced. The method is sophisticated but scaling it to our intended
applications (with cells having dimensions in the order of 100) would lead to an
explosion of rened cells. Using reachability between facets is also the basis of
[11] where control theory is used in order to inuence the reachability of facets
from other facets as studied in [16, 17].
In our approach we do not explicitly create cells or transition relations be-
tween cells. Instead, we create a network of timed automata implementing the
Euler approach for approximating a solution of a dierential equation, and leave
it to the UPPAAL tool to create a nite transition system as the underlying
symbolic UPPAAL semantics. This approach has evolved from the IKNAT tool
in [3] which models biological signaling networks. The timed automata created
by IKNAT used a priori calculated delays between discrete activity levels of en-
zymes (a similar idea (but only for a one-dimensional system) has been used in
[18] in the context of modeling battery lifetime). The IKNAT approach has been
used by [15] in order to improve the quantitative modeling of gene regulatory
networks in [32], thereby solving some instability problems of IKNAT. However,
that approach is tied to a specic application and rather ad-hoc, conceptually
not very clear, and the resulting timed automata are complicated and not e-
cient enough for eective model checking. The Euler-based approach we present
in the next sections does not have these drawbacks.
3 The Euler method for solving dierential equations
The Euler method is a well{known numerical procedure for solving dierential
equations. It can be found in most introductory books on calculus; for an exten-
sive treatment we refer to [7].
The idea behind the Euler method is best illustrated on the one-dimensional
case. Suppose we have a dierential equationdx
dt=f(x) and suppose we take
time steps of size h. If at time tnwe have an approximation xnofx(tn) we
5

--- Page 6 ---
tn tn+1
hxnxn+1=hf(xn)
x(tn+1)
tn tn+1
Tknkn+1
T=1
jf(kn)j
Fig. 2. The Euler method for a xed time step (left) and for a xed value step (right).
obtain the next approximation at time tn+1=tn+hbyxn+1=hf(xn), see
Figure 2 (left).
Starting at some initial value x0and then repeating this procedure yields
a piecewise linear approximation of a trajectory of the dynamical system. The
approximation error jx(tn+1) xn+1jgoes to zero if the time step hgoes to zero,
so this is an arbitrary precision approximation.
We use a variant of the Euler method where we take a xed value step, and
then calculate the time Tneeded to arrive at this next value. This is illustrated
in Figure 2 (right).
If the starting point is the discrete value kn, then the next discrete value is
kn+ 1 if f(kn)>0, and kn 1 iff(kn)<0; in both cases T= 1=jf(kn)j.
We explain the procedure in higher dimensions on the case R2(since it is
easiest to depict), so we have equationdx
dt= (f1(x); f2(x)):
{suppose we start at point ( p; q) with pandqintegers
{the next cell ( p0; q0) reached will be either ( p1; q) (depending on the sign
off1(p; q)) or ( p; q1) (depending on the sign of f2(p; q))
{the time Tto reach the next cell: T=minf1=jf1(p; q)j;1=jf2(p; q)jg
{now repeat this from the point where the next cell is entered, with vector
f(p0; q0)
This is illustrated in Figure 3. Notice that when the procedure starts from
a point xthat has just been reached on the cell boundary of cell kwe use the
vector value f(k) instead of the value of f(x), since we also want to obtain a
discretization of the state space. When the grid size tends towards zero, f(x)
tends towards f(k), so this does not harm the arbitrary precision property of
our approximation.
This version of the Euler method easily generalizes to dimension n:
Initialization:
Suppose we start at point k. The waiting time for each component i:Ti=
1=jfi(k)j(the time needed for reaching the next value ki1, depending on
the sign of fi(k)). Note that if fi(k) = 0, Ti=1.
Repeat step:
6

--- Page 7 ---
k2+ 1
k1+ 1f(k1+ 2; k2)f(k1+ 1; k2)f(k1; k2)
k= (k1; k2)
Fig. 3. example of the Euler-based method in two dimension
begin
For all jfor which Tj=minfT1; : : : ; T ng=t:
{k0
j=kj+ 1 if fi(k)>0
{k0
j=kj 1 iffi(k)<0
Update all waiting times, based on tandk0, as indicated below.
end
Waiting times are updated as follows:
{ifTi=minfT1; : : : ; T ngorfi(k) = 0 or fi(k0) = 0:
T0
i= 1=jfi(k0)j
{iffi(k0) and fi(k) have the same sign:
This situation is represented in Figure 4 for a positive fi(k). At time ta
distance ( Ti t)jfi(k)jstill needs to be covered before reaching ki+ 1, so
the new delay time becomes T0
i= (Ti t)jfi(k)j=jfi(k0)j. Similar reasoning
leads to the same formula if fi(k) is negative.
{iffi(k0) and fi(k) have opposite sign:
Suppose fi(k) is positive (see Figure 4). At time ta distance ( Ti t)jfi(k)j
would still have to be covered before reaching k1+ 1. But now the direction
is changed, so an extra 1  (Ti t)jfi(k)jhas to be covered before ki 1
is reached, so a total of 2  (Ti t)jfi(k)j. So the new delay time becomes
T0
i= (2 (Ti t)jfi(k)j)=jfi(k0)j. Similar reasoning leads to the same
formula if fi(k) is negative.
4 Translation into timed
automata
We implement the Euler method of the previous section by a network of commu-
nicating timed automata. We rst describe this implementation in an abstract
way using pseudo-code and without worrying about syntactical and semantical
issues. Then we show how to concretely implement this in UPPAAL, taking into
account syntactical, semantical, and performance issues.
For each dimension iof the state space we create a timed automaton Ai
containing a discrete state component kiand a clock variable ci. Clock cicounts
up to time Ti= 1=jfi(k)jwhich is the delay time for reaching next integer value
ki1, depending on the sign of fi(k). Iffi(k) = 0 the component is for the
7

--- Page 8 ---
tT0
ikiki+1
(Ti t)jfi(k)j
ki 1T0
i
Fig. 4. Calculating a new delay time
time being quiescent, so Ti=1. While an automaton is waiting, two things
may happen:
1.ci=Ti, so the component has reached the new integer grid value k0
i=ki1
(we call this reaching ). Now all other automata are notied of this fact,
and a new delay time T0
iis calculated for reaching the next grid value:
T0
i= 1=jfi(k1; : : : ; k0
i; : : : ; k n)j, and clock ciis reset.
2. a notication is received from automaton Ajthat it has reached a new grid
value k0
j. Now a new delay T0
ihas to be calculated, based on the new value
fi(k1; : : : ; k0
j; : : : ; k n) and the time that has already been waited, i.e. the
current value of clock ci, in exactly the same way as in the Euler algorithm
in the previous section. The clock ciis reset.
An abstract version of automaton Aiwith pseudo-code is given in Figure 5.
ci:= 0,
\calculate Ti"
ciTi
ci:= 0,
\update Ti"\receive notication
of reaching of T.A. j"
ci:= 0,
\update Ti"\notify other T.A.
of new value of ki"ciTi
Fig. 5. Automaton Aiin pseudo code
We now change the abstract timed automaton with pseudo-code of Figure 5
into a concrete UPPAAL automaton. The result is given in Figure 6; from now
on we assume the automaton Aicorresponding to component xihas id i(and
we often blur the distinction between components and their corresponding au-
tomata).
8

--- Page 9 ---
Fig. 6. The resulting UPPAAL automaton with id=1
We explain step by step the various issues in this automaton.
Notifying when reaching. When automaton Aireaches the grid-point, it is
not the case that all other automata have to be notied. Only those components
xjhave to be notied whose derivate fjmay change as a result of a change in
xi, i.e.@fj(x)
@xi6= 0 for some value of x. This can usually be detected at syntactic
level: if variable xidoes not occur in the mathematical formula for fj, then xj
is not dependent on xi.
In Figure 6 the depicted automaton A1is dependent on A2andA3so there
are transitions from location waiting labeled with reached[2]? andreached[3]? .
Note that these transitions have been depicted in an overlapping fashion to en-
hance readability of the picture. These transitions then reach urgent location
responding from which a transition is taken to update the delay time T1.
Multiple automata reaching It is possible that several automata reach a new
grid-point at the same time. In order to guarantee a consistent resulting update
of the global state we want the resulting sequence of updates to be atomic. To
achieve this we synchronize all reaching transitions from location waiting by
having two transitions labeled with reaching! andreaching? (again these two
transitions are depicted overlappingly). Then a committed location is reached
from which a transition reached[id]! is performed to notify the dependent au-
tomata. Notice that this location is committed so the transition takes precedence
over transitions in automata leaving urgent location responding .
If an automaton has just performed a reached[id]! transition and reached
location waiting we do not want it to receive to a notication of another au-
tomaton that has just reached. Therefore we add predicate c>0to the guard on
the transitions leaving location waiting .
Calculating the clock time. We saw in the last section that the value of clock
cineeds to be known at the moment the delay time Tineeds to be updated.
However, UPPAAL does not allow the clock time to be read. Therefore we per-
form some global time administration in order to extract the clock time. We
9

--- Page 10 ---
introduce a global variable currentTime that records the global time. Each au-
tomaton has a local variable lastUpdate that records the global time at the last
delay update. Now if an automaton Aireaches a new grid value this means it has
waited the full delay time Ti. Therefore the new global time is set to lastUpdate
+Ti; this happens in function settime() . When a notication is received, the
current clock time is currentTime - lastUpdate ; this is calculated in function
gettime() .
The reach() function . When an automaton has reached a new grid value this
value should be communicated to the dependent automata. Since UPPAAL does
not enable value passing in synchronizations this is done by writing the new value
in a global variable that can be used by an update() function elsewhere. This
happens in the function reach() . When the new grid value has reached one of
the extremal values 0 or max ithe automaton Aienters a quiescent mode by
setting Tito innite. It may leave this quiescent mode when changes in other
components make the component move away from the extremal value (so we
do not need to truncate the trajectory by stopping time). This is a pragmatic
solution that makes sense in many applications (e.g. the biological application
in Section 6), but needs to be evaluated in the light of each specic application
area.
The update() function. The function update calculates the new time delay
for reaching the next grid value, as described in the previous section. It is used
in dierent contexts: when initializing, after reaching, and after having received
a notication. In the latter case it has to make use of the old delay time, in the
other two cases (characterized by the clock value being 0) it does not need the
old delay time.
Dealing with innite waiting times. When the derivative of a component
is 0 the waiting time is innite. This could be modeled by a very large number,
but it is not a good idea to put very large numbers in UPPAAL clock guards.
Therefore a boolean function infinite delay() has been dened that is true
when the waiting time is (conceptually) innite. This function is updated by
function update() .
Numerical representations. Our real number computations would require
oating-point precision. Since UPPAAL only provides integer variables and op-
erators, we use a signicand-and-exponent notation with 4 signicant gures,
which allows for an error in the order of 0 :1% while avoiding integer overow in
UPPAAL's engine. For example, the oating point number a= 1:23456 will be
represented as the pair h1235; 3i, which is translated back as a= 123510 3=
1:235. The interested reader can nd the UPPAAL denitions and functions
needed to compute rate and time values together with all other functions such
asupdate() andreact() , inside any UPPAAL model le generated by ANIMO1.
1Models generated by ANIMO are saved in the system's temporary directory. Further
details are available in the ANIMO manual at http://fmt.cs.utwente.nl/tools/
animo/content/Manual.pdf
10

--- Page 11 ---
This completes our explanation of our UPPAAL implementation. The resulting
UPPAAL specication can be used for simulation.
Fig. 7. Phase plane ( xvsyplot) of the system in (1) obtained with the model from
Figure 6 on the intervals [0 ;100] (left) and [0 ;1000] (right), consequently adapting the
equations to t the R2subsets. Starting values for xandyare dened on the [0 ;100]
interval by the equations x0= 5 + 10j; y0= 5 + 10k, with j; k=f0;1; : : : ; 9g.
In Figure 7 we show a phase plane representation of a simulation of following
non-linear system with two unstable equilibrium points:
(dx
dt=x y
dy
dt= 1 16(x 0:5)2(1)
We produced the graphs in Figure 7 directly in ANIMO, by translating the
equations back into relations between nodes and edges in ANIMO's user interface
and analyzing them with multiple initial values for xandy. Computing the
resulting 100 simulation runs took about 11 seconds for the rst graph in Figure 7
and 17 seconds for the second.
For comparison we show in Figure 8 the phase-plane representation of the
same system. Note that the UPPAAL simulation succeeds in faithfully capturing
the qualitative behavior.
Fig. 8. Phase plane of the system in (1) obtained with the pplane software [24].
It is dicult to say something a priori about the accuracy of the Euler ap-
proximation; theoretical bounds on the truncation errors are not very helpful for
11

--- Page 12 ---
this (as they depend on properties of the dierential equation that may be hard
to establish). What these theoretical bounds do show is that the approximation
error is linear in the step size [7]. However, rounding errors caused by the rep-
resentation of numbers further complicate the picture. As a pragmatic way of
dealing with the problem of accuracy we propose to experiment with dierent
step sizes, and plot the resulting simulations, until one is suciently satised
(when the plots do not change signicantly anymore).
5 Correctness and eciency
The translation of the previous section yields a set of ntimed automata (one
for each component of the state vector) that synchronize via channels. We rst
discuss the correctness of this translation by showing how one step of the Euler
algorithm in Section 3 relates to a sequence of transitions in the product of the
timed automata.
We assume each automaton is in state waiting . Suppose an automaton Aj
has waited the allowed waiting time Tjin state waiting , soTj=minfT1; : : : ; T ng.
Note that this may happen for several automata at the same moment; we call
these automata the reaching automata.
Now the following sequence of transitions is performed (this is illustrated in
Figure 9):
...waiting
creaching
...
... ... .........
... ......cresponding
waitingupdate()reached
update()reach()c >= T
...
... ... .........
... ......step
Fig. 9. Relation between timed automata transitions and Euler step.
{all the reaching automata synchronize on the reaching channel. Nonde-
terministically one of them performs reaching! and the others perform
12

--- Page 13 ---
reaching? , leading to several possible transitions that all end up in the
same global state. In this global state all the reaching automata are in a
committed state, and all non-reaching automata are still in state waiting .
The value of khas been updated via the reach() function.
{then all transitions from the committed states are executed in an inter-
leaved way. These transitions may synchronize via channel reached with
non-reaching automata, while updating the waiting times of the reaching
automata. When all reached transitions are nished each reaching automa-
ton is in state waiting , and each non-reaching automaton is in the urgent
state responding .
{nally all transitions from the urgent states responding are performed in
an interleaved way, thereby updating the waiting times in the non-reaching
automata. After this each automaton is in the state waiting .
So the three phases of transitions in Figure 9 taken together correspond to
one step of the Euler algorithm in Section 3, showing the correctness of the
translation.
The automaton in Figure 6 has all the required functionality and can satisfac-
torily be used for simulation. However, it is not yet suitable for model checking
(especially for higher dimensional systems): because of interleavings of transi-
tions in dierent automata, the resulting system would contain too many states.
If in each automaton there is one transition that interleaves with the corre-
sponding transitions in the other automata, and if the system is n-dimensional,
then just that transition generates 2ninterleavings. Since it is our ambition to
deal with systems where nis in the order of 100, it is important to solve these
problems. The problems, together with their remedies, are the following:
{from the start location: all update transitions interleave.
Remedy: all update transitions are synchronized. The automaton with id 1
performs doupdate! and all the other automata doupdate? .
{from the responding location: all update transitions interleave.
Remedy: all update transitions are synchronized. The automaton with the
smallest id performs doupdate! and all the other automata doupdate? .
The smallest responding id is established by enter responding() and writ-
ten into global variable minIDresponding . The smallest id performs doupdate!
and all the other automata doupdate? .
{all transitions from the committed location interleave.
Remedy: all reaching transitions are enqueued in a priority queue (imple-
mented by a boolean array) by the function enqueue(id) . Now the reached[ i]!
transitions are performed by always choosing the minimum id in the queue,
and removing the id from the queue by the function exit queue(id) . In this
way one interleaving is picked out of the exponentially many.
The resulting timed automaton is given in Figure 10. We will show in Sec-
tion 6 that this model is amenable to model checking even for higher dimensions.
In many applications (like the biological application we deal with in Section 6)
it is desirable to inject some imprecision in a model. This may be because of
13

--- Page 14 ---
Fig. 10. Timed automaton with eciency optimizations
inherent nondeterminism in the modeled phenomena, it may be because model
parameters are not precisely known, or it may be because we want our model
checking results to be robust against small perturbations in the behavior.
A simple pragmatic way of doing this is by turning the calculated delay times
Tiinto intervals of possible delay times [ TLi; TU i] (where Lstands for Lower
andUstands for Upper). One might interpret such an interval as a uniform
distribution of delay times (this approach was used for performance analysis in
[39]). In the ANIMO tool in Section 6 such intervals are created by asking the
user to specify an uncertainty percentage, say 10%, and then dening TL= 0:9T
andTU= 1:1T.
6 Application: ANIMO, a tool for analyzing kinase
pathways
In this section we show how the approach has been implemented in the biological
research tool ANIMO.
A signaling network in a biological cell describes the chain of reactions oc-
curring between the reception of a signal and the response with which the cell
reacts to such signal. The target of a signaling pathway is usually a transcription
factor, a molecule with the task of controlling the production of some protein.
Active molecules relay the signal inside the cell by activating other molecules
until a target is reached. We dene the activity level to represent the percentage
of active molecules over an entire molecular species.
ANIMO (Analysis of Networks with Interactive MOdeling) [28, 27, 26, 31] is
a software tool that supports the modeling of biological signaling pathways by
adding a dynamic component to traditional static representations of signaling
networks. ANIMO allows to compare the behavior of a model with wet-lab data,
and to explore such behavior in a user-friendly way. In order to achieve a good
level of user-friendliness for a public of biologists ANIMO is accessible via the
Cytoscape [19, 10] user interface (see Fig. 11). A user may insert a node for each
molecular species and an edge for each reaction. The occurrence of a reaction
modies the activity level of its target reactant; the rate with which a reaction
14

--- Page 15 ---
Fig. 11. The Cytoscape 3 interface for ANIMO
occurs depends on a formula selected by the user. For a more precise explanation
on how reaction rates are computed in ANIMO, we refer to [27], for parameter
setting in ANIMO to [25].
Once the user has created a model, this model is transformed into an UP-
PAAL model applying the discretizations described in the previous sections to
the system of dierential equations derived from the ANIMO network model.
This model can then be analyzed via the Cytoscape/ANIMO interface that has
facilities for model checking templates. ANIMO has also been used as a front-end
for statistical model checking [12].
The ANIMO tool has been validated on several realistic biological case stud-
ies for which experimental data was available in the literature, and it has been
demonstrated how to create models that faithfully t experimental data [28, 27,
26, 31]. Moreover, ANIMO is being used in on-going research on chondrocyte
signaling in relation to osteoarthritis, where the nal objective is to enhance
cartilage tissue engineering strategies [29, 30, 37].
Table 1 shows a comparison between some variants of the timed automata model
when performing model checking on the model from [30] in UPPAAL. All the
timed automata model variants contain 82 automata, i.e. they are a discretiza-
tion of an 82-dimensional continuous dynamical system. \Approx. 5%" is the
approximated variant with a setting of 5% uncertainty level in the original AN-
IMO model.
Model version Time (s) Memory (peak KB)
Standard - -
Approx.5% - -
Standard + optimizations 139.61 3 880 040
Approx.5% + optimizations 63.13 1 107 552
Table 1. Performance comparison of dierent model versions.
15

--- Page 16 ---
The model was initially congured so that a large change in the node activ-
ities on the whole network would take place. We then asked a query to under-
stand whether such change is inevitable. In the UPPAAL query language, this
is written as A<> R77>= 80 (R77being the most interesting readout in the
particular experiment). The answer was positive, except for the non-optimized
models where the computation could not terminate after several hours.
7 Conclusions and Future Work
We have presented an arbitrary precision discretization of a continuous dynam-
ical system as a network of UPPAAL timed automata. The implementation is
conceptually based on the Euler method for solving dierential equations. Math-
ematically this method is less sophisticated than many other discretizations in
the literature; the main contribution of our approach is that is has been able
to handle systems with dimensions in the order of 100. This eciency is a pre-
requisite for the use of model checking of biological systems, especially with the
objective of using the generation of counterexamples as a tool for aiding drug
synthesis.
The approach has been used in the tool ANIMO for biological signal network
analysis. ANIMO has been (and currently is being) used by biologists in actual
biological research. The user interface (based on the tool Cytoscape) enables bi-
ologists to create their own models, perform analysis and interpret the results, all
without intervention from computer scientists. Current research concentrates on
automatic model generation from libraries, on analyzing parameter sensitivity,
and on generating model improvements automatically from experimental data.
Our approach is based on an arbitrary precision approximation. However,
the approximation error is hard to quantify, and it seems hard to qualify the
approximation as an abstraction (in terms of either an over or under approxi-
mation). A CEGAR [21] type approach seems recommended: if model checking
produces a trace, then this trace should be checked against a rened version of
the model, i.e. an approximation with a smaller step size. In addition, it would
be interesting to try to apply error estimation techniques like the one in [13].
The Euler method is known to have potential stability problems, especially
for so-called sti equations. The analysis of stiness properties is a notorious
dicult problem in mathematics; in the future we would like to evaluate (and
possibly improve) the stability properties of our implementation, possibly by
using more advanced versions of the Euler method.
We certainly do not expect our approach to be applicable to the whole uni-
verse of nonlinear dynamical systems. The biological applications we have en-
countered so far could be described by multiane systems that posed no di-
culties to our tools. In the future we would like to see whether our approach can
be applied succesfully to other application areas. In addition we would like to
obtain a better idea of the apriori limitations of our method.
Acknowledgements. We thank Arend Rensink for an important comment on
an earlier version of this work. We thank Wim Bos, Liesbeth Geris, Marcel
16

--- Page 17 ---
Karperien, Johan Kerkhofs, Jaco van de Pol, Janine Post, Jetse Scholma, Ri-
cardo Urquidi Camacho, Paul van der Vet, and Brend Wanders for the fruitful
and pleasant collaboration leading to ANIMO.
References
1. R. Alur and D. L. Dill. A theory of timed automata. Theor. Comput. Sci. , 126:183{
235, 1994.
2. R. Alur, T. Henzinger, G. Laerriere, George, and G. J. Pappas. Discrete abstrac-
tions of hybrid systems. In Proceedings of the IEEE , pages 971{984, 2000.
3. W. Bos. Interactive signaling network analysis tool. Master's thesis, University of
Twente, 2009.
4. P. Bouyer, N. Markey, N. Perrin, and P. Schlehuber-Caissier. Timed-automata
abstraction of switched dynamical systems using control funnels. In Formal Mod-
eling and Analysis of Timed Systems: 13th International Conference, FORMATS
2015, Madrid, Spain, September 2-4, 2015, Proceedings , pages 60{75, Cham, 2015.
Springer International Publishing.
5. L. Brim, M. Ce ska, and D. Safr anek. Model checking of biological systems. In For-
mal Methods for Dynamical Systems: 13th International School on Formal Methods
for the Design of Computer, Communication, and Software Systems, SFM 2013,
Bertinoro, Italy, June 17-22, 2013. Advanced Lectures , pages 63{112, Berlin, Hei-
delberg, 2013. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
6. L. Brim, J. Fabrikov a, S. Drazan, and D. Safr anek. Reachability in biochemical
dynamical systems by quantitative discrete approximation. CoRR , abs/1107.5924,
2011.
7. J. Butcher. Numerical Methods for Ordinary Dierential Equations; 2nd ed. Wiley,
Chichester, 2008.
8. R. Carter and E. M. Navarro-L opez. Dynamically-driven timed automaton abstrac-
tions for proving liveness of continuous systems. In Formal Modeling and Analy-
sis of Timed Systems: 10th International Conference, FORMATS 2012, London,
UK, September 18-20, 2012. Proceedings , pages 59{74, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2012.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
9. E. Clarke. Model checking. In S. Ramesh and G. Sivakumar, editors, Foundations
of Software Technology and Theoretical Computer Science , volume 1346 of Lecture
Notes in Computer Science , pages 54{56. Springer Berlin / Heidelberg, 1997.
10. Cytoscape 3 ANIMO app. http://apps.cytoscape.org/apps/animo .
11. A. David, J. D. Grunnet, J. J. Jessen, K. G. Larsen, and J. I. Rasmussen. Ap-
plication of model-checking technology to controller synthesis. In Formal Methods
for Components and Objects: 9th International Symposium, FMCO 2010, Graz,
Austria , pages 336{351, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2012. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
12. A. David, K. G. Larsen, A. Legay, M. Miku cionis, D. B. Poulsen, and S. Sedwards.
Statistical model checking for biological systems. International Journal on Software
Tools for Technology Transfer , 17(3):351{367, 2015.
13. A. Donz e, B. H. Krogh, and A. Rajhans. Parameter synthesis for hybrid systems
with an application to simulink models. In Hybrid Systems: Computation and
Control, 12th International Conference, HSCC 2009, San Francisco, CA, USA,
April 13-15, 2009. Proceedings , pages 165{179, 2009.
14. E. A. Emerson and E. M. Clarke. Characterizing correctness properties of parallel
programs using xpoints. In Proceedings of the 7th Colloquium on Automata,
17

--- Page 18 ---
Languages and Programming , pages 169{181, London, UK, UK, 1980. Springer-
Verlag.
15. S. V. Goethem, J.-M. Jacquet, L. Brim, and D. Safr anek. Timed modelling of
gene networks with arbitrarily precise expression discretization. Electronic Notes
in Theoretical Computer Science , 293:67 { 81, 2013. Proceedings of the Third
International Workshop on Interactions Between Computer Science and Biology
(CS2Bio'12).
16. L. C. G. J. M. Habets and J. H. van Schuppen. Control of piecewise-linear hybrid
systems on simplices and rectangles. In Hybrid Systems: Computation and Con-
trol: 4th International Workshop, HSCC 2001 Rome, Italy, March 28{30, 2001
Proceedings , pages 261{274, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2001. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
17. L. C. G. J. M. Habets and J. H. van Schuppen. Control to facet problems for
ane systems on simplices and polytopes - with applications to control of hybrid
systems. In Proceedings of the 44th IEEE Conference on Decision and Control ,
pages 4175{4180, Dec 2005.
18. M. Jongerden, B. Haverkort, H. Bohnenkamp, and J. Katoen. Maximizing system
lifetime by battery scheduling. In 39th Annual IEEE/IFIP International Confer-
ence on Dependable Systems and Networks, DSN 2009 , Los Alamitos, June 2009.
IEEE Computer Society Press.
19. S. Killcoyne, G. W. Carter, J. Smith, and J. Boyle. Cytoscape: a community-
based framework for network modeling. Methods in molecular biology (Clifton,
N.J.) , 563:219{239, 2009.
20. K. G. Larsen, P. Pettersson, and W. Yi. UPPAAL in a nutshell. International
Journal on Software Tools for Technology Transfer (STTT) , 1:134{152, 1997.
21. E. M., O. Grumberg, S. Jha, Y. Lu, and H. Veith. Counterexample-guided ab-
straction renement. In Proceedings of CAV , pages 154{169, 2000.
22. O. Maler and G. Batt. Approximating continuous systems by timed automata.
In J. Fisher, editor, Formal Methods in Systems Biology , volume 5054 of Lecture
Notes in Computer Science , pages 77{89. Springer Berlin / Heidelberg, 2008.
23. P. T. Monteiro, D. Ropers, R. Mateescu, A. T. Freitas, and H. de Jong. Tem-
poral logic patterns for querying dynamic models of cellular interaction networks.
Bioinformatics , 24(16):i227{i233, 2008.
24. pplane web page. http://math.rice.edu/ ~dfield/dfpp.html .
25. S. Schivo, J. Scholma, H. B. J. Karperien, J. N. Post, J. C. van de Pol, and
R. Langerak. Setting parameters for biological models with ANIMO. In E. Andr e
and G. Frehse, editors, Proceedings 1st International Workshop on Synthesis of
Continuous Parameters, Grenoble, France , volume 145 of Electronic Proceedings
in Theoretical Computer Science , pages 35{47. Open Publishing Association, April
2014.
26. S. Schivo, J. Scholma, P. E. van der Vet, M. Karperien, J. N. Post, J. van de Pol,
and R. Langerak. Modelling with ANIMO: between fuzzy logic and dierential
equations. BMC Systems Biology , 10(1):56, 2016.
27. S. Schivo, J. Scholma, B. Wanders, R. Urquidi Camacho, P. van der Vet, M. Karpe-
rien, R. Langerak, J. van de Pol, and J. Post. Modelling biological pathway dynam-
ics with Timed Automata. IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics ,
18(3):832{839, 2013.
28. S. Schivo, J. Scholma, B. Wanders, R. A. Urquidi Camacho, P. E. van der Vet,
H. B. J. Karperien, R. Langerak, J. C. van de Pol, and J. N. Post. Modelling
biological pathway dynamics with timed automata. In 12th IC on Bioinformatics
and Bioengineering (BIBE 2012) , pages 447{453. IEEE Computer Society, 2012.
18

--- Page 19 ---
29. J. Scholma, J. Kerkhofs, S. Schivo, R. Langerak, P. E. van der Vet, H. B. J. Karpe-
rien, J. C. van de Pol, L. Geris, and J. N. Post. Mathematical modeling of signaling
pathways in osteoarthritis. In S. Lohmander, editor, 2013 Osteoarthritis Research
Society International (OARSI) World Congress, Philadelphia, USA , volume 21,
Supplement, pages S123{S123, Amsterdam, April 2013. Elsevier.
30. J. Scholma, S. Schivo, J. Kerkhofs, R. Langerak, H. B. J. Karperien, J. C. van de
Pol, L. Geris, and J. N. Post. ECHO: the executable chondrocyte. In Tissue Engi-
neering & Regenerative Medicine International Society, European Chapter Meeting,
Genova, Italy , volume 8, pages 54{54, Malden, June 2014. Wiley.
31. J. Scholma, S. Schivo, R. Urquidi Camacho, J. van de Pol, M. Karperien, and
J. Post. Biological networks 101: Computational modeling for molecular biologists.
Gene , 533(1):379{384, 2014.
32. H. Siebert and A. Bockmayr. Temporal constraints in the logical analysis of regula-
tory networks. Theoretical Computer Science , 391(3):258 { 275, 2008. Converging
Sciences: Informatics and Biology.
33. C. Sloth and R. Wisniewski. Verication of continuous dynamical systems by timed
automata. Formal Methods in System Design , 39(1):47{82, 2011.
34. C. Sloth and R. Wisniewski. Complete abstractions of dynamical systems by timed
automata. Nonlinear Analysis: Hybrid Systems , 7(1):80 { 100, 2013. fIFACgWorld
Congress 2011.
35. O. Stursberg, S. Kowalewski, and S. Engell. On the generation of timed discrete
approximations for continuous systems. Mathematical and Computer Modelling of
Dynamical Systems , 6(1):51{70, 2000.
36. UPPAAL website. www.uppaal.org .
37. R. Urquidi Camacho. Modeling osteoarthritic cartilage with ANIMO: an exe-
cutable biology approach to osteoarthritic signaling and gene expression. Master's
thesis, University of Twente, the Netherlands, July 2013.
38. R. Wisniewski and C. Sloth. Abstraction of dynamical systems by timed automata.
Modeling, Identication and Control , 32(2):79, 2011.
39. J. S. Xing, B. D. Theelen, R. Langerak, J. C. van de Pol, G. J. Tretmans, and
J. P. M. Voeten. UPPAAL in practice: Quantitative verication of a RapidIO net-
work. In J. P. Katoen, editor, ISoLA 2010 - 4th IS On Leveraging Applications of
Formal Methods, Verication and Validation , LNCS 6416, pages 160{174. Springer,
2010.
19
