--- Page 1 ---
Logical Methods in Computer Science
Volume 22, Issue 1, 2026, pp. 8:1–8:40
https://lmcs.episciences.org/Submitted Jan. 23, 2025
Published Mar. 05, 2026
FORMAL ANALYSIS OF THE CONTRACT AUTOMATA RUNTIME
ENVIRONMENT WITH UPPAAL : MODELLING, VERIFICATION AND
TESTING
DAVIDE BASILE
Formal Methods and Tools Lab, ISTI–CNR, Pisa, Italy
e-mail address : davide.basile@isti.cnr.it
Abstract. Recently, a distributed middleware application called contract automata run-
time environment ( CARE) has been introduced to realise service applications specified using
a dialect of finite-state automata. In this paper, we detail the formal modelling, verifi-
cation and testing of CARE. We provide a formalisation as a network of stochastic timed
automata. The model is verified against the desired properties with the tool Uppaal ,
utilising exhaustive and statistical model checking techniques. Abstract tests are generated
from the Uppaal models that are concretised for testing CARE. This research emphasises
the advantages of employing formal modelling, verification and testing processes to enhance
the dependability of an open-source distributed application. We discuss the methodology
used for modelling the application and generating concrete tests from the abstract model,
addressing the issues that have been identified and fixed.
1.Introduction
Behavioural contracts [ BCZ15 ] have been introduced to formally describe the interactions
among services, to enable to reason formally about well-behaving properties of their compo-
sition. Examples of properties are agreement among the parties or reachability of target
states.
Contract automata are a dialect of finite state automata used to specify behavioural
contracts formally in terms of offers and requests [ BDF16 ]. A composition of contracts
is in agreement when all requests are matched by corresponding offers of other contracts.
A composition can be refined to one in agreement using the orchestration synthesis algo-
rithm [ BtBD+20,BtBP20 ], a variation of the synthesis algorithm from supervisory control
theory [ RW87 ]. The Contract Automata Runtime Environment ( CARE ) [BtB23a ] provides a
middleware to coordinate the services implementing contracts. In CARE , each transition of
the orchestration automaton is executed by a series of interactions among the orchestrator
and the CARE services, implemented using Java TCP/IP sockets. These interactions may vary
according to the specific configuration chosen among those provided by CARE . In [ BtB23a ]
the algorithms implemented in CARE are proved to enforce the adherence of each contract
specification to its CARE implementation (basically, the control flow of the application follows
the synthesised orchestration automaton).
In this paper, we describe the modelling, verification and testing of the low-level
interactions among CARE services and the orchestrator. This aspect is no less important, as
witnessed by known cases of algorithms proved to be correct (e.g., the Byzantine distributed
LOGICAL METHODSl IN COMPUTER SCIENCE DOI:10.46298/LMCS-22(1:8)2026© D. Basile
CC⃝ Creative Commons

--- Page 2 ---
8:2 D. Basile Vol. 22:1
consensus [ LSP82 ]) and whose low-level communication implementations were found to have
issues, e.g. deadlocks [ RCS+22]. We verify several properties, including the absence of
deadlocks, absence of undelivered messages, and reachability of target states.
The formal model is a network of stochastic timed automata as accepted by the Uppaal
toolbox. Different variants of the formal model are proposed. The model undergoes
verification against the desired properties using Uppaal , employing both exhaustive model
checking, statistical model checking and model-based testing. This combination allows for
thorough analysis of the model’s behaviour and ensures scalability when dealing with systems
that possess a large state-space.
The benefits of modelling and verifying CARE are: (i) increasing the confidence in the
reliability of CARE due to the formal verification through model checking and model-based
testing, (ii) quantitative evaluation of measures of interest of CARE obtained through statistical
model checking, (iii) improved documentation thanks to the graphical and animatable state
machines endowed with precise semantics.
Finally, this paper tackles the challenge of providing a full-fledged model-based develop-
ment and formal methods approach [ GtBvdP20 ]. The final application has been graphically
modelled at an abstract level, formally verified and tested using the formal model. The
criteria followed for abstracting away irrelevant details are discussed together with the issues
that have been found and fixed thanks to the formal modelling, verification and testing.
All models, formulas, and logs are publicly available in [ Basb ], together with traceability
and model-based testing information connecting the model to the source code.
This work is an extension of the conference paper [ Bas24 ]. The extension includes the
addition of more figures and tables, as well as further explanations throughout the paper.
The most significant addition concerns the testing phase, which was only briefly mentioned
in [Bas24 ]. Testing is now thoroughly described in Section 7. We cover both the generation
of abstract tests from the Uppaal model and the process of concretising these tests in the
real application.
Summarising, the core contributions of this paper are: (i) the bottom-up formal modelling
ofCARE , an already established, open-source distributed middleware, modelled as a network
of stochastic timed automata suitable for the Uppaal toolbox; (ii) the verification of desired
properties of the CARE formal model through the application of both exhaustive and statistical
model checking techniques within Uppaal ; (iii) the establishment of a direct connection
between the abstract formal model and the actual source code of CARE using traceability and
model-based testing. Abstract tests are generated from the Uppaal models and concretised
as JUnit tests for the CARE implementation. This connection helps to validate the chosen
level of abstraction.
Outline We start by discussing the related work in Section 2. In Section 3, we provide the
background on contract automata, their tool support, Uppaal , and the contract automata
runtime environment. The methodology used for modelling and analysing CARE is described
in Section 4. Section 5 contains the description of the models, whilst the verification is
described in Section 6. Model-based testing is addressed in Section 7. Finally, the conclusion
and future work are presented in Section 8.
2.Related work
Several applications of Uppaal to various case studies are available in the literature, including
land transport [ BtBL20 ], maritime transport [ SVW20 ], medical systems [ LRN+22], and

--- Page 3 ---
Vol. 22:1 FORMAL ANALYSIS OF CARE WITH UPPAAL 8:3
autonomous agents path planning [ GJP+22]. These case studies, along with the present
paper, adopt a model-based approach, wherein partial representations of the applications
are created using models.
A recent survey conducted on formal methods [ FtB22 ] reveals that numerous publications
lack a direct correlation between the concrete implementation and its abstract model. This
holds especially when the systems are only envisioned, yet to be realised, such as for
example the ERTMS L3 railway signalling system [ BtBC18 ,BtBFL22 ]. This is also the
case for industrial systems whose implementations are non-disclosed [ HMG+23]. In all these
cases, determining the accuracy of the model in relation to the actual system and assessing
the appropriateness of the chosen level of abstraction becomes challenging. Furthermore,
measuring the influence of the formal modelling and verification phase on the analyzed
system poses difficulties.
Indeed, a recent survey on formal methods in the transport domain [ FtB22 ] identifies
the need “to lower the degree of abstraction, by applying formal methods and tools to
development phases that are closer to software development”. This is also confirmed by a
recent survey on formal methods among 130 high-profile experts [ GtBvdP20 ], where nearly
half of them believe that the most likely future users of formal methods are “a small number
of skilled experts” as long as “skills like modelling, specification, abstraction are involved”.
In contrast to the previously mentioned literature, in this paper we present a bottom-
up formal analysis of an established open-source system that has already been devel-
oped [ BtB23a ]. The availability of the source code further enables us to establish a con-
nection between the abstract formal model and the actual source code. This capability
facilitates the precise identification of specific aspects of the real system that have been
abstracted in the formal model. Additionally, it allows us to validate the appropriateness of
the chosen level of abstraction.
Recently, Yggdrasil [ HLM+08], the offline model-based testing functionality of Uppaal ,
has been used in [ KLN+15] for testing an industrial real-time automotive turn indicator
system, and in [ HL23 ] for testing EIP-1559 Ethereum smart contracts. The usage of the
Uppaal suite, and more specifically Yggdrasil, in three industrial case studies (i.e., medical
devices, an automotive system and a pump manufacturing) is reviewed in [ LLN18 ]. Many
of the above applications of model-based testing using Uppaal concern industrial, non-
disclosed case studies. Therefore, only the models and abstract test cases are reported, whilst
concrete test cases and source code have not been made public. In comparison, CARE is an
open-source application. The concrete tests generated from the Uppaal models discussed
in this paper, as well as the system under testing, are available at [ Basb ]. To the best
of our knowledge, there are no other non-trivial open-source applications for which their
Uppaal formal model is openly accessible and directly connected to the source code through
traceability and model-based testing. This contribution assists in linking formal methods,
particularly Uppaal , to the software development process.
The contract automata approach is closer to [ KDPG18 ], where behavioural types are
expressed as finite state automata of Mungo , called typestates [ SY86 ,AD24 ]. Similarly to
CARE, inMungo finite state automata are used as behaviour assigned to Java classes (one
automaton per class), with transition labels corresponding to methods of the classes. A
tool to translate typestates into automata was presented in [ TMR20 ].CATApp is a graphical
front-end tool for designing contract automata [ Basa]. A tool similar to Mungo isJaTyC
(Java Typestate Checker) [BBG+22].

--- Page 4 ---
8:4 D. Basile Vol. 22:1
Other model-based verification approaches for service-oriented systems and distributed
middleware are surveyed in [ RG21 ,CHLR23 ]. In the literature, there exist many formalisms
for modelling and analysing the behaviour of services, ranging from behavioural type sys-
tems, including behavioural contracts [ CGP09 ,ABZ13 ,LP15 ] and session types [ BLMT08 ,
HYC08 ,DCd10 ,CDCP12 ,MNF13 ], to automata-based formalisms, including interface au-
tomata [ dAH01 ] and (timed) (I/O) automata [ LT89 ,AD94 ,DLL+10]. Foundational models
for service contracts and session types are surveyed in [ tBBG07 ,BCZ15 ,HLV+16]. Sessions
and session types [ BLMT08 ,HYC08 ,DCd10 ,CDCP12 ,MNF13 ] have been introduced to
reason over the behaviour of services in terms of their interactions. Compared to contract
automata, behavioural contracts and session types use process-algebraic frameworks, in-
stead of finite state automata. Indeed, contract automata are similar to other software
engineering-based formalisms such as I/O automata [LT89, AD94, DLL+10].
In the literature there are various attempts to model applications that, similarly to
CARE , communicates through TCP/IP sockets, also using Uppaal [WWH+22,FZL18 ,SF17 ,
WVHFM06 ]. In [ CGMZ21 ] the verification of the transport layer of a TCP/IP protocol
stack implementation in C is performed with a translation into SPARK, where contracts
are modelling the corresponding behaviour. A method to obtain SPIN formal models
from TCP/IP socket applications implemented in C is presented in [ dlCGMS09 ] where
the C application is embedded into a PROMELA model equipped with a formalisation
of the underlying TCP/IP socket API. Similarly, we provide a model of the underlying
socket communications but we also modelled aspects of the application that are targeted by
our analysis whilst unnecessary details are abstracted away. Another approach [ LSM+20]
presents an automatic translation from MAUDE specifications of distributed applications to
distributed MAUDE implementations using TCP/IP sockets, where the implementations are
formally proven to be in correspondence with the specifications. Our approach is bottom-up
and is based on Uppaal modelling of an already realised application.
As reported in [ Bou15 ], the question of qualification and validation of formal methods
tools is “absolutely crucial”. Other tools for behavioural contracts are present in the litera-
ture [ GR17 ,OPB+21,PMT24 ], but differently from CARE , many of these implementations
have not undergone a process of formal verification.
3.Background
In this section, we will provide background on contract automata, their software support,
and the Uppaal statistical model checker. The focus of this paper is on the formal analysis
of the runtime environment of contract automata. While we offer a concise overview of
contract automata to enhance comprehension of their runtime environment, they are not
the focus of our formal analysis.
3.1.Contract Automata. Contract automata are a dialect of finite-state automata mod-
elling services that exchange offers and requests. A contract automaton models either a single
service or a composition of interacting services. Labels of transitions of contract automata
are vectors of atomic elements called actions . Similarly, states of contract automata are
vectors of atomic elements called basic states. The length of the vectors is equal to the
number of services in the automaton (this number is called rank). A request (resp., offer)
action is prefixed by ?(resp., !). The idle action is denoted by -. Labels are constrained to
be one out of three types. In a request (resp., offer ) label a service performs a request (resp.,

--- Page 5 ---
Vol. 22:1 FORMAL ANALYSIS OF CARE WITH UPPAAL 8:5
[Init, Init] [Computing, Computing][?quit, !quit][?create, !create]
[?update, !update]
Figure 1. An example of contract automaton
offer) action and all other services are idle. In a match label one service performs a request
action, another service performs a matching offer action, and all other services are idle. For
example, the contract automaton in Figure 1 right has rank 2 and the label [?quit,!quit]
is a match where the request action ?quit is matched by the offer action !quit . Note the
difference between a request label, e.g. [?coffee, -] , and a request action, e.g. ?coffee .
In a composition of contracts various properties can be analysed [ BDF16 ]. For example,
the property of agreement requires to match all request actions, whereas offer actions
can remain unmatched. The synthesis of the orchestration in agreement produces a sub-
automaton of the composition where all services can match their requests with corresponding
offers to reach a final state. Thus, in the orchestration in agreement labels of transitions
are only matches or offers [ BtBP20 ]. The contract automaton in Figure 11 right is an
orchestration in agreement.
Contract automata and their functionalities are implemented in a software artefact,
called Contract Automata Library ( CATLib ) [BtB22 ]. With CATLib it is possible to specify,
compose, and synthesise specifications given as contract automata. Indeed, CARE uses the
facilities offered by CATLib for, among other things, composing contracts and synthesis-
ing orchestrations. This software artefact is a by-product of our scientific research on
behavioural contracts and implements results that have previously been formally specified
in several publications (cf., e.g., [ BtBD+20,BtBP20 ,BDF16 ]). Scalability features offered
byCATLib include a bounded on-the-fly state-space generation optimised with pruning of
redundant transitions and parallel streams computations [ BtB23b ,BtB24 ]. The software
is open source [ BtB22 ], it has been developed using principles of model-based software
engineering [ BtB21 ] and it has been extensively validated using various testing and analysis
tools to increase the confidence on the reliability of the library [BtB22].
3.2.Uppaal. Uppaal SMC [ DLL+15] is a variant of Uppaal [BDL+06], which is a well-
known toolbox for the verification of real-time systems. Uppaal models are stochastic timed
automata, in which non-determinism is replaced with probabilistic choices, and time delays
with probability distributions (uniform for bounded time and exponential for unbounded
time). These automata may communicate only via broadcast channels and shared variables.
In this paper, we will use both exhaustive and statistical model checking. Statistical Model
Checking (SMC) [ LLT+19] involves running a sufficient number of (probabilistic) simulations
of a system model to obtain statistical evidence (with a predefined level of statistical
confidence) of the quantitative properties to be checked. Monte Carlo estimation with
Chernoff-Hoeffding bound executes N=⌈(ln(2)−ln(α))/(2ε2)⌉simulations ρi,i∈1...N, to
provide the interval [ p′−ε, p′+ε] with confidence 1 −α. Here, p′= (#{ρi|ρi|=φ})/N, i.e.,
Pr(|p′−p| ≤ε)≥1−αwhere pis the unknown value of the formula φbeing estimated
statistically and εandαare the user-defined precision and confidence, respectively. Crucially,
the number of simulations used to estimate a formula is independent of the model’s size and

--- Page 6 ---
8:6 D. Basile Vol. 22:1
depends only on the parameters αandε. In practice the number of simulations required by
Uppaal to reach a specific confidence level is optimized and is thus lower than the above
theoretical bound. Uppaal supports template automata used to instantiate different copies
(in different experiments) of the same automaton, distinguishable by their parameters. The
selection of Uppaal as the chosen tool is influenced by several factors. These include its
extensive adoption by the community, expertise of the author, usability, primitive support
for real-time and stochastic modelling, probabilistic and non-deterministic choices, and
capabilities for statistical model checking, simulation, and model-based testing.
The off-line test case generator of Uppaal is called Yggdrasil, which is integrated since
version 4.1 into the Uppaal GUI as a tab. Starting from the Uppaal models, a suite of test
cases is created, aiming to cover all syntactic transitions in the model (i.e., edge coverage).
TheUppaal model can be decorated with test code, which can be generated from the
execution of a transition or at the entry to or exit from a location. Any language can be used
for the test code. An abstract test case is generated from a trace of execution of the Uppaal
model. During the execution of the trace, the test code of the model is dumped into a text
file, forming the abstract test case. When the system is composed of a set of automata, it is
possible to generate the test code from a single automaton or from the whole system. In this
latter case, the single generated abstract test case contains the interleaved test code from
all automata. The traces of execution can be generated as witnesses of some reachability
property defined using the Uppaal syntax. Random traces can also be executed to improve
test coverage. Parameters to be set include the depth of the trace, the type of search (i.e.,
breadth, depth), and options for the trace to be generated (i.e., fastest, shortest). The
generated abstract test cases need to be decorated and filled with the missing information
from the system under test to become concrete test cases. More details will be provided in
Section 7.
3.3.CARE. The Contract Automata Runtime Environment ( CARE) [BtB23a ] provides
facilities for pairing the contract automata specifications with actual implementations of
service-based applications. Note that our purpose is not to formally analyse the applications
created using CARE , but to formally analyse CARE itself. The formal verification of applications
developed using CARE is a consequence of the reliance of CARE on the formal guarantees
provided by contract automata [ BtB23a ], along with the formal verification of CARE as
an application. This paper addresses the latter aspect. This software is organised into
classes for the orchestrated services (cf. Figure 2) and classes for the orchestrator (cf.
Figure 3). The two core abstract Java classes are the RunnableOrchestration and the
RunnableOrchestratedContract .
Services. In Figure 2, RunnableOrchestratedContract is an abstract class that imple-
ments an executable wrapper responsible for pairing its contract automaton specification
(instance variable contract storing a contract automaton) with an implementation provided
as a Java class (instance variable service implementing the service), where each action of
the automaton contract is in correspondence with a method of the service class. The types
of the methods of a matching offer and request must also be in correspondence. Each time a
new orchestration involving the service is initiated, the RunnableOrchestratedContract
creates a new service. This service remains in a waiting state to receive commands from
the orchestrator, which then triggers the execution of the corresponding methods. In case
the orchestrator requires to perform an action not prescribed by its service contract, then a

--- Page 7 ---
Vol. 22:1 FORMAL ANALYSIS OF CARE WITH UPPAAL 8:7
CentralisedOrchestratedAction
DictatorialChoiceRunnableOrchestratedContract
DistributedOrchestratedAction
MajoritarianChoiceRunnableOrchestratedContract
«interface»
OrchestratedAction
+ 
getActionType(): String
+ 
invokeMethod(RunnableOrchestratedContract, Method, ObjectInputStream,
ObjectOutputStream, ModalTransition<String, Action, S
tate<String>, TypedCALabel>): void
Runn
able
RunnableOrchestratedContract
- 
act: OrchestratedAction {readOnly}
- 
contract: Automaton<String, Action, State<String>,
ModalTransition<String,Action,State<String>,TypedCALabel>> {readOnly}
- 
port: int {readOnly}
- 
service: Object {readOnly}
- 
timeout: int = 600000 {readOnly}
- 
check(ObjectInputStream, ObjectOutputStream): void
+ 
choice(State<String>, ObjectOutputStream, ObjectInputStream): void
+ 
getChoiceType(): String
+ 
getContract(): Automaton<String, Action, State<String>,
ModalTransition<String,Action,State<String>,TypedCALabel>>
+ 
getPort(): int
+ 
getService(): Object
+ 
run(): void
+ 
RunnableOrchestratedContract(Automaton<String, Action, State<String>,
ModalTransition<String,Action,State<String>,CALabel>>, int, Object, OrchestratedAction)
-act
Figure 2. The class diagram for the orchestrated services; the methods
of the derived classes are visible in their super-class/interface as abstract
methods (in italic)
ContractViolationException will be raised by the service. As demonstrated in [ BtB23a ],
this exception will never be raised if the orchestration in agreement is synthesised using the
algorithms of contract automata.
The realisation of an orchestration is abstracted away in contract automata. Crucially,
offers and requests of contracts are an abstraction of low-level messages sent between the
services and the orchestrator to realise them. CARE exploits the abstractions provided by Java
to allow its specialisation according to different implementation choices, using abstractions
of object-oriented design, as showed in Figure 2 and Figure 3.
Orchestrator. The class diagram of the orchestrator side in Figure 3. The abstract
class RunnableOrchestration implements a special service that reads the synthesised
orchestration (stored in the instance variable contract ) and orchestrates the services
(the instances of RunnableOrchestratedContract ) to realise the overall application. The
instance variables port and addresses contain the corresponding addresses and ports of
the services involved in the orchestration.
Choices and Actions. Two aspects to implement for both the orchestrator and the services
are choices and termination (through the abstract method choice ). Indeed, during the
execution of an orchestration, the selection of the transition to execute in the presence of
multiple enabled transitions is implemented through this abstract method. CARE is equipped
with default implementations, but can be extended (by implementing the relative interfaces
and abstract methods) to include other options, other than the default ones. Currently, a so-
called ‘dictatorial’ choice (i.e., an internal choice of the orchestrator, external for the services)
and a so-called ‘majoritarian’ choice (services vote and the majority wins) are two imple-
mented options. For the services, MajoritarianChoiceRunnableOrchestratedContract

--- Page 8 ---
8:8 D. Basile Vol. 22:1
CentralisedOrchestratorAction
DictatorialChoiceRunnableOrchestration
DistributedOrchestratorAction
MajoritarianChoiceRunnableOrchestration
OrchestratorAction
+ 
doAct
ion(RunnableOrchestration, ModalTransition<String, Action, State<String>, ? extends CALabel>,
AutoCloseableList<ObjectOutputStream>, AutoCloseableList<ObjectInputStream>): void
+ 
getActionType(): String
Runn
able
RunnableOrchestration
- 
act: OrchestratorAction {readOnly}
- 
addresses: List<String> {readOnly}
- 
contract: Automaton<Str
ing, Action, State<String>, ModalTransition<String,Action,State<String>,CALabel>>
{readOnly}
- 
currentState: State<String>
- 
ports: List<Integer> {readOnly}
- 
pred: Predicate<CALabel> {readOnly}
- 
checkCompatibility(): void
+ 
choice(AutoCloseableList<ObjectOutputStream>, AutoCloseableList<ObjectInputStream>): String
+ 
getAddresses(): List<String>
+ 
getChoiceType(): String
+ 
getContract(): Automaton<String, Action, State<String>,
ModalTransition<String,Action,State<String>,CALabel>>
+ 
getCurrentState(): State<String>
+ 
getPorts(): List<Integer>
+ 
isEmptyOrchestration(): boolean
+ 
run(): void
+ 
RunnableOrchestration(Automaton<String, Action,
State<String>,ModalTransition<String,Action,State<String>,Label<Action>>>, Predicate<CALabel>,
Automaton<String, Action, State<String>, ModalTransition<String,Action,State<String>,CALabel>>,
List<String>, List<Integer>, OrchestratorAction)
-act
Figure 3. The class diagram for the orchestrator; the methods of the derived
classes are visible in their super-class/interface as abstract methods (in italic)
and DictatorialChoiceRunnableOrchestratedContract are the two classes specialis-
ingRunnableOrchestratedContract according to how the choice is handled and imple-
menting the abstract methods, whilst MajoritarianChoiceRunnableOrchestration and
DictatorialChoiceRunnableOrchestration are specialising RunnableOrchestration .
CARE also provides default implementations for the low-level message exchanges. Cur-
rently, the two available options are the ‘centralised’ action, where the orchestrator acts
as a proxy, and the ‘distributed’ action, where two services matching their actions di-
rectly interact with each other once the orchestrator has made them aware of a matching
partner and its address/port. Accordingly, each RunnableOrchestratedContract has an
OrchestratedAction , and RunnableOrchestration has an OrchestratorAction (instance
variable act) used to implement the corresponding actions that can be either distributed or
centralised according to the current implementation.
Example 3.1. We discuss an example of interactions between two services and an orches-
trator. The example comprehends both the CentralisedAction andDistributedAction
implementations of CARE. The sequence of service invocations is displayed in Figure 4. In
this example, the orchestrator is executing a transition of the orchestration automaton that
is labelled with the match [?coffee,!coffee] , in which Alice is requesting a coffee and
Bobis offering a coffee . As stated above, the RunnableOrchestratedContract class of
both Alice andBobhas two instance variables ( contract andservice , resp.) containing
the contract automaton object and the implementation provided as a Java class. In this
example, the implementation class of Alice has a method Integer coffee(String arg)
that is paired with the corresponding request action ?coffee of her contract. Similarly, the

--- Page 9 ---
Vol. 22:1 FORMAL ANALYSIS OF CARE WITH UPPAAL 8:9
ror
ror
alice
alice
bob
bobcoffee
v1=alice.coffee(null)
coffee, v1
v2=bob.coffee(v1)
v2
alice.coffee(v2)
ror
ror
bob
bob
alice
alicecoffee
coffee
type=match
opens a fresh portport
address and port of bob
v1=alice.coffee(null)
v2=bob.coffee(v1)
alice.coffee(v2)ack
ack
Figure 4. The sequence diagrams depicting the interactions implementing
a centralised match action (on the left) and a distributed match action (on
the right)
implementation class of Bobhas a method String coffee(Integer arg) that is paired
with the corresponding offer action !coffee of his contract.
In both centralised and dictatorial configurations, the method coffee ofAlice is
invoked twice: firstly, passing no argument, it returns an Integer value (e.g., the amount of
sugar) that is passed (by the orchestrator ror) as an argument to the method coffee of
Bob, which in turn returns a String value that is eventually passed as an argument to the
method coffee ofAlice , thus fulfilling the coffee request.
In the CentralisedAction implementation, the orchestrator acts as a broker, forwarding
to the involved parties the various invocations and responses. In the DistributedAction
implementation, the orchestrator communicates the chosen action to both matching services,
and the offerer is also notified of a match (rather than an offer) action, so that it can open a
fresh port to interact with the requester, which is notified of the address and port of the offerer.
Upon successful termination of the interactions, each RunnableOrchestratedContract
updates its contract status, and the orchestrator proceeds with the next invocation according
to the overall orchestration contract, whose status is also updated. In Section 5 will discuss
how this kind of interaction is modelled.
4.Methodology
In this section, we describe both the methodology used for modelling the communica-
tions, abstracting away irrelevant details, and the adequacy of the model to the actual
implementation.

--- Page 10 ---
8:10 D. Basile Vol. 22:1
Figure 5. TheUppaal code used to model the TCP/IP socket communi-
cations
4.1.Modelling TCP/IP sockets communication. Java TCP/IP sockets communica-
tions are asynchronous with FIFO buffers [ Obj]. InUppaal , the interactions are via channel
synchronisation and global variables. Thus, TCP/IP sockets are solely employed in the
actual implementation and are not utilized by the automata of the model. Instead, in the
model each party communicates with the partner using two global arrays (one for sending
and one for receiving, respectively). Figure 5 shows the code used in the Uppaal models
(see Section 5) for modelling the TCP/IP socket communications.
The two global (FIFO) arrays in the model are named orc2services[N][queueSize]
andservices2orc[N][queueSize] (see Figure 5 left). These are used to model the TCP/IP
socket buffers, where Nis the number of services in the model and queueSize is the size of
the queue of the components. These arrays are only modified by functions for enqueueing
and dequeuing messages.
The local declarations of the two automata contain methods for sending and receiving
from the partners and checking their queues of messages. Both automata declare a method
enqueue for sending to the partner a message. Messages are modeled as global integer
constants, depicted in Figure 5 left. Indeed, in this model the actual payload of each
communication is abstracted away. For example, in Figure 3 left, the constants REQUEST and
OFFER abstract payloads that could be any class instantiated by the user, comprehending
newly created Java classes (see Section 4.2). The enqueue method of the services only
takes as parameter the signal idesigto send (see Figure 5 center). The identifier of the
service idis only needed on the orchestrator side to identify the partner (there is only one
orchestrator thus no identifier is needed for it, see Figure 5 right). Similarly, both automata
have a method dequeue for consuming messages from their respective arrays.
The default mode for Java TCP/IP sockets is blocking [Jav], meaning that the sender
blocks when the buffer of the receiver is full, and waits until there is enough space to proceed.
Accordingly, a transition having a send in its effect will check in its guard whether there
is enough space left in the array of the partner by calling either the method available
(returning the space left) or isFull . Similarly, in Java TCP/IP sockets the read operation
isblocking . Accordingly, before reading it is always checked whether the array is not empty
with the method !isEmpty . When the array is empty the automaton blocks until a message
is received.

--- Page 11 ---
Vol. 22:1 FORMAL ANALYSIS OF CARE WITH UPPAAL 8:11
Source locations of sending and receiving transitions are neither committed nor urgent.
In fact, an enabled committed transition (i.e., whose source location is committed, denoted
with C) must be executed before any other non-committed transition in the network. Instead,
an urgent transition must be executed without any delay. If a sending or receiving transition
were to be either committed or urgent, it could introduce the possibility of false positive
deadlocks. This scenario arises when, for example, the receiver has a full buffer (i.e., array)
and is prepared to free it, but the sender transition is enabled and committed. Similarly,
this false positive can occur when the buffer is full, the send transition is urgent but the
receive operation is not urgent, or vice versa, when the buffer is empty, the read transition
is urgent, and the send operation is not urgent.
Hence, the operations of writing to and reading from a buffer are represented using
stochastic delays, specifically following an exponential distribution. Two rates are employed
to capture the delay associated with reading and writing. These exponential delays (variables
write andread ) are present in all non-committed and non-final locations of both automata
in Figure 9 and Figure 10 (modelling the orchestrator and the services, cf. Section 5).
However, the presence of unbounded delays introduces scenarios where the receiver (resp.,
sender) may wait indefinitely without executing its read (resp., write) transition, even when
it is enabled. These scenarios would invalidate the exhaustive model checking of reachability
properties that are satisfied by the actual system, leading to false positives. In the real
implementation, Java TCP/IP sockets offer a timeout mechanism wherein an exception
is thrown if no message exchange occurs within a specified time frame. All sockets used
byCARE have this timeout. Consequently, a dedicated automaton called SocketTimeout
is replicated for each service to model the timeout operation (see Figure 11 left). Each
send or receive operation in every socket resets the SocketTimeout clock c. If no reset
operation is received within a certain duration (variable timeout ),SocketTimeout enters a
location called Timeout and broadcasts the signal fail, indicating that an exception has
been thrown. All automata have a transition from every location (except for Terminated )
to a location Timeout that is reached upon receiving the signal fail . For readability, these
Timeout locations and all their incoming fail transitions are not shown in Figure 9 and
Figure 10.
4.2.Abstractions. We have discussed the modelling of Java TCP/IP socket communica-
tions. We now discuss other aspects that have been abstracted away in the model. We note
that the abstracted aspects are irrelevant for the analysis discussed in Section 6. We remark
that the paper objective is to verify the interactions of the CARE middleware itself. Therefore,
the underlying application that is executed by CARE is abstracted away. Therefore, in the
model, the underlying orchestration automaton is abstracted together with the contracts of
the services. Thus, all conditionals that are dependent from the underlying orchestration
are abstracted as probabilistic choices. We assume that the orchestration has been correctly
synthesised from the services contracts. This allows us to verify the interactions for any
possible valid orchestration. If a specific orchestration would be modelled, then we would
lose such generality. In particular, the payloads of the communications (e.g., which specific
action, which choices) are abstracted. The conditions used to decide whether to perform a
choice, an action or to stop are also abstracted away. The only modelled condition is that no
two consecutive choices are allowed (i.e., after choosing, the chosen step must be performed).
When executing a transition, the conditions used to check whether the label of the transition
is an offer or a match are abstracted away in the model. Moreover, the identifiers of the

--- Page 12 ---
8:12 D. Basile Vol. 22:1
services involved in performing a choice or an action (which are concretely extracted from
the labels of the transitions) are also chosen non-deterministically. Indeed, all services are
distinguished replicas of the same automaton. Finally, we model a single orchestration. In
fact, when multiple orchestrations are executed, they operate independently of each other
and can be verified individually.
As stated above, the underlying application executed by CARE is abstracted away.
Therefore, properties related to the underlying application are not verifiable under the
current abstraction. An example of property not verifiable under the current abstraction
could be to show that the returned payload of an action (e.g., an Integer object) is always
non-negative, by reasoning on the code of the corresponding method returning the value.
This kind of properties cannot be verified under the current abstraction. In this case, a
theorem prover like KeY [ABB+16] would be more suited than Uppaal .
4.3.Traceability. This paper adopts a lightweight approach to integrate the formal model
with the concrete implementation, using the facilities provided by Uppaal . Traceability and
model-based testing have been used to ascertain the adequacy of the model with respect to
the implementation. Traceability involves connecting the items of the abstract model with
the lines of source code that are being abstractly represented. As stated previously, some
aspects of the application are abstracted away. Therefore, only the relevant source code lines
are connected with the abstract model. In [ Basb ] each transition of the model is traced back
to the corresponding source code instructions using comments in the model. Traceability
information is related to a specific version of the source code1. For example, Figure 6 shows
a portion of the automaton modelling the RunnableOrchestratedContract (discussed in
details in the next section). Specifically, from state Ready a transition is executed which is
traced back to line 98 of the class RunnableOrchestratedContract , also showed in Figure 6.
Indeed, at line 98 the first read operation from the ObjectInputStream , reading from the
TCP/IP socket, is performed by the service. This is abstracted in the model by the operation
dequeue() of the automaton.
Testing is used to show the adherence of the model to the actual implementation, and
will be discussed in Section 7.
Remark. We highlight the advantages of employing graphical diagrams. When it comes to
the implementation phase, developers typically work with the source code, which currently
consists of 770 lines of code in the case of CARE. On the other hand, during the modelling
phase with Uppaal , designers graphically edit automata. The automata depicted in Figure 9
and Figure 10 succinctly and accurately specify the interaction logic of CARE .
5.Formal model
This section describes the formal model of CARE. All models used in this paper together
with the evaluated formulas are available in [ Basb ]. The network of automata is composed
of a RunnableOrchestration automaton modelling the orchestrator, and each service is
modeled by two automata: RunnableOrchestratedContract andSocketTimeout . Figure 7
shows the system declarations of the model. In particular, there is a single instance of
RunnableOrchestration whilst there are Ninstance of RunnableOrchestratedContract
and SocketTimeout . Indeed, both RunnableOrchestratedContract and SocketTimeout
1https://github.com/contractautomataproject/CARE/releases/tag/v1.0.1

--- Page 13 ---
Vol. 22:1 FORMAL ANALYSIS OF CARE WITH UPPAAL 8:13
Figure 6. A fragment of the RunnableOrchestratedContract automaton
equipped with traceability information (left) and a fragment of the class
RunnableOrchestratedContract.java (right). The transition from state
Ready is traced back to line 98 of the source code of the respective class.
Figure 7. A snapshot of the Uppaal model showing the system declarations
templates take as parameter idt, which is a special global declaration of Uppaal (namely,
typedef int[0,N-1] id t) to instruct the model to produce Nreplicas of these template,
where as stated above Nis also a global constant of the model.
Figure 9 displays the template automaton for the RunnableOrchestration (i.e., the
orchestrator), while the template automaton for the RunnableOrchestratedContract (i.e.,
the service) has as parameter the idof the service (of type idt) and is depicted in Figure 10.
Recall that, for readability, the Timeout location is not displayed (see Section 4.1). The
behaviour according to the given configuration of action and choice is modelled inside each
automaton. We anticipate that we will use variants of these two automata in Section 6, in
order to perform different analyses. In particular, in Figure 9 the configurations of choice and
action (for both the services and the orchestrator) are instantiated non-deterministically by

--- Page 14 ---
8:14 D. Basile Vol. 22:1
Figure 8. A simplified schema of the RunnableOrchestration automaton
the transition outgoing the initial state (see Section 5.1). Note that, in this case, the variables
choice andaction are not parameters of the templates. Another version of the model is also
available, where the configuration options, instead of being selected non-deterministically, are
fixed as parameters of the templates. Note that in Uppaal templates cannot be primitively
instantiated non-deterministically. The repository [ Basb ] contains the model equipped with
traceability information, i.e., each transition of the model has a comment describing the class
and the lines of the source code that correspond to the specific behaviour of the transition.
The models used for generating tests, together with the generated tests, are also available
in [Basb].
TheUppaal model is composed of a list of global declarations, the two automata (with
their local declarations) and the system set-up (i.e., the instantiation of the automata).
Global declarations include the number of services N, the size of the buffers, the timeout
threshold, the rates of the exponential distributions, two variables action and choice
storing the corresponding configuration for all automata, and the communication buffers.
Constants are also defined globally and their identifiers are in capital letters. Some names of
locations are displayed in the automata for readability. Labels of transitions contain guards
and effects and in a few cases also probabilistic selections.
5.1.Description of the automata. Before discussing the two automata, we describe a
simplified template, depicted in Figure 8.

--- Page 15 ---
Vol. 22:1 FORMAL ANALYSIS OF CARE WITH UPPAAL 8:15
5.1.1. Simplified template. Note that Figure 8 is not a Uppaal automaton. The initial state
is depicted with a double circle. The first activity consists in checking whether all services
and the orchestrator have the same configuration ( CheckCompability ). If this check is
successful, the orchestration starts. From the location Start , the orchestrator internally
decides (based on the orchestration) whether to perform a choice or an action. The choice
of termination is modelled as a third alternative. Probability weights are used to model the
probability of performing a choice, an action or to terminate ( pchoice ,pstop ,paction ).
As stated previously, after a choice is completed, the orchestrator moves to a state where
only an action or termination can be chosen. After an action is completed, the orchestrator
returns to the Start location. The choice can be either dictatorial or majoritarian, according
to the assigned configuration. In the majoritarian choice, the orchestrator interacts with the
services to collect their choice. Similarly, the configuration of action can be either centralised
or distributed. In both cases, an offer label or a match label will be executed. As stated in
Section 3, in a distributed match the orchestrator makes the two services aware of each other
so that they can interact and execute the match. In case of termination, the orchestrator
sends the termination message to all services and terminates.
5.1.2. Detailed description. We now briefly describe Figure 9 and Figure 10. In the first
transition of the orchestrator, one of four options encoding the combinations of choice
and action is selected non-deterministically. The function initialize(conf) instantiates
accordingly the choice andaction global variables such that all have the same configuration,
and also initialises the communication buffers.
From the location CheckCompatibility of the orchestrator a loop is executed to com-
municate with all services to check if all have the same configuration. The orchestrator
sends the message ORCCHECK and its configuration (action and choice). If a service has the
same configuration an ACKis sent, or an ERROR message otherwise. In case of no errors, the
orchestration starts. As stated above, from the location Start the orchestrator internally
decides whether to perform a choice, an action or terminate.
In the case of termination, the orchestrator sends to all services an ORCSTOP message
and the orchestration terminates.
Choice. In the case of a choice, firstly all services receive the message ORCCHOICE . If the
choice is dictatorial, the orchestrator decides autonomously, and no further interactions are
necessary. Otherwise, in the case of a majoritarian choice, the services involved in the choice
are selected non-deterministically, and a message ORCCHOICE is sent to them. Concretely,
the involved services are those who perform an action in one of the outgoing transitions
from the current state of the orchestration. The services that are not involved will receive
aSKIP message. The involved services then receive from the orchestrator the available
choices (i.e., the forward star of the current state). These concrete choices are abstracted
by the constant CHOICES . Each involved service now replies with its choice, abstracted as a
message SERVICE CHOICE . After all involved services have voted, the orchestrator will decide
accordingly.
Action. In case of an action, the orchestration behaves differently depending on whether
the configuration is centralised or distributed. In both cases, a probabilistic choice is made
on whether the transition is an offer or a match. After that, the orchestrator picks non-
deterministically an offerer and a requester (only in the case of a match transition) with

--- Page 16 ---
8:16 D. Basile Vol. 22:1
Figure 9. The RunnableOrchestration Uppaal template
consecutive identifiers (recall that their IDs are immaterial). In the case of a centralised offer
action, the offerer receives from the orchestrator the invocation of the action, abstracted by
the constant ACTION . At this point the offerer is still not aware of whether it is involved in
an offer or a match transition. The reception of the NOPAYLOAD message (i.e., there is no
payload from the requester) disambiguates the offerer who replies with a payload abstracted
here by the constant OFFER .
In a centralised match the requester receives the action invocation, abstracted by the
constant ACTION , and a SKIP command (i.e., the offer has not yet been generated). Note that
in the implementation the service is informed of being an offerer or a requester upon receiving
the action. Since the concrete action is abstracted, in the model this disambiguation occurs
when receiving either the message SKIP (i.e., a requester) or the messages NOPAYLOAD (i.e.,
an offerer in an offer transition) or REQUEST (i.e., an offerer in a match transition). The
requester replies with the message REQUEST (the concrete payload is abstracted away) that is
forwarded by the orchestrator to the offerer, who receives in sequence the messages ACTION
and REQUEST . Similarly to the previous case, the offerer sends to the orchestrator its offer
payload (now based on the payload of the requester), abstracted again by the constant
OFFER .

--- Page 17 ---
Vol. 22:1 FORMAL ANALYSIS OF CARE WITH UPPAAL 8:17
Figure 10. The RunnableOrchestratedContract Uppaal template
Concerning the distributed configuration, in case of an offer or match first the offerer
receives the ACTION command from the orchestrator. In case of an offer, a TYPEOFFER
message is received by the offerer followed by a NOPAYLOAD message. The offerer replies with
anOFFER message. In case of a distributed match, the ACTION message is also sent to the
requester and the TYPEMATCH message is sent to the offerer. The offerer opens a fresh port and
communicates this port (abstracted by the constant PORT ) to the orchestrator. The offerer
waits for a connection from the requester. The orchestrator communicates to the requester
(who was waiting after receiving the ACTION command) the address (constant ADDRESS ) and
PORT of the offerer. Now the requester and the offerer can interact without the orchestrator.
The interactions between any two services in the orchestration all use two (one-position)
buffers, implemented by the variables requester2offerer andofferer2requester . Indeed,
it is never the case that some service interferes in a match in which it is not involved, and
using different buffers for each pair of services would unnecessarily increase the state space.

--- Page 18 ---
8:18 D. Basile Vol. 22:1
Initially, the requester sends its REQUEST payload to the offerer. The offerer replies to the
requester with its payload OFFER (based on the request) and reaches location Done. The
requester receives the payload and sends an ACKto the offerer and the orchestrator (who
both terminate the execution of the match transition and returns to the Start andReady
state, respectively).
6.Analysis
We now describe the analyses we performed on the model. The modelling activity led to
some issues in both the implementation and the model, which were all fixed (we remark
that an already existing application was modelled). Other formal checks on the model were
performed to ensure the properties described in this section (e.g., absence of deadlocks,
absence of orphan messages). We have used Uppaal version 4.1.26-1, released in February
2022. Note that a more recent version of Uppaal is available, which integrates the previously
separate tool Uppaal Stratego. We opted to continue using the version we initially started
working with, since the capabilities of Uppaal Stratego are not used in this paper.
6.1.Validation through modelling. The first validation was performed during the
modelling phase. Indeed, formal modelling requires an accurate analysis and review of
the source code. Interactive simulation is used during modelling to animate and analyse
the portion of the model designed so far, similarly to how the source code is debugged
interactively (e.g., by choosing the next step). We note that in many model-based engineering
tools, behavioural models (e.g., state charts) are validated by only relying on graphical
interactive simulations [ BMF23 ]. Issues can be detected during this phase in particular if
the source code has not been thoroughly tested, as was the case for CARE .
We report an issue detected in the source code during the modelling of the automaton in
Figure 9, and more specifically during the modelling of the loop in which the orchestrator is
reading the SERVICE CHOICE messages sent by the involved services. In the implementation,
the orchestrator was waiting for a choice from all services, also comprehending those who
received a SKIP message. This means that a deadlock could occur in case there was a service
not involved in a choice. Initially, this issue was undetected because the tests had all services
involved in all choices. It was fixed thanks to the activity described in this paper.
On a side note, thorough testing is generally more time-consuming than designing a
formal model similar to the one in this paper. This is a further benefit derived from the usage
of formal methods. For example, the library implementing contract automata operations
(CATLib ) [BtB22 ] has been tested up to 100% coverage of all lines and branches, also using
mutation testing [ BtB22 ]. In CATLib , the lines of code of the tests are more than three
times those of its source code [ BtB22 ]. A similar effort for CARE is more demanding than
the one needed for designing the models in Figures 9 and 10. Uppaal has been used to
automatically generate tests from the formal model.
6.2.Formal Verification. We discuss the formal verification performed on the model,
encompassing both exhaustive and statistical model checking. In the initial phase, we
employ a model variant that guarantees consistent configurations between the services and
the orchestrator. In this variant, the selection of the choice and action configuration is
performed non-deterministically by the first transition of RunnableOrchestration (variable
conf , see Figure 9), and it is always consistent. Subsequently, we move to another variant

--- Page 19 ---
Vol. 22:1 FORMAL ANALYSIS OF CARE WITH UPPAAL 8:19
Task Property Parameters’ tuning Interval Confidence
Buffer size Probability of filling a buffer queueSize set to 5 [0,0.00996915] 0.95
Timeout Probability of timeout timeout set to 15 [0,0.00996915] 0.95
Delays Probability of termination write andread set to 5 [0.990031 ,1] 0.95
Orphan messages Probability of terminating with non-
empty buffers- [0,0.00999882] 0.995
Interference Probability of a service interfering on
a match between two other services- [0,0.00999882] 0.995
Table 1. A summary of the properties analysed with statistical model
checking
Task Property Conf. Time Memory State
space
TerminationIf orchestrator terminates then all
terminate or a timeout occursc1 3 m. 1.5 GB 52 M st.
c2 30 m. 12 GB 426 M st.
DeadlocksAbsence of deadlocks (no enabled
transitions, timeout, or termination)c1 3 m. 1.5 GB 25 M st.
c2 40 m. 13 GB 189 M st.
Orphan MessagesUpon termination, no messages left
in buffersc1 2 m. 1.5 GB 25 M st.
c2 27 m. 12.5 GB 189 M st.
Dummy ExecutionNo dummy execution where no
interaction occursc1 3 sec. 1.4 GB 24 st.
c2 24 s. 10 GB 28 st.
Compatibility Check Mismatch leads to Error location Special
config.1 ms. 49 MB 79 st.
Table 2. A summary of the properties analysed with exhaustive model
checking that are satisfied by the model
where the configuration of choice andaction are treated as parameters. In this case, we
formally prove that when configurations do not match, an error state is reached.
Performances. Statistical model checking has been used to scale to larger systems, and
the verification has been performed in a few seconds on a standard laptop. Conversely,
exhaustive model checking necessitated more resources and has been limited to smaller
parameter setup generating hundreds of millions of states (see below). In this case, the
verification has been performed on a machine with Intel(R) Core(TM) i9-9900K CPU @
3.60 GHz equipped with 32 GB of RAM. Uppaal has been configured for maximising the
state space optimisation and reusing the generated state space. Logs of the experiments
are available in [ Basb ]. The summaries of the analysis performed with statistical (resp.,
exhaustive) model checking are in Table 1 (resp., Table 2).
6.3.Parameters Tuning. The verification process involves employing specific parameter
setup within the model. This encompasses various aspects, such as setting the delays in
reading and writing, setting socket timeout thresholds, adjusting buffer sizes, assigning
probability weights, and determining the number of services involved (i.e., the instantiations
of the RunnableOrchestratedContract template). For deriving the desired set-up of

--- Page 20 ---
8:20 D. Basile Vol. 22:1
[Init, Init] [Computing, Computing][?quit, !quit][?create, !create]
[?update, !update]
Figure 11. On the left side, the SocketTimeout template automaton (one
such automaton is istantiated for each service). On the right side, the orches-
tration automaton taken from the composition service example in [BtB23a]
parameters, we employ statistical model checking. If not stated otherwise, the parameters α
andεof the statistical model checker are set to 0 .05 and 0 .005, respectively (see Section 3).
In this section, when reporting the evaluation of a probabilistic formula, instead of
reporting an interval containing zero (e.g., [0 ,0.00996915]), sometimes, for conciseness, we
will say that the property has a probability near zero. To be more precise, we mean that all
runs do not satisfy the property, thus the probability lies within the interval [0 ,0 +ε] with
probability 1 −α. We remind readers that, unlike probabilistic model checking, in statistical
model checking, the unknown probability value is estimated to lie within an interval with a
given confidence.
It is crucial to note that we do not employ statistical model checking to determine values
(such as buffers size) for use in the concrete implementation. Instead, these quantified values
are used solely within the model. For instance, in the actual implementation, the size of
Java TCP/IP socket buffers is fixed (more below). Our objective is to employ parameter
setup that ensure realistic modelling and improve the performances of the exhaustive model
checking. Realistic modelling entails accurately representing the behaviour of the real system,
by reducing the probability of filling the buffers, timeouts, or excessive communication delays.
Failure to maintain these conditions could potentially invalidate the results of the formal
verification. Improving performances, on the other hand, entails reducing the state space of
the model.
Probabilities weights. The values of the probabilities weights pstop ,pchoice ,pnochoice , and
paction (see Figure 9) can be tuned based on average values extracted from the orchestrations
subject of the analysis. Indeed, as stated in Section 4, the underlying orchestration automaton
is abstracted away. Note that, e.g., in location Start the probability of performing a choice
ispchoice
pchoice +pnochoice(pchoice is the probability weight of performing a choice and pnochoice
is the probability weight of not performing a choice). For example, the orchestration in
Figure 11 (right) can be modelled by tuning the probabilities to pstop=25 ,pchoice=1 ,
pnochoice=0 , and paction=75 .
For readability, in the reminder of this section we will use in the formulae the ab-
breviations rorfor the instantiation of the RunnableOrchestration template (i.e., the
orchestrator), and ROC(i) for the i-th instantiation of the RunnableOrchestratedContract
template (i.e., a service).
Buffer size. Next, we address the buffer size (denoted as variable queueSize ). It is important
to note that the buffers in the model are represented by global arrays utilized by the automata
for enqueuing and dequeuing values. These global arrays serve as models of the actual buffers
found in Java TCP/IP sockets, where the default size is typically 8 KB. Our objective is to
prevent unnecessary growth in the model’s state space while ensuring a low probability of
the buffers filling up, similar to the behaviour observed in the real application. The formula:

--- Page 21 ---
Vol. 22:1 FORMAL ANALYSIS OF CARE WITH UPPAAL 8:21
E[<=500; 10000](max: sum(i:int[0,N-1]) (sum(j:int[0,queueSize-1])(orc2services[i][j]!=nil)))
computes, using 10000 simulations of 500 time units, the expected maximum number of
non-empty positions of the buffers used by the orchestrator to send messages to the services
(called orc2services ). For all statistical evaluations, we set the number of services to 10.
With buffer size set to 10, this formula evaluates to 4 .5±0.019. This indicates that, on
average, the maximum number of utilized buffer positions is between 4 and 5. Consequently,
in order to reduce the state space, it is safe to decrease the value of queueSize to less than
10 for the exhaustive model checking phase. This observation is further supported by the
following formula:
Pr[<=500] (<>(exists (i:id t) ror.isFull(i)))
which measures the probability that, within 500 time units, one of the orc2services[i]
arrays becomes full ( roris the orchestrator automaton). In three separate experiments where
queueSize was varied between 3, 4, and 5, this formula yielded the respective evaluation
intervals of [0 .990031 ,1], [0.00632077 ,0.0163207] (with α=0.005), and [0 ,0.00996915]. Based
on these results, if not stated otherwise, queueSize is set to 5 for the subsequent experiments.
Delays and timeout. Next, we consider the real-time behaviour of the model and focus on
determining appropriate values for the rates write and read, which represent the delays
in writing to and reading from a buffer, respectively. The average message delay in Java
TCP/IP sockets is affected by multiple factors, such as network conditions and server load.
Delays can be sampled using tools like tcpdump , and the rate can be estimated by calculating
the inverse of the sample mean. Additionally, we consider the variable timeout , which
represents the timeout threshold. Our aim is to achieve three objectives. First, we strive
to maintain a low probability of encountering timeouts. Second, we seek to ensure a high
probability of terminating within a specific timeframe, which we have set to be 500 time
units, corresponding to the duration used in our experimental setup. Third, we aim to keep
the timeout threshold at a lower value in order to decrease the state space and facilitate
model checking.
The formula:
Pr[<=500] (<> ror.Timeout)
measures the likelihood of one or more service sockets experiencing a timeout (recall that
in this case a failure signal is broadcasted and all automata enter their respective Timeout
location). The probability of all services and the orchestrator successfully concluding their
operations is evaluated with the formula:
Pr[<=500](<>ror.Terminated&&(forall (i:id t) ROC(i).Terminated))
(ROCis used as an abbreviation of RunnableOrchestratedContract ). In different experi-
ments where we varied the values of the pair (rate,timeout), specifically in (5 ,14), (4 ,15),
(5,15), respectively, the first formula (timeout probability) yielded the respective evaluation in-
tervals [3 .06006 e−06,0.00999494] (with α=0.005), [0 .0433422 ,0.053341], and [0 ,0.00996915],
while the second formula (probability of termination) yielded [0 .990005 ,0.999997] (with
α= 0.005), [0 .948625 ,0.958625] (with α= 0.005), and [0 .990031 ,1]. Therefore, to fulfill
the aforementioned three objectives, we have set the values of write andread to 5, while
the value of timeout has been set to 15 for the subsequent experiments. Indeed, in the
experiments we just mentioned, the value (5,15) for the pair (rate,timeout) yields the best
values for both the probability of experiencing timeout and the probability of reaching
termination.

--- Page 22 ---
8:22 D. Basile Vol. 22:1
Concerning the instances of the templates, in all experiments there is one instance
of the orchestrator template and either 4 or 5 instances of the service template. For the
exhaustive model checking phase, we used two small parameter setup of (number of services,
buffers size). The first is c1=(4,5), the second is c2=(5,3). In fact, the parameter setup
(5,4) remained inconclusive in the experiments due to the need for generating billions of
states and the inadequate memory capacity of the utilized machine. The verification of
larger parameter setup necessitates either relying exclusively on statistical model checking
or employing more powerful machines.
6.4.Verification. Once the model’s parameter setup is determined, our next step involves
verifying additional formal properties.
Termination. We have already assessed the probability of non-termination and found it
to be nearly zero. However, it may be worthwhile to conduct an exhaustive verification
specifically for this property. The property that in all executions eventually all services and
the orchestrator terminate is not valid. Indeed, as described in Section 4, the orchestration
contract automaton is abstracted away and at each iteration, a choice is performed to decide
whether to terminate or not. Hence, there exists an execution in which the orchestration
never terminates. A milder property does hold:
ror.Stop-->((ror.Terminated&&(forall(i:id t)ROC(i).Terminated))||
(exists(i:id t)SocketTimeout(i).Timeout))
i.e., if the orchestrator starts to terminate then eventually all services and the orchestrator
terminate. The formula p-->q is a shortcut for A[](p imply A<>q) . Thus, this formula states that
for all executions and for all states either the orchestrator is not in the location ror.Stop or
all executions passing through that location will eventually lead to a state where all services
and the orchestrator have terminated or a timeout failure is experienced. The formula holds
in both parameter setup c1 and c2. The first (resp. second) parameter setup required
roughly 3 (resp. 30) minutes, 1.5 (resp. 12) Giga of memory, and explored 52 (resp. 426)
million states.
Absence of deadlocks. The likelihood of non-termination being very low also implies an
almost negligible probability of encountering deadlocks. While it may be of interest to
exhaustively prove the absence of deadlocks, the previous formula is insufficient for this
purpose. Hence, to prove that there is no deadlock, we perform exhaustive model checking
of the formula:
A[](not deadlock || (exists(i:id t) SocketTimeout(i).Timeout) ||
(ror.Terminated && (forall (i:id t) ROC(i).Terminated)))
The formula states that for all executions and for all states of the composed system, either
there is always at least one enabled transition or either a timeout failure has been experienced
or all services and the orchestrator are in the Terminated location. In the formula, not
deadlock is a special predicate provided by Uppaal . As expected, this property is satisfied
in both parameter setup. The first (resp. second) parameter setup required roughly 3
(resp. 40) minutes, 1.5 (resp. 13) Giga of memory, and explored 25 (resp. 189) million
states. This also proves that in a correct configuration (of action and choice) the Error
location is never reached, because this would result in a deadlock and the above property
would not be satisfied. This property is also satisfied when the size of the buffers is 3.
However, if we further reduce the size, then a deadlock occurs. This is because from location
CheckCompatibility the orchestrator requires to insert three messages in the buffer of

--- Page 23 ---
Vol. 22:1 FORMAL ANALYSIS OF CARE WITH UPPAAL 8:23
the receiver in one step. By dividing these three send operations in three non-committed
transitions it is possible to further reduce the buffer size.
We report a modelling issue detected during model checking the above formula. In an
earlier version, it was assumed that the socket mode was non-blocking (i.e., sending to a
recipient with a full buffer would cause an error). This was modelled by making committed
(C) all source states of transitions with sending operations. In this way, if the buffer of the
receiver would not have enough free space then an attempt to send to the receiver would
cause a deadlock. In fact, in this earlier version of the model the above formula (absence of
deadlocks) was not satisfied, for any possible size of the buffer. The counterexample trace
of the model checker helped to understand and eventually fix this issue. Basically, in the
model configured with a majoritarian choice there exists a loop in which the orchestrator
alternates choices and actions, and enqueues a sequence of ORCCHOICE andSKIP messages
to a service that never consumes them and is never involved in neither choices nor actions,
thus eventually filling its buffer and deadlocking. A similar issue also exists in the case of a
dictatorial choice.
Note that this kind of problems are hard to detect without model checking. Indeed,
the counterexample trace was generated automatically, and the counterexample trace is
composed of hundreds of steps. Without model checking this would require to manually
execute each step of this trace, and the longer the trace the less chance to discover it. After
we detected this issue, we analysed the underlying Java TCP/IP socket semantics [ Jav]
and fixed the model as described in Section 4 (i.e., by modelling these sockets with default
blocking mode). Another fix could be to include an ack after the reception of a SKIP message
(this would however require to modify also the implementation).
Absence of orphan messages. We now prove that upon termination of an orchestration no
messages are left in any buffer, i.e., all messages are consumed. To expedite the verification
process, we begin by conducting statistical model checking of the following property:
Pr[<=500](<>!allEmpty()&&ror.Terminated&&(forall(i:id t)ROC(i).Terminated))
this property quantifies the probability of termination with at least one message remaining
in any buffer. To verify whether all buffers are empty, we utilize the predicate allEmpty() .
As expected, the probability is found to be nearly zero. We proceed with an exhaustive
verification by employing the property:
A[]((ror.Terminated && (forall (i:id t) ROC(i).Terminated)) imply allEmpty())
the above formula can be read as follows: in all states of all executions either all buffers are
empty or someone has not terminated yet. The above property is valid in both parameter
setup, as expected. The first (resp. second) parameter setup required roughly 2 (resp. 27)
minutes, 1.5 (resp. 12.5) Giga of memory, and explored 25 (resp. 189) million states. It
is also possible to verify that there is no dummy execution in which the services and the
orchestrator never interact (and thus all buffers are trivially empty). This can be verified
with the formula:
E[] (allEmpty() && !ror.Timeout)
that, as stated above, checks if there exists an execution where all states have empty buffers
(excluding the dummy execution scenario in which the timeout occurs at the beginning).
As expected, this property is not valid in the model, for both parameter setup. The first
(resp. second) parameter setup required roughly 3 (resp. 24) seconds, 1.4 (resp. 10) Giga of
memory, and explored 24 (resp. 28) states.

--- Page 24 ---
8:24 D. Basile Vol. 22:1
No interference. When discussing the distributed match action in Section 5, we stated that
it is never the case that some service interferes in a match in which it is not involved. This
guarantees that it is safe to use two one-position buffers for all communications between any
two services involved in a match. To verify this, we perform statistical model checking of
the following formula:
Pr[<=500](<>exists(i:id t)(i<N-1&&(ROC(i).d1==TYPEMATCH||ROC(i).d1==ADDRESS||ROC(i).d1==PORT))
&&((ROC(i+1).d1==TYPEMATCH||ROC(i+1).d1==ADDRESS||ROC(i+1).d1==PORT))&&
(exists(j:id t)(j!=i&&j!=i+1&&(ROC(j).d1==TYPEMATCH||ROC(j).d1==ADDRESS||ROC(j).d1==PORT))))
the formula measures the probability of reaching a state where one service (index j) is
interfering on a match between two other services (indexes iandi+1). We recall that in the
model two matching services have consecutive indexes. We detect a service to be involved in
a distributed match when its temporary variable d1has one of the three values ( TYPEMATCH ,
ADDRESS ,PORT ). The probability is found to be nearly zero.
We also include in the repository [ Basb ] a version of the model where each pair of
services has its own buffers. All results in this section also hold in that model.
Compatibility check. Next, we formally prove that if some service is not matching the
configuration of the orchestrator, then the orchestration will not start and an Error location
will always eventually be reached. Indeed, the possibility of mismatching configurations
is allowed in the real system. However, in the model discussed in Section 5 this scenario
is not possible because, by construction, all services and the orchestrator share the same
configuration. The configuration is selected non-deterministically. In this way, for each
formula being verified all possible configurations are checked automatically.
Only for this check the model has been slightly modified by adding two parameters
action and choice to the templates and by updating accordingly the model. For this
verification, the set-up of the system is of an orchestrator rorand three services alice ,bob
andcarl and the size of each buffer is 4:
ror = RunnableOrchestration(MAJORITARIAN CHOICE,DISTRIBUTED ACTION);
alice = RunnableOrchestratedContract(0,MAJORITARIAN CHOICE,DISTRIBUTED ACTION);
bob = RunnableOrchestratedContract(1,MAJORITARIAN CHOICE,DISTRIBUTED ACTION);
carl = RunnableOrchestratedContract(2,DICTATORIAL CHOICE,DISTRIBUTED ACTION);
ast = SocketTimeout(0);bst = SocketTimeout(1);cst = SocketTimeout(2);
system ror,alice,bob,carl,ast,bst,cst;
Note that, differently from Figure 7, the configurations of choice and action are now
parameters assigned to each automaton. This allows us to assign a mismatching configuration
to verify that the Error location will be reached. Indeed, in the above set-up carl has a
different configuration. We use the formula:
A<>((ror.Error && carl.Error)||ror.Timeout)
stating that in all executions eventually the orchestrator and the service with a wrong
configuration reach an Error location or a timeout is experienced. Alternatively, the
formula:
A[](!ror.Start)
states that in all executions the Start location of the orchestrator is never traversed (i.e.,
the orchestration never starts). Both properties are satisfied in this setup, thus verifying the
correctness of the compatibility check. The first (resp. second) formula required visiting 19
(resp. 79) states. Both formulae used roughly 48 Megabytes of memory and a few milliseconds

--- Page 25 ---
Vol. 22:1 FORMAL ANALYSIS OF CARE WITH UPPAAL 8:25
of CPU. We have proved that in case of mismatching configurations, the orchestration will
not start.
7.Testing
The model-based testing functionality of Uppaal has been employed to generate tests that
demonstrate the model’s adherence to the actual implementation.
The abstract test cases generated by Uppaal have been transformed into concrete
JUnit tests for the source code. Uppaal provides various methods for test generation (see
Section 3). We utilized the generation from reachability queries (i.e., of the form E<>). In
our models, these queries encode specific simulation traces that are relevant to the specific
orchestration employed in the tests and are designed to cover all transitions of the model. The
specific simulation traces also guide the generation of the concrete test cases from the abstract
test cases. Uppaal provides functionalities for offline test generation, such as achieving
transition coverage or generating traces that reach a specified final state (reachability queries).
However, Uppaal does not primitively offer a mechanism within their query language to
explicitly enforce a sequence of intermediate states or events that a test trace must follow. To
achieve this, two global variables, namely steps[] andstep , are introduced in the models
to encode the desired orchestration in the query. Whenever a specific transition is executed,
the variable steps[step] is updated with a value encoding the transition being executed,
and the counter step is incremented. For example (see Figure 12), whenever the transition
reaching state Terminated is executed, the value ORCSTOP is assigned to steps[step] . As
another example, whenever a centralised match transition is executed by the orchestration,
the value CENTRALISED MATCH is assigned to steps[step] , encoding the execution of the
request action in the match (see Section 5). The length of the array steps[] is equal to the
desired number of transitions that the trace must pass through, and the variable step is a
pointer to the current position in the array. As a small example, let alice be an instatiation
of the automaton in Figure 12. The query E<>(alice.steps[0]==ORC CHECK) encodes a
trace where the check operation is executed first. In Section 7.3, we will provide a complete
example showing how these additional variables are used in a query.
7.1.Testing the Orchestrator. Different variants of the model have been developed, each
one equipped with specific test code to test one of the components. One version of the model
is equipped with test code for testing the orchestrator (i.e., RunnableOrchestration ). In
this case, during concrete testing, the orchestrator will be the actual system, whilst the
tester will mimic the services. Therefore, the test code will be generated from the services
model. In this version, the automaton template RunnableOrchestratedContract contains
test code in its transitions, whilst the automaton template RunnableOrchestration does
not contain test code. However, useful comments are inserted as test code in some transitions
ofRunnableOrchestration to guide the generation of concrete tests from abstract tests.
This mainly involves printing the actual value during simulation of variables offerer ,
requester and iused by the RunnableOrchestration as indices to identify the services
the orchestrator is interacting with. In the generated tests, no timeout is experienced,
therefore the SocketTimeoutAutomaton is a dummy automaton receiving signals from
RunnableOrchestratedContract and doing nothing. Indeed, a timeout in the concrete
system could be experienced due to a worsening of the physical network, which is outside
the scope of the model-based testing performed in this paper to ascertain the adequacy.

--- Page 26 ---
8:26 D. Basile Vol. 22:1
All transitions of RunnableOrchestratedContract containing a dequeue() operation in
the effects will also contain as test code the instruction msg = (String) oin.readObject() .
Basically, the abstract operation of reading a message from the queue is concretised as
a read operation from the variable oinof class ObjectInputStream of the Java TCP/IP
socket of the service. Similarly, transitions containing an enqueue effect will contain as
test code instructions for writing into a socket. The information on the actual payload to
be sent by the concrete services is abstracted away in the Uppaal model. For example,
consider the transition reaching state Ready ofRunnableOrchestratedContract with effect
enqueue(SERVICE CHOICE) (see Figure 12, top right corner). In this case, SERVICE CHOICE
is a constant abstracting from the choice that the service will be expressing, which will be
based at runtime on the transitions outgoing the current state of the contract automaton of
the service, abstracted in the Uppaal model. Accordingly, the test code generated from
that transition is oout.writeObject(choice);oout.flush(); . In this case, choice is a
placeholder that needs to be replaced in the concrete test with the actual choice made at
that point. Furthermore, oout is the ObjectOutputStream of the service’s TCP/IP socket,
on which a write operation is performed.
Finally, some read operations and other transitions with guards will include asser-
tions in their test code. These assertions will be concretised in the concrete tests by
adding values that were abstracted away in the model and will be used by the JUnit
tests to verify whether the tests are successful or not. For example, the transition of
RunnableOrchestratedContract reaching state Terminated will contain in its test code
the instruction assertEquals(msg,RunnableOrchestration.stop msg); . In this case, it
is tested whether the last received message is the constant identifying the termination of the
current orchestration.
7.2.Testing the Services. For testing the RunnableOrchestratedContract services an-
other version of the model is used. The orchestrator will be mocked by the test, whilst the
services will be the actual classes of CARE . The abstract test code will be generated through the
automaton RunnableOrchestration . The Uppaal automaton RunnableOrchestration
will also be decorated with the effects on the array steps[step] , similar to Figure 12.
The generation of test code is similar to the case of testing the orchestrator, discussed
previously. The main difference is that the orchestrator manages a list of input/output
streams, one for each service. For example, when sending the message ORCCHOICE to the
services (see Figure 9), the transition with the effect enqueue(i,ORC CHOICE) generates
the test code oout.get( $(ror.i)).writeObject(RunnableOrchestration.choice msg);
oout.get( $(ror.i)).flush(); , where the object oout is a list of ObjectOutputStream ,
one for each service. Similarly, the dequeue(i) effect generates the test code response =
oin.get( $(ror.i)).readObject(); , where oinis a list of ObjectInputStream . Finally,
similar to the case of testing the orchestrator, abstract values need to be instantiated in
the concrete tests, and assertions are included in the tests to check whether the received
messages are as expected.
For testing the interactions between two services in a distributed match, there are two
further versions of the model. In these versions, the tester is represented by the orchestrator
and one of the two interactive services, either the requester or offerer in the match.
In the following, we will provide an example on how the abstract test code is generated
and transformed into a concrete test. We will focus on a specific version of the model, i.e.,
the one used for testing the orchestrator, and a specific set-up.

--- Page 27 ---
Vol. 22:1 FORMAL ANALYSIS OF CARE WITH UPPAAL 8:27
Figure 12. The RunnableOrchestratedContract Uppaal template used
for testing the orchestrator
7.3.An example of test generation. We now discuss an example of testing an orches-
tration whose set-up is dictatorial choice with centralised action. This means that the
orchestrator will decide each choice and the orchestrator will act as a broker in a match
between the two services.
Query. All versions of the model contains queries for testing the various configurations of
the orchestrator (e.g., majoritarian choice, distributed action). We refer to [ Basb ] for more
details about these other queries. In the concrete tests, the orchestrator will interact with
two mocked services. Furthermore, the orchestration contract automaton, a parameter of the
RunnableOrchestration object (see Figure 3), is dummy and is instrumental to cover the
desired portions of code of CARE . In particular, the orchestration contract automaton that will
be used in the concrete tests accepts the trace (!euro,-)(?coffee,!coffee)[(!euro,-)]∗.
The corresponding query used to generate the abstract test is:
E<>(alice.steps[0]==ORC CHECK &&
bob.steps[1]==ORC CHECK &&
alice.steps[2]==CENTRALISED OFFER && //alice offer action !euro
alice.steps[3]==CENTRALISED MATCH && //alice request action ?coffee

--- Page 28 ---
8:28 D. Basile Vol. 22:1
bob.steps[4]==CENTRALISED OFFER && //bob offer action !coffee
alice.steps[5]==DICTATORIAL CHOICE &&
bob.steps[6]==DICTATORIAL CHOICE &&
alice.steps[7]==CENTRALISED OFFER && //alice offer action !euro
alice.steps[8]==DICTATORIAL CHOICE &&
bob.steps[9]==DICTATORIAL CHOICE &&
alice.steps[10]==ORC STOP &&
bob.steps[11]==ORC STOP)
The query above is endowed with comments to pinpoint each step with the corresponding
action, if any. An evidence to the query above simulates a run accepted by the orches-
tration contract automaton. We now analyse the query. As discussed in Section 5, the
orchestration always starts by checking if the configurations of the services and the orches-
trator are matching. Therefore, both services are instructed to check their configuration
(alice.steps[0]==ORC CHECK and bob.steps[1]==ORC CHECK ). In this test, the configu-
ration is of centralised action and dictatorial choice. After the configuration checks, the
orchestration starts. In the query, Alice is instructed to execute the offer action !euro with
alice.steps[2]==CENTRALISED OFFER . This corresponds to execution of the offer label
(!euro,-) in the orchestration (Alice is the first service). After that, the match label
(?coffee,!coffee) of the orchestration is executed. The match starts with Alice perform-
ing the request ?coffee , encoded in the query as alice.steps[3]==CENTRALISED MATCH .
After Alice performs the request action, it is Bob’s turn to match the request of Al-
ice with the corresponding offer action !coffee . In Figure 12, it is possible to observe
that the transition of the RunnableOrchestratedContract Uppaal template covering
the execution of an offer action in both the cases of offer label or match label (respec-
tively, d1==NOPAYLOAD ord1==REQUEST , see Section 5) has in its effect the instruction
steps[step]=CENTRALISED OFFER . Therefore, Bob is instructed to execute the offer action
!coffee in the query with bob.steps[4]==CENTRALISED OFFER .
After the offer label (!euro,-) and the match label (?coffee,!coffee) have both
been executed, a choice has to be made on whether to execute the offer label (!euro,-) or
terminate (recall that the trace (!euro,-)(?coffee,!coffee)[(!euro,-)]∗is accepted
by the orchestration contract automaton). In this set-up (i.e., dictatorial choice), the
orchestrator performs the choice and communicates it to the services. The orchestra-
tor will decide the first time to execute the offer label (!euro,-) and the second time
to terminate. thus covering both cases. The first choice is encoded in the query with
alice.steps[5]==DICTATORIAL CHOICE andbob.steps[6]==DICTATORIAL CHOICE . As be-
fore, the offer label is encoded in the query with alice.steps[7]==CENTRALISED OFFER .
Finally, the orchestrator performs the choice to terminate. This is encoded in the query with
alice.steps[8]==DICTATORIAL CHOICE andbob.steps[9]==DICTATORIAL CHOICE (the or-
chestrator communicates the choice to the services) and alice.steps[10]==ORC STOP,
bob.steps[11]==ORC STOP (both services terminate their execution).
7.3.1. Test generation. We now discuss the abstract test code generated by the query and
how it is concretised into a JUnit test for the real system. Uppaal also allows the insertion
of abstract test code in the system declaration of a model, which will be printed out in the
abstract test either at the start (i.e., pre-fix) or upon termination of the test (i.e., post-fix).

--- Page 29 ---
Vol. 22:1 FORMAL ANALYSIS OF CARE WITH UPPAAL 8:29
In all tests, pre-fix test code is used to declare some variables that will be utilised during
the test.
Configuration check. The first transitions executed during the test are those related to the
configuration check. Both Alice and Bob generate the same portion of abstract test code,
reported below.
1 msg = (String) oin.readObject();
2
3 //INIT CHECK
4 assertEquals(msg,RunnableOrchestration.check_msg);
5
6 String received_choiceType = (String) oin.readObject();
7 String received_actionType = (String) oin.readObject();
8 assertEquals(received_actionType,actionType);
9 assertEquals(received_choiceType,choiceType);
10
11 oout.writeObject(RunnableOrchestration.ack_msg);
12 oout.flush();
13 //STOP CHECK
In Figure 12, for both services, after the transition from the initial state Ready is executed,
the transition with the guard d1==ORC CHECK is fired, followed by the subsequent transition,
and finally, the transition having the effect steps[step]==ORC CHECK is executed. In order
to satisfy the query these four transitions must first be executed by Alice (when step=0 )
and then by Bob (when step=1 ).
The first transition performs a dequeue operation, which appends the readObject in-
struction (line 1). The second transition executed, with the guard d1==ORC CHECK , generates
an assertion to check whether the message received by the orchestrator is the command
for performing the configuration check (line 4). The next transition performs two dequeue
operations, generating two readObject instructions, followed by two assertions to check
whether the two messages are those expected by the orchestrator (lines 6-9). Recall that the
orchestrator communicates the choice and action configuration (see Figure 9) to all services.
It is important to note here that the actual values to check ( actionType andchoiceType )
will be instantiated in the concrete test, discussed next. The fourth executed transition
performs an enqueue operation, generating the test code writeObject , which writes the
corresponding acknowledgement message into the socket (lines 11-13).
We now move to the structure of the concrete JUnit test and the concretisation of the
abstract test code discussed until now. After that, we will discuss the remaining part of the
abstract test code and its concretisation. The concrete test file is available at [ Basb ] and
is called DictatorialCentralisedRunnableOrchestrationTest.java . All concrete tests
used for testing the orchestrator follow the same schema, reported below (for the case of
dictatorial choice and centralised action).
Listing 1. The JUnit method testing the centralised dictatorial orchestrator
1 @Test
2 public void test() throws IOException, ClassNotFoundException, InterruptedException {
3 Thread alice = new Thread(()->{ //mocked service
4 check(8080);
5 try (ServerSocketChannel server = ServerSocketChannel.open()){
6 server.bind(new InetSocketAddress(8080));
7 Socket socket = server.accept().socket();
8 ObjectInputStream oin = new ObjectInputStream(socket.getInputStream());
9 ObjectOutputStream oout = new ObjectOutputStream(socket.getOutputStream());

--- Page 30 ---
8:30 D. Basile Vol. 22:1
10 oout.flush();
11 uppaal_alice(oin,oout);
12
13 } catch (IOException | ClassNotFoundException e) {
14 throw new RuntimeException(e);
15 }
16 });
17
18 Thread bob = new Thread(()->{ //mocked service
19 check(8081);
20 try (ServerSocketChannel server = ServerSocketChannel.open()){
21 server.bind(new InetSocketAddress(8081));
22 Socket socket = server.accept().socket();
23 ObjectInputStream oin = new ObjectInputStream(socket.getInputStream());
24 ObjectOutputStream oout = new ObjectOutputStream(socket.getOutputStream());
25 oout.flush();
26 uppaal_bob(oin,oout);
27 } catch (IOException | ClassNotFoundException e) {
28 throw new RuntimeException(e);
29 }
30 });
31 alice.start();
32 bob.start();
33 RunnableOrchestration ror = new DictatorialChoiceRunnableOrchestration(new Agreement(),
34 adc.importMSCA(dir+"Orchestration.data"),
35 Arrays.asList(null,null),
36 Arrays.asList(8080,8081),
37 new CentralisedOrchestratorAction());
38
39 Thread tror = new Thread(ror);
40 tror.start();
41 tror.join();
42 }
The test is organised as follows. Both Alice and Bob services are encoded as parallel threads.
Alice’s thread is declared at lines 3–16, whilst Bob’s thread is declared at lines 18–30. They
are both executed at lines 31–32. After that, the orchestration is declared at lines 33–37 and
executed as another parallel thread (lines 39–41). It is important to note that, whilst Alice
and Bob are two mocked services, the orchestrator is the real RunnableOrchestration class
ofCARE. In this case, at lines 33–37, we can see that the RunnableOrchestration object
roris instantiated with dictatorial choice and centralised action. The other tests for the
orchestrator will have different instantiations (majoritarian choice and/or distributed action).
Furthermore, it uses the orchestration contract automaton discussed above, stored in the file
Orchestration.data . The rorobject also takes as a parameter the ports of the services.
Alice is listening at port 8080 , and Bob is listening at port 8081 .
Alice’s thread starts by invoking the method check , passing its port as an argument (line 4).
After that, the socket and object streams are initialised, and the method uppaal alice
is invoked, passing the input and output object streams as arguments. Bob’s thread is
equivalent. The method check (not reported for brevity), similarly to lines 5–10 of method
test above, opens a socket awaiting connection from the orchestrator and invokes the method
uppaal check . The method uppaal check contains the concretisation of the abstract test
code discussed above, which is used for checking the configuration of the corresponding
service. The methods uppaal alice and uppaal bob(line 11 and line 26) contain the
remaining concretisation of the abstract test code generated by Alice and Bob, respectively,
and will be discussed in the following. The method uppaal check is reported below.

--- Page 31 ---
Vol. 22:1 FORMAL ANALYSIS OF CARE WITH UPPAAL 8:31
Listing 2. The JUnit method testing the configuration of the service
1 private void uppaal_check( ObjectInputStream oin, ObjectOutputStream oout) throws IOException {
2 String choiceType = "Dictatorial";
3 String actionType = "Centralised";
4 String msg;
5 msg = (String) oin.readObject();
6 assertEquals(msg,RunnableOrchestration.check_msg);
7 String received_choiceType = (String) oin.readObject();
8 String received_actionType = (String) oin.readObject();
9 assertEquals(received_actionType,actionType);
10 assertEquals(received_choiceType,choiceType);
11 oout.writeObject(RunnableOrchestration.ack_msg);
12 oout.flush();
13 }
It is easy to see that this method includes the abstract test case instructions discussed above.
In this case, the concretisation of the abstract test case simply instantiates the variables
choiceType and actionType to their respective values (lines 2-3). Note that the method
uppaal check will be invoked by both services.
We have discussed the main structure of the concrete test, the abstract test case instructions
covering the configuration check and their concretisation. We now discuss the remaining
instructions of the abstract test case and their concretisation in the methods uppaal alice
anduppaal bob.
Offer label. After the orchestration check has been performed, the orchestration starts, and
the offer label (!euro,-) of the orchestration will be executed. The following instructions
are appended to the abstract test case being generated.
1 //centralised offerer 0
2
3 msg = (String) oin.readObject();
4
5 assertEquals(msg, expected action);
6
7 msg = (String) oin.readObject(); // reading payload centralised action
8 assertEquals(msg,expectedPayload);
9
10 oout.writeObject(INSERT OFFER);
11 oout.flush();
The transition outgoing state CentralisedOffer of the RunnableOrchestration automaton
(see Figure 9) has as test code //centralised offerer $(ror.offerer) . This will append
the comment at line 1 in the abstract test, indicating that the next instructions of the
abstract test will cover the first offer action performed by Alice (service at index 0). This
is helpful for generating the concrete test from the abstract test. After performing the
check, both Alice and Bob are again in state Ready (Figure 12). The first readObject
operation (line 3) is again appended by the outgoing transition from state Ready of Alice.
The next transition executed by Alice, with guard d1==ACTION , will append the instruction
at line 5. The assertion will check whether the message received by the orchestrator will be
the expected action, which will be concretised in the concrete test with the value "euro"
(i.e., the orchestrator is invoking the method euro of Alice).
After that, Alice automaton will execute the centralised action, and the subsequent transition
will perform a dequeue operation, appending to the abstract test case the instructions at
lines 7-8. In the assertion, expectedPayload is a placeholder that will be concretised with
value null . Recall that in CARE each action of the contract automaton of each service is in

--- Page 32 ---
8:32 D. Basile Vol. 22:1
correspondence with a method of the corresponding service class (see Section 3), which has
input parameters and a returned value. In this case, the parameters and returned values of
the method in correspondence with the offer euro of Alice are dummy (i.e., concretised with
null values). The next transition with effect enqueue is executed by Alice. This transition
also has in the effect the instruction steps[step]=CENTRALISED OFFER , thus fulfilling the
query (at this point of the simulation it holds step=2 ). The execution of the transition will
append instructions at lines 10-11 to the abstract test case. Indeed, the enqueue operation
corresponds to a writeObject operation in the test. The placeholder INSERT OFFER will be
replaced by the concrete value null in the concrete test.
This concludes the test code for the first offer label (!euro,-) of the orchestration.
Match label. Next, the match label (?coffee,!coffee) is executed. The instructions
appended to the abstract test case during the execution of the match label are reported
below.
1 //requester: 0
2
3 msg = (String) oin.readObject();
4
5 assertEquals(msg, expected action);
6
7 msg = (String) oin.readObject(); // reading payload centralised action
8 assertEquals(msg,expectedPayload);
9
10 oout.writeObject(INSERT REQUEST);
11 oout.flush();
12
13 //matching offerer: 1
14
15 msg = (String) oin.readObject();
16
17 assertEquals(msg, expected action);
18
19 msg = (String) oin.readObject(); // reading payload centralised action
20 assertEquals(msg,expectedPayload);
21
22 oout.writeObject(INSERT OFFER);
23 oout.flush();
24
25 //requester: 0
26
27 msg = (String) oin.readObject(); //receiving the matching offer
28 assertEquals(msg, expected payload);
The three comments (lines 1,13,25) are appended by the RunnableOrchestration automa-
ton, after state CentralisedMatch is reached (see Figure 9), and are useful to identify
the instructions generated by Alice ( requester 0 ) and Bob ( matching offerer 1 ). The
instructions at lines 3-11 are appended by Alice when executing the request action ?coffee .
The placeholder expectedPayload at line 8 will be concretised with the value "coffee" (i.e.,
the orchestrator is invoking the method coffee of Alice), whilst the placeholder at line 10
will be replaced with the concrete value "request payload" (i.e., the request sent by Alice
to Bob is the dummy String "request payload" ). Indeed, although the services are mocked
by the test, in case of a match these values will be handled by the real CARE orchestrator,
which will act as a broker between the two services. After executing the transition with effect
steps[step]=CENTRALISED MATCH (Figure 12), thus fulfilling the query, Alice waits for Bob
to send the offer. The instructions at lines 15-23 are appended by Bob when executing the

--- Page 33 ---
Vol. 22:1 FORMAL ANALYSIS OF CARE WITH UPPAAL 8:33
offer action !coffee . Note that these are identical to the previous offer action !euro fired
by Alice, because the same transitions of Figure 12 have been executed. The placeholders at
line 17, line 20 and line 22 will be replaced by the concrete values "coffee" (the orchestrator
invokes the method coffee of Bob), "request payload" (the payload sent by Alice to Bob
is checked) and "offer payload" (the dummy reply of Bob to Alice), respectively. After
that, the instructions at lines 27-28 are executed by Alice for completing the request action.
The placeholder at line 28 will be replaced by the concrete value "offer payload" (the
reply of Bob to Alice is checked).
This concludes the match (?coffee,!coffee) .
Choice. As stated earlier, the orchestrator will now perform a choice on whether to continue
and execute the offer label (!euro,-) or terminate. For brevity, we only report the abstract
test code dumped by a service when executing a dictatorial choice, reported below.
1 msg = (String) oin.readObject();
2
3 assertEquals(msg,RunnableOrchestration.choice_msg);
The instruction at line 1 is again appended when executing the dequeue effect outgoing state
Ready (Figure 12). After that, the transition with guard d1 == ORC CHOICE is executed,
which will append the test code at line 3. The next executed transition, with effect
steps[step]=DICTATORIAL CHOICE , has no test code generated but it is used to fulfill the
query. No other test code is generated for the dictatorial choice, as the orchestrator decides
on its own the next move. This test code is generated by both Alice and Bob, performing
in turn the choice. In this example, after the first dictatorial choice, the orchestrator will
execute again the offer label (!euro,-) , and again a dictatorial choice. We have already
covered the test code that will be generated.
Termination. After that, the orchestrator decides to terminate. The test code generated by
each service is:
1 msg = (String) oin.readObject();
2
3 assertEquals(msg,RunnableOrchestration.stop_msg);
The instruction at line 1 is the first dequeue operation as above. The instruction at
line 3 is instead appended by the test code of the transition with guard d1==ORC STOP
(Figure 12). This transition has also in its effect the instruction steps[step]=ORC STOP,
thus fulfilling the query. Note that both values RunnableOrchestration.choice msgand
RunnableOrchestration.stop msgare constants of the class RunnableOrchestration of
CARE , used to identify the two commands of the orchestrator.
We have already discussed how the values of the abstract test code are concretised. For
completeness, we report below the code of the method uppaal alice discussed before, which
contains test code for the service Alice, obtained by concretising the abstract test code as
discussed above.
Listing 3. The JUnit method testing the Alice service
1 private void uppaal_alice( ObjectInputStream oin, ObjectOutputStream oout) throws IOException {
2 String msg;
3 msg = (String) oin.readObject();
4 assertEquals(msg, "euro");
5 msg = (String) oin.readObject(); // reading payload centralised action
6 assertEquals(msg,null);
7 oout.writeObject(null);
8 oout.flush();

--- Page 34 ---
8:34 D. Basile Vol. 22:1
9
10 msg = (String) oin.readObject();
11 assertEquals(msg, "coffee");
12 msg = (String) oin.readObject(); // reading payload centralised action
13 assertEquals(msg,null);
14 oout.writeObject("request payload");
15 oout.flush();
16
17 msg = (String) oin.readObject(); //receiving the matching offer
18 assertEquals(msg, "offer payload");
19
20 msg = (String) oin.readObject();
21 assertEquals(msg,RunnableOrchestration.choice_msg);
22
23 msg = (String) oin.readObject();
24
25 //if the orchestrator decides not to terminate
26 while (msg.equals("euro")) {
27 msg = (String) oin.readObject(); // reading payload centralised action
28 assertEquals(msg, null);
29 oout.writeObject(null);
30 oout.flush();
31 msg = (String) oin.readObject();
32 assertEquals(msg, RunnableOrchestration.choice_msg);
33 msg = (String) oin.readObject();
34 }
35
36 assertEquals(msg,RunnableOrchestration.stop_msg);
37 }
Note that the above code allows Alice to perform more than a single offer "euro" before
terminating (lines 26 34). In this way it is possible to handle all possible traces of the
orchestration automaton, and all internal choices of the orchestrator.
Similarly, we report below the code of the method uppaal bob.
Listing 4. The JUnit method testing the Bob service
1 private void uppaal_bob(ObjectInputStream oin, ObjectOutputStream oout) throws IOException {
2 String msg;
3
4 msg = (String) oin.readObject();
5 assertEquals(msg, "coffee");
6 msg = (String) oin.readObject(); // reading payload centralised action
7 assertEquals(msg,"request payload");
8 oout.writeObject("offer payload");
9 oout.flush();
10
11 msg = (String) oin.readObject();
12 assertEquals(msg,RunnableOrchestration.choice_msg);
13
14 //in case the orchestrator decides not to terminate
15 do {
16 msg = (String) oin.readObject();
17 } while (msg.equals(RunnableOrchestration.choice_msg));
18
19 assertEquals(msg,RunnableOrchestration.stop_msg);
20
21
22 }

--- Page 35 ---
Vol. 22:1 FORMAL ANALYSIS OF CARE WITH UPPAAL 8:35
Figure 13. The coverage information generated by IntelliJ
Similar to Alice, also the code of Bob allows to handle many unfoldings of the final loop of
the orchestration.
This concludes the example of test generation. Recall that this is one query of one version
of the model (for testing the orchestrator). There are other queries used for testing the
other configurations (e.g., majoritarian choice, distributed offer) and other versions of the
model for testing the other components. However, the generation of abstract tests and their
concretisation follows the same approach covered by this example. All these versions and
the concrete tests are available at [Basb].
7.4.Coverage. The coverage information generated by IntelliJ is in Figure 13. The code
coverage indicates that the concrete tests derived from the model cover a significant portion
of the source code. This suggests that the model is not excessively abstract compared to the
actual implementation. Furthermore, from the queries we know that the generated abstract
tests cover all transitions of the model and all interactions between the orchestrator and the
services.
On a side note, the modelling and verification allowed us to fix some issues (see Section 6).
This would not have been possible in case the abstraction were too coarse.
8.Conclusion and Future Work
We have presented the formal modelling and verification of the Contract Automata Runtime
Environment ( CARE), an open-source platform. Both statistical and exhaustive model
checking techniques have played a crucial role in formally verifying numerous desired
properties of the modeled system, such as the absence of deadlocks, while also enhancing
the accuracy of the formal model. Statistical model checking has also been employed to
fine-tune parameter settings within the formal model, such as the buffer size. The adequacy
of the abstract model has been described, and the transitions of the formal model have been

--- Page 36 ---
8:36 D. Basile Vol. 22:1
linked to the corresponding lines of source code. The tests generated from the formal model
have been employed to test the source code.
At present, the different artifacts such as the model, source code, tests, and tracing informa-
tion are manually kept aligned. This process demands substantial effort whenever a new
version of CARE is introduced, as each artifact needs to be updated accordingly. Future
work involves studying techniques for automatic alignment of these artifacts. Furthermore,
it would be interesting to exploit the facilities provided by the recently introduced tool
Uppex [PPN+23] to factorize the different variants of the model discussed in the paper under
a single, configurable Uppex model, to automate the selection of a configuration and more
generally to facilitate the collaboration between the software developer and the Uppaal
modeller, whenever they are different persons.
Acknowledgment. Part of this study was carried out within the MUR PRIN 2022 PNRR
P2022A492B project ADVENTURE (ADVancEd iNtegraTed evalUation of Railway systEms)
funded by the European Union - NextGenerationEU, and the CNR project “Formal Methods
in Software Engineering 2.0”, CUP B53C24000720005.
References
[ABB+16] Wolfgang Ahrendt, Bernhard Beckert, Richard Bubel, Reiner H¨ ahnle, Peter H. Schmitt, and
Mattias Ulbrich, editors. Deductive Software Verification – The KeY Book: From Theory to
Practice , volume 10001 of LNCS . Springer, 2016. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-49812-6 .
[ABZ13] L. Acciai, M. Boreale, and G. Zavattaro. Behavioural contracts with request-response operations.
Sci. Comp. Program. , 78(2):248–267, 2013. doi:10.1016/j.scico.2011.10.007 .
[AD94] R. Alur and D. Dill. A Theory of Timed Automata. Theoret. Comp. Sci. , 126(2):183–235, 1994.
doi:10.1016/0304-3975(94)90010-8 .
[AD24] Arwa Hameed Alsubhi and Ornela Dardha. Coconut: Typestates for embedded systems. In
Ilaria Castellani and Francesco Tiezzi, editors, Coordination Models and Languages - 26th
IFIP WG 6.1 International Conference, COORDINATION 2024, Held as Part of the 19th
International Federated Conference on Distributed Computing Techniques, DisCoTec 2024,
Groningen, The Netherlands, June 17-21, 2024, Proceedings , volume 14676 of Lecture Notes in
Computer Science , pages 219–238. Springer, 2024. doi:10.1007/978-3-031-62697-5_12 .
[Basa] Davide Basile. CATApp. URL: https://github.com/contractautomataproject/
ContractAutomataApp .
[Basb] Davide Basile. Formal analysis of the Contract Automata Runtime Environment with Uppaal,
complementary material. doi:10.5281/zenodo.14671729 .
[Bas24] Davide Basile. Modelling, verifying and testing the contract automata runtime environment with
uppaal. In Ilaria Castellani and Francesco Tiezzi, editors, Coordination Models and Languages
- 26th IFIP WG 6.1 International Conference, COORDINATION 2024, Held as Part of the
19th International Federated Conference on Distributed Computing Techniques, DisCoTec 2024,
Groningen, The Netherlands, June 17-21, 2024, Proceedings , volume 14676 of Lecture Notes in
Computer Science , pages 93–110. Springer, 2024. doi:10.1007/978-3-031-62697-5_6 .
[BBG+22] Lorenzo Bacchiani, Mario Bravetti, Marco Giunti, Jo˜ ao Mota, and Ant´ onio Ravara. A Java
typestate checker supporting inheritance. Sci. Comput. Program. , 221, 2022. doi:10.1016/j.
scico.2022.102844 .
[BCZ15] Massimo Bartoletti, Tiziana Cimoli, and Roberto Zunino. Compliance in Behavioural Contracts:
A Brief Survey. In Programming Languages with Applications to Biology and Security , volume
9465 of LNCS , pages 103–121. Springer, 2015. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-25527-9_9 .
[BDF16] Davide Basile, Pierpaolo Degano, and Gian-Luigi Ferrari. Automata for specifying and or-
chestrating service contracts. Log. Methods Comput. Sci. , 12(4):6:1–6:51, 2016. doi:10.2168/
LMCS-12(4:6)2016 .

--- Page 37 ---
Vol. 22:1 FORMAL ANALYSIS OF CARE WITH UPPAAL 8:37
[BDL+06] G. Behrmann, A. David, K. G. Larsen, J. H˚ akansson, P. Pettersson, W. Yi, and M. Hendriks.
UPPAAL 4.0. In Proceedings 3rd International Conference on the Quantitative Evaluation of
SysTems (QEST) , pages 125–126. IEEE, 2006. doi:10.1109/QEST.2006.59 .
[BLMT08] R. Bruni, I. Lanese, H. C. Melgratti, and E. Tuosto. Multiparty Sessions in SOC. In COORDINA-
TION , volume 5052 of LNCS , pages 67–82. Springer, 2008. doi:10.1007/978-3-540-68265-3_
5.
[BMF23] Davide Basile, Franco Mazzanti, and Alessio Ferrari. Experimenting with formal verifi-
cation and model-based development in railways: The case of UMC and sparx enter-
prise architect. In Alessandro Cimatti and Laura Titolo, editors, Formal Methods for In-
dustrial Critical Systems (FMICS) , volume 14290 of LNCS , pages 1–21. Springer, 2023.
doi:10.1007/978-3-031-43681-9_1 .
[Bou15] Jean-Louis Boulanger. Tool Qualification. In CENELEC 50128 and IEC 62279 Standards ,
chapter 9, pages 287–308. John Wiley & Sons, 2015. doi:10.1002/9781119005056.ch9 .
[BtB21] Davide Basile and Maurice H. ter Beek. A Clean and Efficient Implementation of Chore-
ography Synthesis for Behavioural Contracts. In Ferruccio Damiani and Ornela Dardha,
editors, COORDINATION , volume 12717 of LNCS , pages 225–238. Springer, 2021. doi:
10.1007/978-3-030-78142-2_14 .
[BtB22] Davide Basile and Maurice H. ter Beek. Contract Automata Library. Sci. Com-
put. Program. , 221:102841, 2022. URL: https://github.com/contractautomataproject/
ContractAutomataLib ,doi:10.1016/j.scico.2022.102841 .
[BtB23a] Davide Basile and Maurice H. ter Beek. A Runtime Environment for Contract Automata. In
Marsha Chechik, Joost-Pieter Katoen, and Martin Leucker, editors, FM, volume 14000 of LNCS ,
pages 550–567. Springer, 2023. URL: https://github.com/contractautomataproject/CARE ,
doi:10.1007/978-3-031-27481-7_31 .
[BtB23b] Davide Basile and Maurice H. ter Beek. Research challenges in orchestration synthesis. In
Cl´ ement Aubert, Cinzia Di Giusto, Simon Fowler, and Larisa Safina, editors, Proceedings of
the 16th Interaction and Concurrency Experience (ICE) , volume 383 of EPTCS , pages 73–90,
2023. doi:10.4204/EPTCS.383.5 .
[BtB24] Davide Basile and Maurice H. ter Beek. Advancing orchestration synthesis for contract automata.
J. Log. Algebraic Methods Program. , 141:100998, 2024. doi:10.1016/J.JLAMP.2024.100998 .
[BtBC18] Davide Basile, Maurice H. ter Beek, and Vincenzo Ciancia. Statistical Model Checking of
a Moving Block Railway Signalling Scenario with Uppaal SMC. In Tiziana Margaria and
Bernhard Steffen, editors, ISoLA , volume 11245 of LNCS , pages 372–391. Springer, 2018.
doi:10.1007/978-3-030-03421-4_24 .
[BtBD+20] Davide Basile, Maurice H. ter Beek, Pierpaolo Degano, Axel Legay, Gian-Luigi Ferrari, Stefania
Gnesi, and Felicita Di Giandomenico. Controller synthesis of service contracts with variability.
Sci. Comput. Program. , 187:102344, 2020. doi:10.1016/j.scico.2019.102344 .
[BtBFL22] Davide Basile, Maurice H. ter Beek, Alessio Ferrari, and Axel Legay. Exploring the ERTM-
S/ETCS full moving block specification: an experience with formal methods. Int. J. Softw.
Tools Technol. Transf. , 24(3):351–370, 2022. doi:10.1007/s10009-022-00653-3 .
[BtBL20] Davide Basile, Maurice H. ter Beek, and Axel Legay. Strategy Synthesis for Autonomous
Driving in a Moving Block Railway System with Uppaal Stratego . In Alexey Gotsman
and Ana Sokolova, editors, FORTE , volume 12136 of LNCS , pages 3–21. Springer, 2020.
doi:10.1007/978-3-030-50086-3_1 .
[BtBP20] Davide Basile, Maurice H. ter Beek, and Rosario Pugliese. Synthesis of orchestrations and
choreographies: Bridging the gap between supervisory control and coordination of services.
Log. Methods Comput. Sci. , 16(2):9:1–9:29, 2020. doi:10.23638/LMCS-16(2:9)2020 .
[CDCP12] G. Castagna, M. Dezani-Ciancaglini, and L. Padovani. On Global Types and Multi-Party
Sessions. Log. Methods Comput. Sci. , 8(1:24):1–45, 2012. doi:10.2168/LMCS-8(1:24)2012 .
[CGMZ21] Guillaume Cluzel, Kyriakos Georgiou, Yannick Moy, and Cl´ ement Zeller. Layered formal
verification of a TCP stack. In SecDev , pages 86–93. IEEE, 2021. doi:10.1109/SecDev51306.
2021.00028 .
[CGP09] G. Castagna, N. Gesbert, and L. Padovani. A Theory of Contracts for Web Services. ACM
Trans. Program. Lang. Syst. , 31(5):19:1–19:61, 2009. doi:10.1145/1538917.1538920 .

--- Page 38 ---
8:38 D. Basile Vol. 22:1
[CHLR23] H´ el´ ene Coullon, Ludovic Henrio, Fr´ ed´ eric Loulergue, and Simon Robillard. Component-based
distributed software reconfiguration:a verification-oriented survey. ACM Comput. Surv. , 56(1),
August 2023. doi:10.1145/3595376 .
[dAH01] L. de Alfaro and T. Henzinger. Interface Automata. In ESEC/FSE , pages 109–120. ACM, 2001.
doi:10.1145/503209.503226 .
[DCd10] M. Dezani-Ciancaglini and U. de’Liguoro. Sessions and Session Types: An Overview. In WS-FM ,
volume 6194 of LNCS , pages 1–28. Springer, 2010. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-14458-5_1 .
[dlCGMS09] Pedro de la C´ amara, Mar´ ıa-del-Mar Gallardo, Pedro Merino, and David San´ an. Checking
the reliability of socket based communication software. Int. J. Softw. Tools Technol. Transf. ,
11(5):359–374, 2009. doi:10.1007/s10009-009-0112-7 .
[DLL+10] A. David, K. G. Larsen, A. Legay, U. Nyman, and A. Wasowski. Timed I/O Automata: A
Complete Specification Theory for Real-time Systems. In HSCC , pages 91–100. ACM, 2010.
doi:10.1145/1755952.1755967 .
[DLL+15] A. David, K. G. Larsen, A. Legay, M. Mikuˇ cionis, and D. B. Poulsen. Uppaal SMC tutorial.
Int. J. Softw. Tools Technol. Transf. , 17(4):397–415, 2015. doi:10.1007/s10009-014-0361-y .
[FtB22] Alessio Ferrari and Maurice H. ter Beek. Formal Methods in Railways: A Systematic Mapping
Study. ACM Comput. Surv. , 2022. doi:10.1145/3520480 .
[FZL18] Yuan Fei, Huibiao Zhu, and Xin Li. Modeling and verification of NLSR protocol using UPPAAL.
In Jun Pang, Chenyi Zhang, Jifeng He, and Jian Weng, editors, TASE , pages 108–115. IEEE
Computer Society, 2018. doi:10.1109/TASE.2018.00022 .
[GJP+22] Rong Gu, Peter Gjøl Jensen, Danny Bøgsted Poulsen, Cristina Seceleanu, Eduard Enoiu,
and Kristina Lundqvist. Verifiable strategy synthesis for multiple autonomous agents: a
scalable approach. Int. J. Softw. Tools Technol. Transf. , 24(3):395–414, 2022. doi:10.1007/
s10009-022-00657-z .
[GR17] Simon Gay and Ant´ onio Ravara, editors. Behavioural Types: from Theory to Tools . River, 2017.
doi:10.13052/rp-9788793519817 .
[GtBvdP20] Hubert Garavel, Maurice H. ter Beek, and Jaco van de Pol. The 2020 Expert Survey on Formal
Methods. In M.H. ter Beek and D. Niˇ ckovi´ c, editors, FMICS , volume 12327 of LNCS , pages
3–69. Springer, 2020. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-58298-2_1 .
[HL23] Mohamed Amin Hammami and Mariam Lahami. Model-based testing approach for EIP-1559
ethereum smart contracts. In Mohamed Mosbah, M. Tahar Kechadi, Ladjel Bellatreche, and
Fa¨ ıez Gargouri, editors, Model and Data Engineering - 12th International Conference, MEDI
2023, Sousse, Tunisia, November 2-4, 2023, Proceedings , volume 14396 of Lecture Notes in
Computer Science , pages 44–57. Springer, 2023. doi:10.1007/978-3-031-49333-1_4 .
[HLM+08] Anders Hessel, Kim Guldstrand Larsen, Marius Mikucionis, Brian Nielsen, Paul Pettersson,
and Arne Skou. Testing real-time systems using UPPAAL. In Robert M. Hierons, Jonathan P.
Bowen, and Mark Harman, editors, Formal Methods and Testing, An Outcome of the FORTEST
Network, Revised Selected Papers , volume 4949 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages
77–117. Springer, 2008. doi:10.1007/978-3-540-78917-8_3 .
[HLV+16] H. H¨ uttel, I. Lanese, V. T. Vasconcelos, L. Caires, M. Carbone, P. - M. Deni´ elou, D. Mostrous,
L. Padovani, A. Ravara, E. Tuosto, H. Torres Vieira, and G. Zavattaro. Foundations of
Session Types and Behavioural Contracts. ACM Comput. Surv. , 49(1):3:1–3:36, 2016. doi:
10.1145/2873052 .
[HMG+23] Benedek Horv´ ath, Vince Moln´ ar, Bence Graics, ´Akos Hajdu, Istv´ an R´ ath, ´Akos Horv´ ath,
Robert Karban, Gelys Trancho, and Zolt´ an Micskei. Pragmatic verification and validation of
industrial executable sysml models. Systems Engineering , 2023. doi:10.1002/sys.21679 .
[HYC08] K. Honda, N. Yoshida, and M. Carbone. Multiparty Asynchronous Session Types. In POPL ,
pages 273–284. ACM, 2008. doi:10.1145/1328438.1328472 .
[Jav] URL: https://docs.oracle.com/javase/7/docs/api/java/net/Socket.html .
[KDPG18] Dimitrios Kouzapas, Ornela Dardha, Roly Perera, and Simon J. Gay. Typechecking protocols
with Mungo and StMungo: A session type toolchain for Java. Sci. Comput. Program. , 155:52–75,
2018. doi:10.1016/j.scico.2017.10.006 .
[KLN+15] Jin Hyun Kim, Kim G. Larsen, Brian Nielsen, Marius Mikucionis, and Petur Olsen. For-
mal analysis and testing of real-time automotive systems using UPPAAL tools. In Manuel
N´ u˜ nez and Matthias G¨ udemann, editors, Formal Methods for Industrial Critical Systems

--- Page 39 ---
Vol. 22:1 FORMAL ANALYSIS OF CARE WITH UPPAAL 8:39
- 20th International Workshop, FMICS 2015, Oslo, Norway, June 22-23, 2015 Proceed-
ings, volume 9128 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 47–61. Springer, 2015.
doi:10.1007/978-3-319-19458-5_4 .
[LLN18] Kim G. Larsen, Florian Lorber, and Brian Nielsen. 20 years of UPPAAL enabled industrial
model-based validation and beyond. In Tiziana Margaria and Bernhard Steffen, editors,
Leveraging Applications of Formal Methods, Verification and Validation. Industrial Practice -
8th International Symposium, ISoLA 2018, Limassol, Cyprus, November 5-9, 2018, Proceedings,
Part IV , volume 11247 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 212–229. Springer, 2018.
doi:10.1007/978-3-030-03427-6_18 .
[LLT+19] Axel Legay, Anna Lukina, Louis-Marie Traonouez, Junxing Yang, Scott A. Smolka, and Radu
Grosu. Statistical Model Checking. In Bernhard Steffen and Gerhard J. Woeginger, editors,
Computing and Software Science: State of the Art and Perspectives , volume 10000 of LNCS ,
pages 478–504. Springer, 2019. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-91908-9_23 .
[LP15] C. Laneve and L. Padovani. An algebraic theory for web service contracts. Form. Asp. Comp. ,
27(4):613–640, 2015. doi:10.1007/s00165-015-0334-2 .
[LRN+22] Sascha Lehmann, Antje Rogalla, Maximilian Neidhardt, Anton Reinecke, Alexander Schlaefer,
and Sibylle Schupp. Modeling R3Needle Steering in Uppaal. In Clemens Dubslaff and Bas
Luttik, editors, Proceedings of the 5th Workshop on Models for Formal Analysis of Real Systems
(MARS@ETAPS) , volume 355 of EPTCS , pages 40–59, 2022. doi:10.4204/EPTCS.355.4 .
[LSM+20] Si Liu, Atul Sandur, Jos´ e Meseguer, Peter Csaba ¨Olveczky, and Qi Wang. Generating correct-
by-construction distributed implementations from formal MAUDE designs. In Ritchie Lee,
Susmit Jha, and Anastasia Mavridou, editors, NFM , volume 12229 of LNCS , pages 22–40.
Springer, 2020. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-55754-6_2 .
[LSP82] Leslie Lamport, Robert E. Shostak, and Marshall C. Pease. The byzantine generals problem.
ACM Trans. Program. Lang. Syst. , 4(3):382–401, 1982. doi:10.1145/357172.357176 .
[LT89] N. Lynch and M. Tuttle. An Introduction to Input/Output Automata. CWI Q. , 2:219–246,
1989. URL: https://ir.cwi.nl/pub/18164/18164A.pdf .
[MNF13] J. Michaux, E. Najm, and A. Fantechi. Session types for safe Web service orchestration. J. Log.
Algebr. Program. , 82(8):282–310, 2013. doi:10.1016/j.jlap.2013.05.004 .
[Obj] URL: https://docs.oracle.com/javase/7/docs/api/java/io/ObjectOutputStream.html .
[OPB+21] Simone Orlando, Vairo Di Pasquale, Franco Barbanera, Ivan Lanese, and Emilio Tuosto.
Corinne, a Tool for Choreography Automata. In Gwen Sala¨ un and Anton Wijs, editors, FACS ,
volume 13077 of LNCS , pages 82–92. Springer, 2021. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-90636-8_5 .
[PMT24] Carlos Gustavo L´ opez Pombo, Pablo Montepagano, and Emilio Tuosto. Search: An execution
infrastructure for service-based software systems. In Ilaria Castellani and Francesco Tiezzi,
editors, Coordination Models and Languages - 26th IFIP WG 6.1 International Conference,
COORDINATION 2024, Held as Part of the 19th International Federated Conference on
Distributed Computing Techniques, DisCoTec 2024, Groningen, The Netherlands, June 17-21,
2024, Proceedings , volume 14676 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 314–330. Springer,
2024. doi:10.1007/978-3-031-62697-5_17 .
[PPN+23] Jos´ e Proen¸ ca, David Pereira, Giann Spilere Nandi, Sina Borrami, and Jonas Melchert.
Spreadsheet-based Configuration of Families of Real-Time Specifications. In Maurice H. ter
Beek and Clemens Dubslaff, editors, Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Trends in Con-
figurable Systems Analysis (TiCSA@ETAPS) , volume 392 of EPTCS , pages 27–39, 2023.
doi:10.4204/EPTCS.392.2 .
[RCS+22] Markus Roggenbach, Antonio Cerone, Bernd-Holger Schlingloff, Gerardo Schneider, and
Siraj Ahmed Shaikh. Formal Methods for Software Engineering: Languages, Methods, Applica-
tion Domains . TTCS. Springer, 2022. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-38800-3 .
[RG21] Gopal N. Rai and G. R. Gangadharan. Model checking based web service verification: A
systematic literature review. IEEE Transactions on Services Computing , 14(3):747–764, 2021.
doi:10.1109/tsc.2018.2845401 .
[RW87] Peter J. Ramadge and Walter M. Wonham. Supervisory control of a class of discrete event
processes. SIAM J. Control Optim. , 25(1):206–230, 1987. doi:10.1137/0325013 .
[SF17] Shruti Saini and Ansgar Fehnker. Evaluating the Stream Control Transmission Protocol Using
Uppaal. In Holger Hermanns and Peter H¨ ofner, editors, Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on

--- Page 40 ---
8:40 D. Basile Vol. 22:1
Models for Formal Analysis of Real Systems (MARS@ETAPS) , volume 244 of EPTCS , pages
1–13, 2017. doi:10.4204/EPTCS.244.1 .
[SVW20] Fatima Shokri-Manninen, J¨ uri Vain, and Marina Wald´ en. Formal Verification of COLREG-
Based Navigation of Maritime Autonomous Systems. In Frank S. de Boer and Anto-
nio Cerone, editors, SEFM , volume 12310 of LNCS , pages 41–59. Springer, 2020. doi:
10.1007/978-3-030-58768-0_3 .
[SY86] Robert E. Strom and Shaula Yemini. Typestate: A programming language concept for enhancing
software reliability. IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng. , 12(1):157–171, 1986. doi:10.1109/TSE.1986.
6312929 .
[tBBG07] Maurice H. ter Beek, Antonio Bucchiarone, and Stefania Gnesi. Web Service Composition
Approaches: From Industrial Standards to Formal Methods. In Proceedings of the 2nd Inter-
national Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services (ICIW’07) . IEEE, 2007.
doi:10.1109/ICIW.2007.71 .
[TMR20] Andr´ e Trindade, Jo˜ ao Mota, and Ant´ onio Ravara. Typestates to Automata and back: a tool.
In Julien Lange, Anastasia Mavridou, Larisa Safina, and Alceste Scalas, editors, Proceedings of
the 13th Interaction and Concurrency Experience (ICE) , volume 324 of EPTCS , pages 25–42,
2020. doi:10.4204/EPTCS.324.4 .
[WVHFM06] Daniel Witsch, Birgit Vogel-Heuser, Jean-Marc Faure, and Ga¨ elle Marsal. Performance analysis
of industrial ethernet networks by means of timed model-checking. In INCOM , volume 39,
pages 101–106, 2006. doi:10.3182/20060517-3-FR-2903.00063 .
[WWH+22] Jie Wang, Xintao Wu, Gang Hou, Pengfei Li, Ao Gao, Zhichao Chen, and Haoyu Gao. Modeling
and reliability verification of industrial control network protocol based on time state transition
matrix. Int. J. Commun. Syst. , 35(9), 2022. doi:10.1002/dac.5140 .
This work is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution License. To view a copy of this
license, visit https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ or send a letter to Creative
Commons, 171 Second St, Suite 300, San Francisco, CA 94105, USA, or Eisenacher Strasse 2,
10777 Berlin, Germany
