--- Page 1 ---
HAL Id: hal-01930301
https://hal.science/hal-01930301v1
Submitted on 25 May 2021
HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access archive
for the deposit and dissemination of scientific re-
search documents, whether they are published or not.
The documents may come from teaching and research
institutions in France or abroad, or from public or pri-
vate research centers.L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL , est des-
tinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents scien-
tifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non, émanant
des établissements d’enseignement et de recherche
français ou étrangers, des laboratoires publics ou
privés.
HAL Authorization
Writing and verifying interoperability requirements:
Application to collaborative processes
Nicolas Daclin, Sihem Mallek Daclin, Vincent Chapurlat, Bruno Vallespir
To cite this version:
Nicolas Daclin, Sihem Mallek Daclin, Vincent Chapurlat, Bruno Vallespir. Writing and verifying interoper-
ability requirements: Application to collaborative processes. Computers in Industry, 2016, Vol. 82, pp.1-18.
⟨10.1016/j.compind.2016.04.001⟩. ⟨hal-01930301⟩

--- Page 2 ---
Writing  and  verifying  interoperability  requirements:  Application  to
collaborative  processes
N.  Daclina,*,  S.  Mallek  Daclina,  V.  Chapurlata,  B.  Vallespirb,c
aLGI2P —Laboratoire  de  Génie  Informatique  et  d’Ingénierie  de  Production  Site  de  l’Ecole  des  Mines  d’Alès,  Parc  Scienti ﬁque  G.  Besse,  30035  Nîmes  cedex  1,
France
bUniv.  Bordeaux,  IMS,  UMR  5218,  F-33400  Talence,  France
cCNRS,  IMS,  UMR  5218,  F-33400  Talence,  France
Keywords:
Interoperability  requirements
Repository  for  interoperability
requirements
Requirements  veriﬁcation
Domain  Speci ﬁc  LanguageA  B  S  T  R  A  C  T
Interoperability  analysis  is  highly  correlated  with  interoperability  requirements,  the  ability  to  grasp,
structure,  author  and  verify  such  requirements  has  become  fundamental  to  the  analytical  process.  To  this
end,  requirements  must  be:  (1)  properly  submitted  in  a  suitable  and  usable  repository;  (2)  written
correctly  by  stakeholders  with  relevance  to  the  studied  domain;  and  (3)  as  easily  veriﬁable  as  possible  on
various  models  of  the  system  for  which  interoperability  capabilities  are  being  requested.  The  purpose  of
this  article  is  to  present  both  a  structured  repository  for  interoperability  requirements  and  a  Domain
Speci ﬁc  Language  to  write  and  verify  interoperability  requirements  –  within  a  collaborative  process
model  –  using  formal  veriﬁcation  techniques.  The  interoperability  requirements  repository,  which  serves
to  structure  interoperability  requirements  and  make  them  available,  is  itself  structured  through
abstraction  levels,  views  and  interoperability  life  cycle  dimensions.  Additional  parameters  detailing  the
requested  information  and  the  known  impacts  of  requirements  on  behavior  of  the  studied  system  have
also  been  included.  The  Domain  Speci ﬁc  Language  provides  the  means  for  writing  interoperability
requirements.  Afterwards,  these  requirements  /C0  more  speci ﬁcally  the  temporal  requirements  /C0  are  re-
written  into  properties  by  transforming  the  temporal  logic  TCTL  to  allow  for  their  effective  veriﬁcation  by
using  the  model  checker  UPPAAL.  The  overall  approach  is  illustrated  in  a  case  study  based  on  a
collaborative  drug  circulation  process.  The  article  also  draws  conclusions  and  offers  an  outlook  for  future
research  and  application  efforts
1.  Introduction
In  the  ﬁeld  of  Systems  Engineering  (SE)  [1],  like  in  any
specialized  engineering  ﬁeld  (mechanical,  Information  Systems,
mechatronics,  etc.),  requirements  engineering  is  a  critical  activity
dedicated  to  ensuring  that  a  given  system  meets  all  expressed
requirements  (i.e.  original  requirements  corresponding  to  stake-
holder1expectations  and  prescriptions,  as  well  as  requirements
induced  by  technical  choices  and  decisions  throughout  the  system
design  phase).For  one  thing,  a  requirement  assigns,  without  ambiguity  and  in
a  coherent  manner,  designers'  tasks  and  constraints  when  devising
a  solution.  A  requirement  can  be  described  using  standards  [2],
reference  models  and  vocabularies  [3].  However,  the  existing
vocabulary  and  requirement  checklists  commonly  adopted  in  the
SE  ﬁeld  tend  to  be  understandable,  yet  perfectible  and  abstract
when  taking  a  particular  category  of  requirements  into  account
(e.g.  non-functional  requirements  such  as  interoperability)  or  a
particular  system  (e.g.  enterprises  involved  in  collaborative
processes).  For  another  thing,  the  interoperability  concept  [4]
remains  a  key  factor  of  success  for  enterprises  that  share  and
exchange  processes,  service  data  and  resources  in  a  collaborative
context;  moreover,  a  number  of  existing  works  have  sought  to
characterize  [5],  implement  [6]  and  assess  this  very  concept  [7–9].
Nevertheless,  compliance  with  interoperability  requirements
within  a  partnership  is  neglected  and  constitutes  a  challenge  that
can  provide:  (1)  structure  to  interoperability  requirements,  (2)  a* Corresponding  author.
E-mail  addresses:  surname.name@mines-ales.fr  (N.  Daclin),
bruno.vallespir@ims-bordeaux.fr  (B.  Vallespir).
1 We  have  adopted  the  deﬁnition  in  [3]  that  deﬁnes  a  stakeholder  as  a  “party 
having  a  right,  share  or  claim  in  a  system  or  in  its  possession  of  characteristics  that 
meets  said  party’s  needs  and  expectations”.

--- Page 3 ---
means  for  expressing  requirements,  and  (3)  the  tools  needed  to
detect  possible  interoperability  ﬂaws.
The  paper's  focus  is  threefold:  grasping  and  structuring
interoperability  requirements,  identifying  the  means  of  writing
such  requirements,  and  performing  veriﬁcations  with  formal
techniques  [10].  The  deﬁnition  and  veriﬁcation  of  requirements
involves  a  collaborative  process  model  for  the  purpose  of
highlighting  interoperability  issues  that  may  lead  to  dysfunctions
and  interfacing  problems  from  technical,  organizational  (including
human)  and  conceptual  points  of  view.  Following  this  brief
introduction,  the  problem  statement  and  expected  outcomes  will
be  presented.  The  relevant  research  work  will  be  provided  and
discussed  in  Section  3.  Section  4  will  then  lay  out  the  proposed
repository  for  interoperability  requirements,  featuring  its  dimen-
sions,  their  relationships  and  the  steps  allowing  for  its  utilization.
Section  5  will  offer  a  case  study  to  illustrate  the  value  of  such  an
approach;  lastly,  Section  6  will  assess  the  approach  and  its  possible
enhancements.
2.  Interoperability  requirements  engineering
2.1.  Problem  statement  and  expected  outcomes
Nowadays,  a  technical  problem  involving  interoperability  in  the
ﬁelds  of  computer  science  and  Information  and  Communication
Technologies  [11]  basically  includes  organizational  aspects  (i.e.  are
the  organization  and  its  personnel  able  to  collaborate  efﬁciently?)
and  conceptual  aspects  (do  the  data  being  exchanged  share  a
common  semantics?)  [12–14].  While  initially  focused  exclusively
on  data  exchange  and  sharing,  topics  such  as  process  interopera-
bility  [15]  are  also  receiving  consideration  at  present.  Moreover,
interoperability  encompasses  other  aspects,  like  for  instance  the
interfacing  issue,  which  extends  to  the  autonomy  and  reversibility
of  partners  involved  in  the  collaborative  venture  [16].  Interopera-
bility  therefore  is  an  important  and  mandatory  capability  to  ensure
effectiveness  in  terms  of:  exchanging  and  sharing  information,
products  and  resources;  aligning  and  orchestrating  collaborative
processes;  and  establishing  decisions  or  policies.  Among  the
numerous  relationships  concepts  (collaboration,  cooperation,
coalition  .  .  .  )  and  their  associated  time  scale,  interoperability  is
for  instance  necessary  in  organizations  such  as  Collaborative
Networked  Organizations  [61]  which  rely  on  collaborative
business  processes  (which  can  be  coordinated,  orchestrated  or
else,  synchronized)  which  themselves  rely  on  interoperable
activities,  resources,  applications  (through  collaboration  points[62])  which  themselves,  for  instance,  exchange  data.  However,  the
better  the  understanding  and  deﬁnition  of  interoperability,  the
more  complex  its  implementation,  monitoring,  control  and
improvement.  This  statement  actually  leads  to  considering
interoperability  requirements  and  their  veriﬁcation  from  a  more
suitable  perspective  [17].
Requirements  engineering  practices  must  consider  two  major
aspects  [18],  namely  the  requirements  management  (access,
versioning,  change,  traceability,  etc.)  and  the  actual  engineering
steps  (elicitation,  writing,  reﬁnement,).  Requirements  must  be
checked,  throughout  a  system's  life  cycle  from  design  phase  to
execution  phase  via  the  corresponding  components  and  sub-
systems  development  phase  [2],  in  order  to  prove  expectations
have  been  satisﬁed  and  avoid  problems  (e.g.  drift  from  expected
objectives,  cancellation  in  worst  cases).  Similarly,  some  require-
ments  must  be  veriﬁed  during  the  actual  operations  phase  and
until  the  system  is  decommissioned  (or  at  least  partially
redesigned).  Requirements  engineering  therefore  plays  a  major
role  in  the  success  or  failure  of  a  project  [19,58] ,  yet  it  is  often
neglected  by  actors  [20,59,60] .
The  requirements  engineering  process  continues  to  be  consid-
ered  as  time-  and  resource-consuming  and  without  clear  added
value.  Stakeholders  however  should  always  keep  in  mind  that  as
more  errors  or  omissions  are  carried  to  the  upstream  engineering
phases,  the  remedial  costs  in  downstream  phases  will  increase
(modi ﬁcation  to  the  existing  system)  [21]  (Fig.  1).  On  this  ﬁgure,  an
important  aspect  is  the  “cost  to  extract  defects ”  in  relation  to  the
different  steps  of  development  which  shows  that  the  more  a  defect
is  identi ﬁed  belatedly,  the  more  the  correction  cost  is  important.
The  requirements  engineering  belongs  to  the  ﬁeld  of  the  deﬁnition
of  the  problem  so,  it  is  beneﬁ cial  to  spend  time  deﬁning  clearly
what  is  expected  in  order  to  avoid  (as  much  as  possible)  problems
in  the  later  phases  of  development.  Interoperability  is  a  non-
functional  requirement  (NFR)  to  be  incorporated  throughout  the
system  life  cycle  [22]  that  affects  both  the  functioning  and  quality
of  system  service  yet  that  has  remained  neglected  [23].  Hence,
interoperability  requirements  engineering  is  a  key  to  handling,
improving  and  ensuring  that  interoperability  capabilities  are  being
properly  controlled.
First  of  all,  a  simple  requirements  baseline  is  unsuitable.
Requirements  need  to  be  combined  into  a  structured  reference,  i.e.
a  repository.  The  overall  objective  is  to  structure  requirements  for
them  to  be  easily:  (1)  traceable  throughout  the  system  life  cycle
(deﬁ ned,  veriﬁed,  allocated,  satisﬁed),  (2)  modi ﬁable/removable/
addable,  (3)  usable  for  determining  relevant  solutions,  and  (4)
Fig.  1.  Commited  Life-cycle  cost  against  time  (extracted  from  [21]  from  Defense  Acquisition  University  1993).

--- Page 4 ---
identi ﬁable.  Moreover,  a  repository  is  capable  of  supporting  the
requirements  speci ﬁcation  from  a  well-de ﬁned  basis,  rather  than
with  a  jumbled  list,  and  is  bound  to  comply  with  quality  criteria
from  a  set  of  requirements,  as  deﬁned  in  [24].
The  assumption  here  is  that  the  qualities  inherent  to  a  set  of
requirements  are  more  easily  respected  with  a  repository  that
structures  the  interoperability  requirements.  As  a  ﬁrst  and  obvious
point,  the  repository  must  be  in  agreement  with  the  interopera-
bility  concept,  speci ﬁcally  in  corporate  sectors  concerned  with
issues  of  interoperability,  interoperability  problems  and  life  cycle
(when  interoperability  is  anticipated).  Second,  a  repository  can
lead  to  considering  interoperability  requirements  that  might  be
generic  enough  for  application  to  any  collaborative  processes  and
in  different  ﬁelds.  This  kind  of  requirement  would  then  be
identi ﬁed  and  permanently  positioned  in  the  repository  to  be  used
at  stakeholders'  subsequent  request.  Third,  an  overview  like  a
repository  can  simplify  conﬂict  identi ﬁcation  between  require-
ments.  Such  is  the  case  in  collaborative  processes  involving  various
activities  and  resources  from  various  processes  belonging  to
different  organizations  with  the  potential  for  conﬂicting  expect-
ations.  Lastly,  a  repository  in  agreement  with  existing  interopera-
bility  frameworks  and  including  requirements  that  satisfyinteroperability  needs  could  ultimately  yield  interoperability
solutions  that  are  fully  adapted  to  the  initial  expectations.
Stakeholders  must  subsequently  express  their  requirements.  To
this  end,  a  number  of  practical  rules  for  adequately  expressing,
reviewing  and  sharing  requirements  are  available  in  the  literature.
Let’s  cite  the  well-known  acronyms  M.U.S.T,2S.M.A.R.T3and  ISO
recommendations  [25].  The  spectrum  of  languages  to  express
requirements  extends  from  natural  languages  to  formal  languages.
Natural  languages  offer  readability  (with  requirements  being
understandable),  ﬂexibility  (possibility  of  writing  the  same
requirement  using  different  terms),  extensibility  (deﬁ nition  of
new  concepts,  terms,  attributes),  though  their  principal  drawbacks
are  low  levels  of  consistency  and  precision  plus  a  risk  of  ambiguity.
Furthermore,  the  veriﬁcation  of  these  requirements  relies,  for
instance,  on  human  expertise,  thus  implying  deﬁciencies  (misin-
terpretation  of  requirements,  an  untruthful  result,  time  allocation
to  verify  requirements).  Formal  languages  offer  precision  (mathe-
matical  basis),  consistency  and  are  often  supported  by  computer
tools.  Conversely,  these  languages  are  barely  readable  and  prevent
stakeholders  from  using  their  own  business  vocabulary  and
culture.  These  languages  and  tools  require  a  solid  knowledge,
and  only  a  few  stakeholders  are  accustomed  to  these  techniques  in
favoring  natural  languages.
Fig.  2.  Overall  process  of  managing  and  expressing  interoperability  requirements.
2M.U.S.T.  stands  for:  Measurable,  Useful,  Simple  and  Traceable.
3S.M.A.R.T.  stands  for:  Speciﬁc,  Measurable,  Achievable,  Relevant  and  Traceable
(or  Time-bound).4For  instance,  the  modalities  in  temporal  logic,  where  E  stands  for  “it  exits ”,  A  for
“for  all”,  []  for  “always ”  and  <>  for  “sometimes ”.

--- Page 5 ---
Regardless  of  the  language,  a  dedicated  language  –  as  formal  as
possible  –  can  assist  actors  in  specifying  interoperability  require-
ments.  The  proposed  language  must  be  concise,  accurate  and
simple  enough  to  create  requirements  that  are  understandable,
distributable,  unambiguous  and  entirely  readable  for  humans  (as  a
formal  language4).  The  language  must  then  allow  writing
interoperability  requirements  within  a  collaborative  process,  i.e.
by  including  limited  concepts  related  to:  attributes  for  checking
interoperability  (data,  responsibilities,  duration);  an  expression  of
requirements  (modalities,  state,  cause,  conclusion);  the  language
used  to  model  the  collaboration.  Moreover,  the  language  needs  to
guide  the  writing,  by  making  available  both  proposals  and
information  regarding  possible  error.  The  language  must  therefore
comply  with  a  strictly  deﬁned  grammar.
Consequently,  the  main  goal  here  is  to  support  the  process  that
entails  managing,  writing  and  verifying  interoperability  require-
ments  (see  Fig.  2).  The  veriﬁcation  step  is  performed  on  a
collaborative  process  model  –  compliant  with  BPMN  2.0  [26]  –
transformed  into  an  equivalent  model  for  applying  the  veriﬁcation
routine.  Two  formal  veriﬁcation  techniques  have  been  used:
conceptual  graphs  [27]  using  the  COGITANT  tool  [28]  to  verify  non-
temporal  requirements  and  model  checking  [29]  using  UPPAAL
[30] as  well  as  temporal  requirements.  At  this  stage,  the
collaborative  process  model  is  transformed  into  the  model  used
by  veriﬁcation  tools  [31].  Moreover,  requirements  are  written
directly  in  the  formal  language,  i.e.  conceptual  graphs  and  TCTL
(temporal  logic —Timed  Computation  Tree  Logic).  The  purpose
then  is  to  enable:  (1)  managing  requirements  in  a  structured  form,
whereby  a  set  of  requirements  can  be  selected/added/removed/
modi ﬁed;  and  (2)  writing  requirements  using  a  human  readable
language  and  addable  into  a  dedicated  repository.  As  a  ﬁnal
condition,  requirements  must  be  transformed  into  the  targeted
formal  language  for  veriﬁcation.
This  stage  will  solely  consider  the  writing  of  temporal
requirements.  Non-temporal  requirements  have  already  been
written  and  positioned  within  the  repository  for  selection  and
veriﬁcation.  Hence,  the  goals  are  to:  (1)  render  the  writing  of
temporal  requirements  feasible  with  a  dedicated  stakeholder-
oriented  language;  (2)  rewrite  this  requirement  into  the  language
used  in  formal  veriﬁcation  techniques;  and  (3)  perform  the
veriﬁcation  step.
2.2.  Managing  and  writing  interoperability  requirements
Interoperability  is  applicable  in  various  ﬁelds  (e.g.  medicine
[32,33] ,  armed  services  [34],  computer  science  [35],  crisis
management).  As  regards  corporate  interoperability,  research
has  sought  to:  (1)  deﬁne  interoperability,  (2)  develop  methods
and  tools  for  interoperability  evaluation,  and  (3)  propose
methodologies  for  its  implementation.  Some  work  can  serve  as
a  basis  to  manage  interoperability  requirements  and  elicit
requirements.
Interoperability  frameworks  structure  interoperability  accord-
ing  to  its  characteristics  (problems,  approaches).  Most  frameworks
[55] consider  interoperability  [4,36,37]  as  a  conceptual,  organiza-
tional  and  technological  issue.  Some  however  include  additional
dimensions  in  order  to  develop  interoperability  solutions  [4];  they
mainly  consider  the  “how ”  (solution)  rather  than  the  “what ”  (what
needs  to  be  done?),  yet  they  do  allow  structuring  interoperability,
and  this  step  needs  to  be  considered  in  grasping  (a  solution  is  a
response  to  a  requirement(s)),  organizing  and  handling  interoper-
ability  requirements.
Interoperability  evaluation  also  involves  interoperability
requirements.  As  regards  maturity  evaluations  [38–41],  maturity
models  describe  expectations  to  be  met  regarding  a  given
interoperations  capability  that  may  evolve  throughout  maturitylevels.  The  notion  of  requirement  is  implicit  and  not  formalized  (i.e.
not  structured  or  expressed  as  a  requirement),  yet  these  models
remain  a  key  input  from  which  interoperability  requirements  can
be  extracted.  Operational  measurements  (i.e.  effective  exchange
and  sharing  phase)  [8,42]  deﬁne  and  provide  metrics  for  an
interoperability  evaluation.  These  results  are  compared  with
respect  to  expected  results  describing  requirements  in  terms  of
operational  interoperability.  Further  details  (maturity/operational
evaluation)  are  available  in  [43].
Regarding  research  on  interoperability  requirements,  [44]
deﬁnes  interoperability  as  a  fundamental  “ility ”  that  enhances
Systems  of  System  capabilities.  In  a  similar  manner,  the  latest
version  of  TOGAF  [45]  highlights  the  need  to  deﬁne  interoperabili-
ty  requirements  and  provides  guidelines  in  support  of  their
deﬁnition.  Moreover,  [46]  proposed  a  set  of  interoperability
requirements  (related  to  gas  and  electricity  Smart  Metering
Systems),  according  to  a  deﬁned  and  common  format.  With
respect  to  the  structuring  of  interoperability  requirements,  [31]
proposed  a  set  of  requirements  and  a  3-dimensional  model  to
provide  a  means  for  verifying  interoperability  requirements.  This
work  was  mainly  directed  at  the  effective  veriﬁcation  of  require-
ments  supported  by  formal  techniques.  Let's  note  that  [4],  with  its
interoperability  engineering  phase  dimension,  considers  deﬁning
requirements,  yet  this  has  not  been  developed  any  further  for
relevant  application  and  moreover  may  be  extended  to  consider
interoperability  requirements.  Finally,  other  works  focusing  on  the
notion  of  interoperability  and  collaboration  between  organizations
can  be  also  considered.  Along  these  lines,  let's  mention  the  service
level  agreements  (SLA)  that  contractually  deﬁne  the  expected
quality  of  services  between  parties.
To  address  these  issues  surrounding  requirements  expression,
various  vocabularies  and  their  semantics  can  be  employed  in  order
to  abandon  the  natural  language  and  its  weaknesses.  These
vocabularies  must  support  designers  not  only  in  expressing  the
requirements,  but  also  in  decomposing  or  reﬁning  them  from  a
more  relevant  and  formal  presentation  into  a  set  of  sub-require-
ments.  Various  approaches  are  available  to  handle  these  vocabu-
laries;  however,  it  remains  a  difﬁcult  task  to  choose  and  develop  a
dedicated  language  that  is  concise  and  capable  of:  properly  writing
requirements,  specifying  interoperability,  performing  veriﬁca-
tions,  and  being  simple  enough  for  widespread  comprehension.
From  this  perspective,  mental  maps  or  guided  interviews  may  be
used  to  specify  requirements  among  the  less  formal  techniques.
More  formally  speaking,  the  KAOS  method  [47],  boilerplate
approaches  [48],  Use  Case  Map  notation  [49],  standardized
requirement  checklists  [3]  or  the  REGAL  approach  [50]  have  all
been  recognized  as  suitable  methodologies.  These  approaches
however  offer  methodologies  to  write  requirements  using  natural
language.  In  this  sense,  the  use  of  standards  offering  a  vocabulary
based  on  natural  language,  in  addition  to  limiting  and  structuring
the  writing  of  requirements,  seems  to  be  more  appropriate.  Let's
also  mention  URN  [51],  GRL  [52]  or  SBVR  [53].  For  instance,
Semantic  Business  Vocabulary  Rules  (SBVR)  propose  a  deﬁned
vocabulary  to  write  business  rules  that  represent  requirements.  In
fact,  SBVR  “deﬁnes  the  vocabulary  and  rules  for  documenting  the
semantics  vocabularies,  business  facts  and  business  rules  for  the
interchange  of  business  vocabularies  and  business  rules  among
organizations  and  between  software  tools ”  [53]  and  moreover  is
based  on  a  natural  language  that  simpli ﬁes  writing  requirements  in
comparison  with  a  formal  language  [54].  Thus,  SBVR  offers  a  clear
representation  of  requirements  without  necessitating  speci ﬁc
skills  since  it  is  based  on  natural  language  with  a  limited
vocabulary.  These  semi-formal  notations,  either  graphical  or
textual,  feature  a  well-de ﬁned  syntax  and  are  easily  understood
and  handled  by  stakeholders.  Conversely,  the  majority  of  these
languages  are  only  minimally  automated  and  still  present  a  risk  of

--- Page 6 ---
ambiguity.  Formal  languages  (CTL,  LTL,  TCTL,  etc.)  also  make  it
possible  to  write  requirements  with  great  precision  by  offering  a
deﬁned  syntax  and  semantics  with  a  high  level  of  automation.  In
contrast,  these  languages  are  difﬁcult  to  learn,  read  and  under-
stand  without  extensive  expertise.  Lastly,  let's  mention  the  Formal
Description  Techniques  (FDTs)  which  offer  languages  to  describe  a
system,  especially  for  computer  system  development.  FDTs  ensure
to  get  a  set  of  speci ﬁcations  which  respect  characteristics  such  as
clearness,  concision,  completeness,  consistency,  tractability,  and
conformance.  FDTs  are  addressed  to  developers,  implementers,
testers  and  end  users  and  let's  quote  ESTELLE,  ALBERT  II,  LOTOS...
[65].  These  FDTs  remain  close  to  the  programmatic  languages
structure  based  on  mathematical  symbols  that  can  hardly  usable
but  they  allow  to  reach  an  effective  and  reliable  system  in  an
efﬁcient  and  rigorous  manner.  Thus,  it  could  be  interesting  to
extend  these  kinds  of  approaches  to  allow  –  beyond  the  developers
and  implementers  –  the  business  users  in  charge  of  the
management  of  collaborative  processes  and,  here,  the  manage-
ment  of  interoperability  aspects,  to  beneﬁ t  from  formal  techniques.
From  these  considerations,  it  is  necessary  at  ﬁrst  to  clearly
structure  identi ﬁed  (or  written)  interoperability  requirements
according  to:  (1)  interoperability  problems,  and  (2)  the  interoper-
ability  deﬁnition.  This  structure  must  ultimately  provide  feasible
interoperability  solutions  that  satisfy  stakeholder  expectations.
Second  of  all,  it  is  necessary  to  write  requirements  in  adhering  to
strict  guidelines  and  rules  applicable  to  stakeholders  in  their
speci ﬁcations  task  and  the  resulting  requirements  must  be  veriﬁed
with  formal  techniques.  This  has  to  lead  to  the  development  of  alanguage  sufﬁciently  “non  formal ”  to  be  used  without  strong
knowledge  and  sufﬁciently  formal  to  be  linked  with  a  tool  allowing
formal  veriﬁcation.  Thus,  the  expecting  result  is  a  Controlled
Natural  Language  [63]  enables  non  engineers  or  experts  in
requirements  engineering  to  take  advantage  of  reliable  veriﬁcation
means  based  on  formal  language  while  keeping,  as  possible,  the
comfort  and  the  power  of  expression  of  the  Natural  Language,  i.e.,
“to  bridge  the  gap  between  a  natural  language  and  a  formal  language
by  the  use  of  a  controlled  natural  language  (CNL)  that  can  mediate
between  these  languages”  [64].
3.  Repository  for  interoperability  requirements
3.1.  Fundamental  dimensions
A  repository  is  “a  place  where  things  are  stored  and  can  be  found5
”.  Regarding  interoperability  requirements  engineering,  the
repository  provides  a  means  for  structuring,  organizing  and
managing  requirements  according  to  interoperability  features,  in
continually  verifying  their  compliance  throughout  a  partnership
and  guiding  the  selection  of  a  best  interoperability  solution  [9].  In
other  words,  it  offers  a  set  of  interoperability  requirements  that
respect  the  quality  criteria  of  a  set  of  pre-established  requirements,
thus  making  it  possible  to:
Fig.  3.  The  Interoperability  Requirements  repository  (requirements  shown  with  a  lock  are  prede ﬁned  and  unmodi ﬁable).
5http://dictionary.cambridge.org/ .

--- Page 7 ---
/C15  grasp  and  structure  interoperability  requirements —stakeholders
may  set  up  their  own  requirements  in  accordance  with
dimensions  properly  related  to  interoperability;
/C15  specify  the  requirement  author,  modify  and  remove  interopera-
bility  requirements  all  in  an  efﬁcient  manner;
/C15  include  a  basic  set  of  interoperability  requirements —existing
requirements  from  the  literature  applicable  to  any  collaborative
process  (i.e.  independent  of  the  context)  are  already  positioned
and  proposed;
/C15  satisfy  all  stakeholder  expectations,  avoid  redundancy  and
conﬂict  between  requirements,  ensure  that  a  set  of  (selected)
requirements  can  be  satisﬁed  (otherwise,  provide  for  early
detection  of  infeasibility),  and  ensure  that  requirements  are
easily  accessible  and  available  for  consultation  (structuring).
/C15  generate  a  set  of  interoperability  solutions  when  a  requirement
is  not  satisﬁed  /C0  the  targeted  repository  must  be  consistent  with
existing  interoperability  frameworks  yielding  interoperability
solutions.
Consequently,  the  proposed  repository  is  in  agreement  with  the
framework  in  [4]  and  [36].  This  one  can  act  as  a  base  to  collect
interoperability  requirements  to  get  a  relevant  repository.
Moreover  the  original  version  of  the  framework  makes  available
a  set  of  interoperability  solutions  –  according  to  its  dimensions  –
that  can  be  related  with  interoperability  requirements.  Thus,  the
repository  considers  three  basic  dimensions:  abstraction,  views,
and  interoperability  life  cycle  (Fig.  3),  in  agreement  with  [4].
Abstraction  levels  are  included  within  the  interoperability  prob-
lems.  Interoperability  views  are  the  companies ’  ﬁelds  affected  by
interoperability.  Lastly,  a  third  dimension  is  added  and  deﬁned  as
interoperability  life  cycle  which  is  the  decomposition  of  interoper-
ability  into  agreements  during  the  partnership  life  cycle.  For
instance,  requirements  at  the  beginning  of  a  partnership  concern
interfacing  while  requirements  at  the  end  pertain  to  unplugging.
The  dimension  of  abstraction  levels  considers  interoperability
problems  in  the  three  realms  of  Conceptual  (meaning  of
information,  capability  of  expressing  and  communicating  infor-
mation),  Organizational  (responsibilities,  authority  decision-mak-
ing  processes,  policies,  organizational  processes  and  regulations)
and  Technological  (physical  interface  compatibility  issues).
The  dimension  of  interoperability  views  identi ﬁes  the  main
ﬁelds  needed  to  develop  in-company  interoperability  [36]:
Business,  Process,  Service  and  Data.  Initially  limited  in  its  original
version  to  the  data  exchange,  sharing  and  the  exploitation  ofexchanged  and  shared  data  exclusively,  this  last  level  of  the
repository  has  currently  been  extended  to  consider  other  ﬂows,  so
as  to  enable  specifying  interoperability  requirements.  For  our
purposes,  this  level  includes:
-Resources .  The  interoperability  of  resources  relates  to  the
speci ﬁc  resources  (human,  software,  hardware)  that  belong  to
the  various  partners  and  that  can  be  shared  among  them.  This
aspect  mainly  pertains  to  the  synchronization  of  resources
deployed,  their  aptitudes  and  capacities;
-Material .  Material  interoperability  refers  to  exchanges  of  the
materials  to  be  processed  by  the  various  partners.  This  aspect
mainly  pertains  to  the  volume,  length,  span,  etc.  of  the  material
being  exchanged.
The  dimension  of  interoperability  life  cycle  phases  relates  to  the
occurrence  of  interoperability  during  the  partnership.  Interopera-
bility  requirements  may  indeed  evolve,  depending  on  the  phase  of
the  partnership,  i.e.  the  beginning  (partner  connections),  the
operational  phase  (interoperation  exchange,  sharing,  perfor-
mance)  or  the  end  (dismantling).  Each  phase  therefore  is
consistently  correlated  with  interoperability.  As  such,  this  dimen-
sion  is  characterized  by:  compatibility  (interfacing  issues),
interoperations  (running  of  the  partnership),  autonomy,  and
reversibility  [31].
As  shown  in  the  previous  ﬁgure,  a  set  of  interoperability
requirements  is  already  positioned  within  the  repository.  The
stakeholder  must  obtain  information  on  the  requirements  and  is
unconcerned  with  any  writing  or  veriﬁcation  process.  For  instance,
the  selected  requirement  is  positioned  at  the  service/organiza-
tional/compatibility  level;  moreover,  it  is  non-temporal  and
veriﬁed  with  conceptual  graphs  (pre-loaded).  Moreover,  its  goal
consists  of  ensuring  that  a  person  associated  with  a  task  of  a  given
process  holds  the  possible  required  authorization  to  access  another
process  (information,  tool,  database).  The  stakeholder  then  merely
has  to  instantiate  the  requirement  in  specifying  the  considered
tasks  (shown  in  the  description).  Lastly,  the  following  table
presents  some  typical  interoperability  requirements  positioned
into  the  repository.  This  table  presents  the  two  dimensions
interoperability  levels  and  interoperability  categories,  the  inter-
operability  lifecycle  phase  is  positioned  beside  the  requirement  (C-
compatibility,  I-interoperation,  A-autonomy  and  R-reversibility)
(Table  1).
Table  1
Examples  of  interoperability  requirements  (available  at:  https://tel.archives-ouvertes.fr/tel-00666099/document ).
Conceptual Organizational Technological
Business – /C15  The  decisional  structures  are  deﬁned  (C)
/C15  A  common  strategy  is  deﬁned  (I)
/C15  A  strategy  of  a  partner  is  not  altered  by  the
common  strategy  (A)–
Process /C15  The  internal  processes  are  modeled  (C) /C15  The  collaborative  process  is  modeled  (I) –
Service /C15  The  services  are  described  (C) /C15  The  responsible  are  identi ﬁed  (C)
/C15  The  receiver  acknowledges  reception  (I)
/C15  The  internal  functions  are  performed  after  the
partnership  (R)
/C15  A  service  can  stand  in  for  the  service  involved
into  the  partnership  (A)/C15  A  communication  protocol  is  deﬁned  (C)
/C15  The  duration  to  exchange  is  less  than  a  deﬁned
value  (I)
/C15  The  duration  to  use  exchanged  data  is  less  than  a
deﬁned  value  (I)
/C15  The  duration  to  execute  a  task  post-partnership
is  equal  to  the  duration  ante-partnership  (R)
Data
Resource
Material/C15  Data  are  unambiguous  (C)
/C15  Received  data  are  conform  to  required  data  (I)
/C15  Data  are  not  degraded  (R)/C15  Internal  data  are  secured  (C)
/C15  Data  to  exchange  are  available  (I)/C15  A  data  mapping  language  is  deﬁned  (C)
/C15  The  quantity  of  required  data  is  equal  to  the
quantity  of  received  data  (I)

--- Page 8 ---
All  these  requirements  are  either  (1)  expressed  and  veriﬁed
with  conceptual  graphs  due  to  their  a-temporal  nature,  (2)
expressed  and  veriﬁed  with  the  model  checking  technique  due
to  their  temporal  nature  or  (3)  kept  like  this  whatever  their  nature
and  veriﬁed  by  expertise  since  it  is  impossible  to  express  them
with  a  more  formal  language.
Lastly,  let’s  mention  that  the  following  point  of  view  is  adopted
to  consider  a  requirement  as  an  interoperability  requirement:
when  heterogeneous  organizations  work  together  and  require  to
share,  exchange,  use,  modify,  have  permission  .  .  .  functionalities,
resources,  data  .  .  .  from  each  other,  and  when  objects  and  attributes
from  different  organizations  occur  in  a  requirement  that  can  impact
the  relation,  the  requirement  falls  into  the  category  of  interoperability
requirements  and  are  positioned  into  the  repository .
3.2.  Additional  parameters
Other  parameters  must  also  be  considered  by  the  repositrory  in
order  to:  (1)  ascertain  with  precision  the  impact  of  interoperability
requirements  on  collaborating  partners  and/or  on  the  partnership
itself;  (2)  provide  information  about  veriﬁcation  techniques  and
the  means  for  writing  requirements;  and  (3)  ensure  availability  of
adapted  solutions  with  respect  to  the  veriﬁed  requirements.  These
parameters  are  known  as  “Granularity ”,  “Analysis” ,  “Solution
proposal ”  and  “Means  of  veriﬁ cation ”  [17].
The  Granularity  parameter  represents  the  level  of  detail  on  the
object  affected  by  interoperability.  The  selection  and  implementa-
tion  of  an  efﬁcient  interoperability  solution  depends  on  how
accurate  the  particular  object  has  been  identi ﬁed.  Interoperability
solution  can  indeed  inﬂuence  partnership  operations  or  efﬁciency
(mission,  objectives,  etc.)  or  a  partner  (mission,  objectives,
components,  resources).  As  an  example,  “partners  hold  the
necessary  authorization  to  access  shared  data ”  (CxOxD6)  does  affect
partnership  activities  (risk  of  lost  time  while  obtaining  the
information  required  by  an  activity).  The  requirement  “function
f,  performed  by  resource  r  involved  in  partnership,  is  still  performed ”
(AxOxS)  exerts  an  impact  on  a  partner  (execution  of  a  function).
Partners  can  thus  select/adapt/build  interoperability  solutions  or,
potentially,  relax  requirements.
Analysis  levels  constitute  the  main  characteristics  affected  by
the  implementation  of  interoperability.  The  satisfaction  of  a
requirement  can  affect  criteria  (e.g.  performance  affecting  the
partnership  or  a  partner).  Requirements  must  therefore  be  deﬁned
according  to  these  criteria  in  order  to  highlight  interoperability
expectations  and  their  impacts  on  partner  and  partnership.  These
criteria  are  deﬁned  as:  performance,  stability,  and  integrity.
Performance  refers  to  the  ability  of  a  system  to  achieve  its
objectives.  Requirements  positioned  on  this  characteristic  concern
the  expected  interoperability  performance  and  the  impact  of
interoperability  on  partner/partnership.  For  instance,  the  require-
ment  “the  duration  to  connect  application  is  less  than  x  times  units ”
impacts  performance  (CxTxS).  More  precisely,  it  affects  partner-
ship  performance  by  extending  for  example  partners'  interfaceduration  and  the  time  required  to  deliver  the  expected  service/
product.  Stability  refers  to  a  system's  ability  to  maintain  its  viability
and  adapt  to  its  environment  (external  change).  For  purposes  of
illustration,  the  requirement  “a  resource  r  is  used  to  change  the
partnership  mission ”  (IxTxS)  indicates  that  a  modi ﬁcation  in  the
mission  (e.g.  new  service  expected  by  the  customer)  must  be
performed  by  the  initially  allocated  resource.  In  this  case,  the
stability  of  the  partnership  is  affected  since  the  resource  must  be
capable  of  participating  in  the  new  mission,  under  satisfactory
conditions  and  with  the  expected  performance  level  (e.g.  agility,
ﬂexibility,  reactivity).  Integrity  refers  to  a  system's  ability  to  remain
consistent  and  carry  out  its  functions  in  case  of  modi ﬁcations  (e.g.
loss  of  resources  /C0  internal  change).  For  instance,  the  previous
requirement  “function  f,  performed  by  resource  r  involved  in
partnership,  is  still  performed ”  alters  the  integrity  of  a  partner
since  its  own  resource  is  being  allocated  to  the  partnership  and  an
internal  function  also  needs  to  be  performed.  In  this  case,  the
partner  must  take  action  to  sustain  its  own  integrity  (e.g.  overload
of  another  internal  resource,  subcontracting,  overtime  hours).
Solution  proposal  parameters  are  intended  to  make  available  a
set  of  solutions  (this  set  is  fully  related  to  [4])  in  accordance  with
the  considered  requirement.  This  parameter  also  includes:  (1)
information  on  the  potential  problem(s)  resulting  from  require-
ment  non-veri ﬁcation;  and  (2)  the  potential  impact  on  the
veriﬁcation  of  other  requirements  once  a  solution  is  implemented.
For  instance,  non-veri ﬁcation  of  the  requirement  “if  task  requires
aptitude,  then  resource  has  aptitude ”  (CxOxS)  can  lead  to  partial  task
achievement  or,  in  the  worst  case,  to  its  non-achievement.  The
solution  might  then  consist  of  either  replacing  the  allocated
resource  by  one  with  the  requested  aptitude  or  training  the  current
resource.  The  choice  of  solution  (resource  change)  can  however
produce  an  impact  on  the  veriﬁcation  of  other  requirements,
namely  those  related  to  the  achievement  of  other  tasks  and  the
availability  of  shared  resources  (e.g.  “It  is  possible  that  task  is
starting  and  resource  is  available ”).
Veriﬁ cation  means  stakeholder  guidance  during  selection  of  a
prede ﬁned  requirement  or  in  writing  a  requirement.  It  therefore
provides  information  about  the  technique  used  to  verify  require-
ments  (expertise,  conceptual  graphs,  model  checking),  depending
on  both  the  nature  of  the  requirement  (temporal  or  non-temporal)
and  its  ability  to  be  veriﬁed  automatically  (conceptual  graphs  and
model  checking)  or  not  (human  expertise).  It  also  provides  the
dedicated  domain  speci ﬁc  language,  according  to  a  selected  means
of  veriﬁcation,  for  writing  a  requirement.  For  instance,  the  previous
requirement  “a  resource  r  gets  used  to  carry  out  a  change  in  the
partnership  mission ”  is  veriﬁed  by  an  expert  because  no  veriﬁcation
can  be  conducted  with  any  formal  technique.  Consequently,
stakeholders  must  have  the  possibility  to  write  requirements
depending  on  the  chosen  means  of  veriﬁcation.  The  next  section
will  present  a  language  to  write  interoperability  requirements  for
veriﬁcation  using  model  checking  techniques.
4. Process  of  writing  interoperability  requirements
4.1.  Principles  of  DSL7applied  to  writing  interoperability  requirements
First,  the  domain  speci ﬁc  language  must  be  easily  manipulated
and  accessible  without  any  sophisticated  knowledge  (in  compari-
son  with  temporal  logic,  for  instance)  and  allow  stakeholders  to
properly  create  and  verify  requirements.  Hence,  the  proposed
language  must  be  limited  yet  sufﬁcient  to  write  requirements,  i.e.  it
must  be  developed  in  accordance  with  the  ﬁeld  under  study.  In  this
research,  DSL  includes  limited  concepts,  such  as:6We  have  adopted  the  following  convention  regarding  the  position  of  a
requirement:
/C15  The  ﬁrst  letter  denotes  the  interoperability  life  cycle  (e.g.  “C”  stands  for
compatibility).
/C15  The  second  letter  denotes  the  abstraction  level  (e.g.  “O”  stands  for  organiza-
tional).
/C15  The  third  letter  denotes  the  interoperability  level  (e.g.  “D”  stands  for  data).
For  instance,  CxOxD  means  the  requirement  concerns  the  interfacing  aspect
(Compatibility )  at  the  Organizational  level  and  is  required  for  the  exchange/sharing
of  Data .7DSL  stands  for  Domain  Speci ﬁc  Language.

--- Page 9 ---
1.  The  language  used  to  model  the  collaborative  process  (BPMN
concepts,  like  task,  resource,  event)  [26];
2. The  veriﬁcation  technique  (UPPAAL)  to  model  process  behavior
and  temporal  requirements  [30].  All  automaton  and  states
corresponding  to  the  BPMN  object  behavior  (e.g.  task  in  a
“Working ”  state)  are  taken  into  consideration,  as  is  the
speci ﬁcation  language  (reachability  “E<>”).
3. Interoperability  concepts,  i.e.  all  concepts  absent  from  the
previous  point  but  still  relevant  to  writing  interoperability
requirements  [16]  (aptitude,  is_less_than ,  authorization,  respon-
sibilities,  etc.).
The  proposed  DSL  is  constrained  to  write  interoperability
requirements  and  formalized  in  the  following  formula:
InteroperabilityRequirement  DSL  =  {BPMNconcepts ,UPPAALconcepts,
Interoperabilityconcepts }  (1)
Second,  the  DSL  must  provide:  (1)  proposals  throughout  the
writing  process,  (2)  information  about  possible  mistakes,  and  (3)  a
human  readable  language  rather  than  a  formal  language.  On  the
basis  of  this  DSL  therefore,  stakeholders  must  be  able  to  write  a
temporal  interoperability  requirement  for  veriﬁcation  on  a
collaborative  process  model.  For  example,  the  interoperability
requirement  ‘it  is  possible  that  a  task  is  working  and  a  resource  is
active ’  is  built  based  on  BPMNconcept  (task,  resource)  and
UPPAALconcept  (working,  active).  Furthermore,  instead  of  using
the  formal  quanti ﬁer  “E  <  >",  this  one  is  expressed  by  ‘it  is  possible
that’,  which  is  a  more  easily  understood  construction.
4.2.  The  syntax  of  interoperability  requirement  DSL
The  proposed  syntax  allows  stakeholders  to  express  require-
ments  from  an  intelligible  language  while  respecting  the
fundamental  characteristics  of  a  requirement.  It  makes  funda-
mental  objects  available,  such  as  the  modalities  that  express  the
type  of  proposition  to  verify  (e.g.  “it  is  inevitable  that ”),  the
elements  involved  in  the  collaborative  process  (resources),  and  thestate  of  a  given  element  in  the  collaborative  process  (resource
availability),  operators  (Boolean  as  well  as  comparative).  In  turn,  all
these  elements  serve  to  build  and  create  a  set  of  interoperability
requirements.  From  a  formal  perspective,  an  interoperability
requirement  can  be  simply  written  in  order  to  respect  the
following  syntax:
interoperabilityRequirement:  =  modality  p  |  p  leadTo  q (2)
where:
modality
:  =  {reachable,  invariantly,  inevitable,  potentially} (3)
lead  To:  =  {lead  to} (4)
and:p,q: =  proposition (5)
A  proposition  can  also  include  various  operators  (e.g.  Boolean,
iterator)  to  build  a  more  complex  interoperability  requirement.  For
this  purpose,  the  proposition  integrates  BPMNconcepts ,  UPPAAL-
concepts  and  Interoperabilityconcepts .  Moreover,  let's  note  that  the
proposed  syntax  can  evolve  in  accordance  with  the  speci ﬁc  needs
of  stakeholders  in  terms  of  requirement  writing.  The  resulting
implementation  of  the  DSL  grammar  is  given  in  Table  2  below.Table  2
DSL  grammar  for  temporal  requirement  writing.
It is poss ible that taskis_working and resource is_ac/g415veR
equirement
mod p
re
achable st v b st v
Fig.  4.  Example  of  a  syntax  tree  for  a  requirement  conforming  to  DSL  grammar.

--- Page 10 ---
The  following  example  shows  that  a  requirement  conforms  to
the  grammar  deﬁned  above.  The  syntax  is  implemented  within  the
xText8framework,  which  allows  deﬁning  an  entire  speci ﬁc
language  that  includes  aspects  leading  to  completion  and  mistake
avoidance  during  requirement  writing  (Fig.  4).
4.3.  TCTL  syntax
The  UPPAAL  tool  is  used  to  process  a  behavioral  model  deﬁned
as  a  set  of  templates  that  communicate  by  synchronization  using
channels  and  syntax  such  as  sent/receive.  Templates  are  given
locations  and  transitions  [30].  The  principle  of  a  model  checker  is
to  exhaustively  verify  requirements  with  temporized  and  possibly
constrained  automata  that  describe  the  behavior  of  a  system.
Furthermore,  temporal  requirements  must  be  formalized  into  the
TCTL  (Timed  Computation  Tree  Logic)  properties  used  to  consider
several  possible  futures  based  on  the  state  of  a  system.  The  UPPAAL
model  checker  features  four  TCTL  quanti ﬁers  (A:  for  all  paths,  E:  a
path  exists,  []:  all  states  in  a  path,  <>:  some  states  in  a  path)
introduced  to  write  a  property.  Formally,  a  TCTL  property  (a  query
in  UPPAAL)  can  be  simply  written  in  respecting  the  following
syntax.
Query:  =  quantiﬁ er  p|  p  leadTo  q (6)
where:Quanti ﬁer: =  (pathQuanti ﬁer,  temporalQuanti ﬁer) (7)
with:
pathQuanti ﬁer  =  {[],  <>} (8)
tempor
alOperator  =  {E,  A} (9)
leadT
o  =  {!} (10)
and:
p,  q  =  expression (11)
An  expression  (p)  is  written  in  accordance  with  existing
automata  (states  and  variables),  as  presented  in  Fig.  5  for  the
automaton  of  a  task  described  with  four  states  (Waiting,  Start,
Working  and  Stop)  and  two  variables  (timeMin  and  timeMax)  used
in  a  clock  T.
Furthermore,  an  expression  may  also  include  various  operators
(e.g.  Boolean,  iterator)  to  build  a  more  complex  property  to  verify.The  resulting  implementation  of  this  TCTL  grammar  is  shown  in
Table  3  (adapted  from  [30]).
As  per  the  previously  deﬁned  TCTL  query  syntax,  Fig.  6
describes  a  given  requirement  using  TCTL  logic.
4.4.  Rewriting  of  interoperability  requirements
Once  a  requirement  has  been  written  using  DSL,  it  then  needs  to
be  rewritten  into  the  language  used  to  apply  the  veriﬁcation
technique  (TCTL).  Both  syntaxes  are  based  on  the  use  of  modalities
(interoperability  requirement  DSL)/quanti ﬁer  (TCTL)  followed  by  a
proposition.
The  ﬁrst  mapping  involves  the  link  between  the  modalities  of
the  interoperability  requirement  DSL  and  the  quanti ﬁer  used  in
TCTL.  As  such,  four  modalities  are  deﬁned  in  keeping  the  meaning
of  the  quanti ﬁer.  These  modalities  are  human  readable  and  express
path  quanti ﬁcation  (E,  A)  and  temporal  operators  ([],  <>)  (Table  4).
The  second  mapping  pertains  to  the  link  between  a  proposition
expressed  using  DSL  and  a  proposition  using  TCTL.  For  instance,  a
stateTerm  (e.g.  “task ”)  will  be  mapped  with  an  iValue .  In  the  same
manner,  a  verb  (e.g.  “is_waiting ”)  will  also  be  mapped  with  an
iValue .  Beyond  this  simple  mapping  however,  both  the  structure  of
the  written  requirement  and  the  targeted  language  must  be
considered  as  well.  For  instance,  the  stateTerm  “task ”  in  a
requirement  means  that  the  mapping  must  be  established  with
the  automaton  Task.  In  addition  to  this  initial  mapping,  a
subsequent  mapping  of  the  Verb  “is_waiting ”  must  be  performed
with  the  corresponding  state  of  the  automaton  Task  (“Waiting ”).
This  second  mapping  must  still  respect  the  structure  of  the  writing
using  TCTL,  which  means  that  the  dot  symbol  (“.”)  must  be  inserted
between  the  name  of  the  automaton  and  the  considered  state.
Consequently,  this  second  mapping  also  considers  the  aspect  of
query  building  correctness  by  incorporating  the  “pID”  rule  found  in
the  grammar.
The  mapping  therefore  depends  not  only  on  a  simple
relationship  between  the  elements  of  a  requirement  and  a  query
(one-to-one  mapping)  but  also  on  how  they  are  arranged  in  the
requirement  and  the  correspondence  of  this  arrangement  within  a
query.  A  partial  representation  of  the  proposed  solution  is  given  in
the  following  table  (Table  5).
Based  on  this  mapping,  all  elements  of  an  interoperability
requirement  (DSL  grammar)  need  to  be  transformed  into  a  query
(TCTL  grammar).  To  this  end,  rules  have  been  developed  to
automatically  rewrite  a  requirement.  For  instance,  a  mapping  can
be  derived  to  rewrite  the  interoperability  requirement  “It  is  possible
that  task  is_working  and  resource  is_active  and  clock  is_less_than
timeMax ”  into  TCTL,  as:  “E  <  >  task.Working  and  resource.Active  and
T  <  timeMax ”.  In  considering  and  respecting  the  proposed  map-
ping,  the  modality  can  indeed  be  rewritten  into  a  quanti ﬁer  and  the
DSL  proposition  rewritten  into  a  TCTL  proposition,  as  shown  in
Fig.  7.
Lastly,  to  prepare  a  requirement  for  veriﬁcation  entails
instantiating  it  with  existing  elements  in  the  studied  collaborative
process  model.  This  implies  that  before  the  rewriting  step,
elements  within  the  process  must  be  proposed  from  the  elements
that  compose  the  requirement  to  be  veriﬁed.  Thus,  for  a  given
requirement  involving  both  tasks  and  resources  for  example,  then
each  task  and  resource  belonging  to  the  collaborative  process
model  must  be  proposed  to  instantiate  the  requirement.  In
pursuing  the  current  example  “It  is  possible  that  task  is_working
and  resource  is_active ”,  all  names  of  tasks  and  all  names  of
resources  involved  in  the  process  need  to  be  proposed  in  order  to
instantiate  the  requirement.
Fig.  5.  Task  automaton  in  UPPAAL.
8Available  online  at:  http://www.eclipse.org/Xtext/ .

--- Page 11 ---
5. Application  case  study:  the  drug  circulation  process9
Drug  circulation  is  a  critical  process  in  hospitals  since  it  is
mandatory  to  provide  the  right  drug  to  the  right  patient  in  time  and
in  the  right  dose.  While  apparently  simple,  proper  execution  of  this
circulation  primarily  depends  on  good  interactions  between
participants  and  precise  interactions  between  all  resources
involved.  This  process  therefore  must  closely  involve  stakeholders
in  order  to  improve  pharmacy  practices  and  strengthen  the  role  of
the  Medicine  Committee  (care  unit).  A  drug  circuit  is  generally
composed  of  three  main  steps:  prescription,  delivery,  and
administration  performed  by  both  the  care  unit  and  the  pharmacy.
Furthermore,  three  resources  are  involved:  a  nurse  (Care  Unit),  a
medical  practitioner  (Care  Unit),  and  a  pharmacist  (Pharmacy).  Alldata  relative  to  the  process,  e.g.  resource  declaration,  resource
allocation,  attribute  declaration,  are  provided  by  the  stakeholders
in  charge  of  modeling.  Tasks  and  interactions  are  modeled  with  a
BPMN  2.0  modeler  (Fig.  8).  The  following  diagram  (known  as  a
collaboration  diagram  in  BPMN  [26])  sets  up  the  model  for  various
processes  from  various  entities  (Pharmacy  and  Care  Unit)  and  their
interactions  (message  ﬂows  between  processes),  with  the  entire
set-up  constituting  the  drug  circulation  process  (upper  part  of
Fig.  8).  Various  resources  are  involved  and  ascribed  to  a  single
entity.  These  resources  are  declared  (a  point  to  extend  the  BPMN
language  has  been  developed,  lower  part  of  Fig.  8)  and  allocated  to
the  various  process  tasks  (a  resource  ascribed  to  one  entity  can  in
fact  be  allocated  to  a  task  of  another  entity  process).
It  is  now  proposed  to  show  how  interoperability  requirements
are  managed  through  the  designated  repository.  This  discussion
will  concern  the  selection  and  use  of  a  requirement  already
existing  in  the  repository.  Afterwards,  the  case  study  will
demonstrate  how  stakeholders  can  write,  select  and  verify  their
own  requirements.  Two  interoperability  requirements  expressed
in  natural  language  will  be  considered:
1.When  a  given  task  requires  a  speci ﬁc  aptitude  to  be  deployed,  the
allocated  resource  must  have  the  appropriate  aptitude .
2.A  resource  is  available  to  perform  its  allocated  task  when  required.
Interoperability  is  often  simpli ﬁed  to  the  exchange  and  sharing
of  information  and  technical  compatibilities.  In  a  collaborative
process  context,  beyond  the  exchange  of  information,  the  exchange
and  sharing  of  resources  (hardware,  software  or  human)  may  be
required  as  well.  Such  is  the  case  in  this  process,  for  which  the
“medical  practitioner ”  resource  is  declared  as  belonging  to  theTable  3
Implementation  of  the  TCTL  query  grammar  (adapted  from  UPPAAL).
quan/g415ﬁerQuery
p
reachable ident ident andL ident ident
E<> task Working and resource Ac/g415ve .pID
.pID
Fig.  6.  Example  of  the  syntax  tree  for  a  query  conforming  to  TCTL  grammar.
9A  demonstration  of  the  developed  tool  is  available  at:  goo.gl/chclk7,  in  offering
details  of  the  application  case  study.

--- Page 12 ---
“Care  Unit”  participant.  Beyond  his/her  involvement  in  the
activities  of  the  “Care  Unit” ,  the  “medical  practitioner ”  is  indeed
also  involved  in  the  activities  of  the  participant  “Pharmacist ”,  so  as
“to  provide  opinion  and  analysis ”.  The  ﬁrst  requirement  therefore
entails  ensuring  that  the  resource  is  in  effect  available  (in  terms  of
time)  to  perform  the  activity.  The  second  requirement  concerns
ensuring  that  the  allocated  resource  is  capable  (in  terms  of
aptitude,  as  the  medical  sector  requires  numerous  qualiﬁcations)
of  performing  the  activity.
The  ﬁrst  requirement  is  prede ﬁned  and  non-temporal  with  the
possibility  of  being  selected  in  the  repository.  It  is  positioned  on  the
service  view,  at  the  conceptual  and  compatibility  level.  Moreover,
it  is  expressed  such  that  “if  task  requires  aptitude  then  resource  has
aptitude ”.  As  a  prede ﬁned  requirement,  it  can  be  directly  selected
by  stakeholders  before  its  instantiation  and  veriﬁcation.
The  conceptual  graph  corresponding  to  this  requirement  also
exists  and  can  be  applied  in  its  current  form  (Fig.  9).
Hence,  the  stakeholders  are  not  concerned  by  the  writing  of  this
kind  of  requirement.  They  must  merely  ensure,  via  the  information
provided  by  the  requirement  repository,  that  the  requirement
matches  its  expectations  in  terms  of  collaborative  process  model
veriﬁcation  and  has  been  selected.  The  previous  requirement  is
already  positioned  in  the  repository  and  cannot  be  modi ﬁed  by
users  (locked).  The  nature  of  the  requirement,  the  means  used  for
its  veriﬁcation,  and  its  expression  and  information  are  all  used  to
guide  the  selection  (Fig.  10).
The  second  requirement  is  temporal  and  can  be  written  or
chosen  should  it  exist  in  the  repository.  If  it  is  written,  thenstakeholders  must  position  it  in  the  repository  according  to  the
relevant  view,  abstraction  level  and  life  cycle  level.  The  following
ﬁgure  shows  the  graphical  user  interface  that  implements  the  DSL
to  allow  writing  a  requirement.  The  writing  process  is  guided
through  a  set  of  proposals  that  are  consistent  with  the  deﬁned
grammar.  As  regards  the  requirement  presented  in  Fig.  11,  once  the
stakeholders  have  selected  the  nature  of  this  requirement
(temporal  vs.  non-temporal)  as  well  as  its  means  of  veriﬁcation
(expertise  vs.  model  checking  vs.  conceptual  graphs),  the
corresponding  deﬁned  grammar  is  proposed  (Fig.  11a).  As  for
writing  this  requirement  and  in  agreement  with  the  syntax  (see
Section  4.2),  the  modalities ,  iterations  and  negation  are  proposed
ﬁrst.  Since  the  stakeholders  have  chosen  a  modality  (“It  is  possible
that”),  “iterations ”,  “negation ”  and  “stateTerm ”  are  all  proposed.
Let's  note  that  additional  constraints  have  been  included  in  the
syntax  in  order  to  detect  the  previous  terms  and  propose  only  the
verb  related  to  this  term  (e.g.  the  verbs  “is_waiting ”,  “is_working ”,
“is_starting ”  and  “is_stopped ”  only  relate  to  the  state  term  “task”).
Moreover,  the  syntax  tree  is  built  according  to  the  same  principle
and  until  the  stakeholders  complete  their  writing  process.  In  this
example,  the  last  proposals  are  the  verbs  related  to  the  state  term
“resource” ,  namely  “is_active ”  and  “is_available ”.  Lastly,  let's  note
that  the  stakeholders  are  constrained  when  they  build  a
requirement  and  cannot  write  nonsense;  otherwise,  the  require-
ment  could  not  be  validated  (errors  are  highlighted,  see  Fig.  11b)  or
veriﬁed.
This  requirement,  expressed  previously  in  natural  language,  is
now  being  expressed  with  the  dedicated  language;  it  uses  the
modality  “it  is  possible  that”,  which  indicates  that  proposition  must
be  satisﬁed  along  one  path  of  the  collaborative  process  (stemming
from  the  originating  requirement  “when  it  is  required ”).  It  is  also
composed  of  the  proposition  “task  is_starting  and  resource
is_available ”,  which  means  that  when  a  task  begins  to  ﬁt  into
the  working  state,  the  allocated  resource  must  be  positioned  in  the
state  available  at  the  same  time.  The  set,  modalities  and
proposition  taken  together  make  up  the  interoperability  require-
ment  to  verify.  Moreover,  the  expressed  requirement  can  be  saved
and  added  to  the  repository  for  further  veriﬁcation  (Fig.  12).Table  5
Mapping  between  DSL  proposition  and  TCTL  proposition  (partial  representation).
Interoperability  requirement  DSL  proposition TCTL  proposition
StateTerm  (st) Ident  (iValue)
Verb  (v) Ident  (iValue)
StateTerm  Verb  (st  v) Point  (pId)
Operator  (op) Binary  (binaryValue)
Bool  (b) Binary  (binaryValue)
Iter  (it) Iteration  (iterop)
Fig.  7.  Principle  of  mapping  between  an  interoperability  requirement  and  a  TCTL  query.Table  4
Mapping  between  DSL  modalities  and  the  TCTL  quanti ﬁer.
Interoperability  requirement  modalities TCTL  quanti ﬁer
It  is  possible  that  (p  is  satisﬁed  in  some  possible  worlds) E  <>  (p  is  true  in  one  reachable  state)
Invariantly  (p  is  satisﬁed  in  all  worlds) A[]  (p  is  true  in  all  reachable  states)
It  is  inevitable  that  (p  will  inevitably  become  satisﬁed) A  <>  (p  is  true  in  some  states  of  all  paths)
There  is  potentially  always  (p  is  potentially  always  satisﬁed) E[]  (exists  a  path  in  which  p  is  true  in  all  states)

--- Page 13 ---
It  is  to  note  that  some  requirements  are  prede ﬁned  and  directly
usable.  This  is  typically  the  case  for  the  requirements  which  are
domain-independent  and  which  can  be  applied  on  any  collabora-
tive  processes.  Other  requirements  are  deﬁned  directly  by  the
stakeholders  with  the  help  of  the  proposed  grammar  to  write
temporal  requirement  and  veriﬁed  by  model  checking.  For
instance,  the  selected  requirement  (receipt)  is  a  prede ﬁned  and
unmodi ﬁable  (lock)  requirement.  It  is  expressed  by  a  conceptual
graph  and  allows  verifying  that  an  acknowledgement  of  a  receipt
has  to  be  performed  when  a  task  receives  a  message  ﬂow  from
another  entity:  “if  task  receive  a  message  ﬂow  then  a  mechanism  of
conﬁrmation  exists ”  (Fig.  13,  using  the  language  used  by  COGITANT
on  the  left  and  the  graphical  representation  on  the  right).
Conversely,  the  requirement  previously  written  (ResourceAvaila-
bilityError)  is  intentionally  built  with  an  error.  In  that  case,  the
requirement  is  added  into  the  repository,  can  be  modi ﬁed  (without
lock)  but  cannot  be  used  for  veriﬁcation.To  extend  the  case  study  from  the  originating  requirement  to
the  writing  of  a  requirement  and  ﬁnally  its  veriﬁcation,  let’s
consider  the  stakeholder  requirement:
“The  duration  of  interactions  between  participants  must  not
exceed  x  time  units  and  the  duration  of  interaction  between  the
activities  within  an  internal  process  must  not  exceed  y  time  units ”.
In  this  format,  the  stakeholders  have  two  ways  to  verify  this
need.  First,  they  can  use  expertise  and  perform  a  complete  review
of  the  model  and  its  inputs  related  to  the  times  and  durations  of  the
activities  and  interactions  to  be  sure  that  they  meet  the
expectation.  This  is  relevant  but  it  can  require  time  and  several
resources  with  the  possibility  to  get  an  error.  Second,  they  can  take
time  to  build  a  requirement  based  on  a  deﬁned  grammar  that
guides  the  writing.  They  have  to  write  the  originating  requirement
according  to  the  elements  in  the  grammar  that  allows  considering
and  expressing  the  duration  between  participants  and  within  a
participant.  Thus,  the  proposed  language  is  enough  constrained  to
Fig.  8.  The  drug  circulation  process  modeled  with  BPMN  2.0,  including  the  declaration  of  a  human  resource.
Requirement expression Conceptual graph representa/g415on
Iftaskrequires ap/g415tude
th
enresourcehasap/g415tud eTask
ResourceAp/g415tude
usesrequires
has(cause)
(conclusion)
Fig.  9.  Expression  of  a  non-temporal  requirement  and  mapping  with  the  conceptual  graph.

--- Page 14 ---
express  a  requirement  accurately  and  to  be  mapped  with  a  formal
language  to  be  veriﬁed.  Obviously,  the  use  of  such  a  language  (as
for  any  languages)  requires  a  minimum  of  knowledge  and  time  to
be  mastered  but  as  mentioned  in  introduction,  the  time  spent  in
the  expression  of  the  problem  allow  to  avoid  mistakes  in  the  laterphases.  Hence,  although  the  writing  step  is  guided,  it  is  required  to
understand  the  semantic  and  the  syntax  of  the  grammar  to  be  sure
that  the  written  requirement  is  the  right  expression  of  the
originating  requirement.  As  a  consequence,  the  requirement
Fig.  10.  Positioned  requirements  in  the  repository  and  the  set  of  information  provided.gr10
Fig.  11.  Writing  of  a  temporal  interoperability  requirement.

--- Page 15 ---
shown  in  natural  language  can  be  write  with  the  proposed
controlled  language  as:
“It  is  possible  that  for  all  message_ ﬂows,  emission_message_end
[index]  minus  reception_message_start  [index]  is_less_than  valueand  for  all  sequence_ ﬂows,  reception_sequence_start  [index]
minus  emission_sequence_end  [index]  is_less_than  value ”
In  this  requirement,  “message_ ﬂows ”  represents  the  interac-
tions  between  the  participants,  “sequence_ ﬂows ”,  the  interactions
Fig.  12.  Requirements  added  to  the  repository  (without  locks,  one  correct  and  one  with  an  error).
Fig.  13.  Prede ﬁned  requirement  using  the  conceptual  graph  technique.

--- Page 16 ---
between  activities  inside  a  process,  “reception_message_start ”
(“emission_sequence_end ”  .  .  .  )  represents  the  dates  of  emission/
reception  in  the  collaborative  process,  “[index] ”  the  considered
message  ﬂow(s)  and  sequence  ﬂow(s)  and,  “value ”,  the  time  to  not
exceed.
Then,  the  written  requirement  must  be  instantiated  and
mapped  (automatically)  into  the  targeted  formal  language  to  be
veriﬁed.  Regarding  to  the  example  the  following  property  is
getting:
E<>  forall(i:NbMessageFlow)emission_message_end  [i]-recep-
tion_message_start  [i]<5  and  forall(i:NbSequenceFlow)recep-
tion_sequence_start  [i]-emission_sequence_end  [i]<10
In  this  formal  requirement,  the  stakeholders  are  interested  in  all
interactions  (index  “i”)  and  choose  different  value  to  not  exceed  (5
time  units  between  participants  and  10  time  units  inside  a
process).  This  process  /C0  from  an  originating  requirement
expressed  in  the  Natural  Language  to  a  formal  requirement
expressed  in  a  Formal  Language  /C0  shows  that  a  controlled  natural
language  to  express  a  requirement  can  act  as  pivot  between  the
Natural  Language  with  its  imperfection  and  its  lack  of  reliable
veriﬁcation  means  and  a  Formal  Language  hard  to  use  and
understand  but  having  a  reliable  support  tool  to  perform  the
veriﬁcation.
To  return  to  the  initial  case  study,  requirements  must  be
instantiated  (Fig.  14)  according  to  their  constituent  concepts  (e.g.
task,  resources,  clock,  time)  and  elements  existing  in  the
collaborative  process  (e.g.  “to  provide  opinion  and  analysis ”,  “to
supply ”,  Nurse,  Pharmacist).  For  this  purpose,  a  set  of  instantiation
proposals  are  directly  submitted,  in  accordance  with  the  selected
requirement  (coming  from  its  position  in  the  repository),  leaving
stakeholders  to  choose  the  relevant  proposals  with  respect  to  their
veriﬁcation  goal.  Hence,  the  ﬁrst  requirement  “if  task  requires
aptitude  then  resource  has  aptitude ”  must  be  instantiated  with  the
name  of  the  set  of  tasks  and  resources  deﬁned  on  the  collaborative
process  model  (instance  proposals).  The  resulting  instantiation
leads  to  the  requirement  being  deﬁned  as  “if  To  give  opinion  and
analysis  requires  aptitude  then  MedicalPractitioner  has  aptitude ”(instantiation  result).  The  instantiation  of  the  second  requirement,
i.e.  “it  is  possible  that  task  is_starting  and  resource  is_available ”
(interoperability  requirement)  follows  the  same  principle  and
must  be  instantiated  with  the  tasks  and  resources  (instance
proposals).  The  resulting  requirement  is  automatically  generated
and,  in  this  example,  becomes  “It  is  possible  that  To  give  opinion  and
analysis  is_starting  and  MedicalPractitioner  is_available ”  (instantia-
tion  result).
Lastly,  temporal  and  non-temporal  requirements  can  be
veriﬁed,  which  can  then  be  provided  to  the  stakeholders  as
results.  Let's  note  that  the  mapping  and  veriﬁcation  steps  are  not
visible  to  stakeholders,  only  the  veriﬁcation  result  is  given.
As  shown  in  Fig.  15,  the  temporal  requirement  (upper  frame)  is
satisﬁed,  which  implies  that  the  resource  (medical  practitioner)  is
effectively  available  when  requested  by  the  activity  (“to  give
opinion  and  analysis ”).  More  precisely,  the  model  checker  explores
all  process  paths  (transformed  into  a  network  of  timed  automata
[54])  and  ensures  that  a  path  exists  whereby  the  activity  is  in  the
“start”  state  and  the  resource  in  the  “available ”  state.  In  contrast,
the  non-temporal  requirement  “aptitude ”  (lower  frame)  is  not
veriﬁed,  which  indicates  that  the  resource  cannot  appropriately
perform  its  assigned  activity  due  to  an  aptitude  defect.  More
speci ﬁcally,  the  projection  mechanisms  offered  by  conceptual
graphs  conﬁrm  that  all  aptitudes  requested  by  the  activity  to  be
performed  are  effectively  held  by  the  allocated  resource.  According
to  the  veriﬁcation  result,  stakeholders  must  decide,  deﬁne  and
apply  corrective  actions  to  ensure  that  the  requirement  is  satisﬁed.
Note  that  once  satisﬁed,  the  non-temporal  requirements  called
“responsible ”  (not  presented  herein)  were  intended  to  ensure  that
the  Medical  Practitioner  would  interact  with  the  right  person  at
the  right  time  and  right  place  in  the  pharmacy.
6. Discussion
The  proposed  approach  aims  to  facilitate  and  guide  the  use  of
interoperability  requirements  within  collaborative  processes  by
means  of  comparison  with  hazardous  approaches.  Its  support  of
this  aspect  involves  an  attempt  at  reducing  the  cognitive  load
Fig.  14.  Interoperability  requirement  instantiation.

--- Page 17 ---
required  to  manage-write-verify  requirements,  in  order  to  add
value  to  the  process.  The  repository  introduced  allows  properly
structuring  the  requirements  in  agreement  with  the  studied  ﬁeld
and  encompassing  key  requirements  in  the  collaborative  process
so  as  to  save  (or  at  least  not  lose)  time  for  their  veriﬁcation  rather
than  deal  with  an  endless  inventory.  Writing/instantiation  serve  to
express  requirements  without  strong  knowledge  using  formal
technique  and  mechanisms  that  avoid  mistakes,  either  with  rules
during  the  writing  process  or  with  proposed  objects  belonging
only  to  the  studied  collaborative  process  model  during  instantia-
tion.  Moreover,  the  veriﬁcation  process  including  rewriting  and
model  transformation  is  not  visible  for  the  end  user  and  merely
outputs  the  ﬁnal  result.  Obviously,  all  requirements  cannot  be
veriﬁed  with  formal  techniques,  but  those  that  can  are  no  longer
being  assigned  to  stakeholders.
Although  this  approach  has  laid  the  initial  concepts  and  tools,
numerous  points  can  still  be  improved  in  order  to  further  support
stakeholders'  efforts  to  avoid  bad  practices.  Despite  the  fact  that
conﬂict  identi ﬁcation  between  requirements  stems  from  different
stakeholders  and  that  this  kind  of  structure  supports  redundancy,
the  repository  remains  dependent  upon  human  expertise  and  its
possible  absence,  especially  when  the  set  of  requirements  becomes
substantial.  Automated  means  can  be  implemented  to  address  this
issue;  to  this  end,  the  work  performed  on  ontologies  or  semantic
similarity  measurements  may  prove  useful  and  substantiate  this
aspect  of  requirement  engineering.  The  solution  issue  however  is
still  inadequately  developed;  hence,  a  solution  can  only  be  linked
to  a  requirement.  As  mentioned  previously,  interoperability  is  part
of  a  broad  set  of  requirements  to  be  satisﬁed,  and  any  given
solution  can  affect  the  other  requirements  (functional  as  well  as
non-functional)  and  further  the  collaboration  of  a  given  partner.
Hence,  the  link  between  requirements  in  terms  of  dependence  and
the  possible  nature  of  this  link  in  terms  of  impact/in ﬂuence  must
be  established.  The  work  presented  in  [57]  has  been  performed
along  these  lines  and  reveals  the  possible  dependencies  among  “-
ilities” ,  including  interoperability.  The  ﬁnal  goal  consists  of  making
available  the  most  appropriate  solution  by  taking  into  account  the
environment  of  interoperability  requirements  and  stakeholder
priorities  (e.g.  investment/gain  tradeoff).  Another  aspect  to  be
considered  is  the  existing  approaches  [56]  to  develop  interopera-
bility  that  may  also  be  useful  in  choosing  a  relevant  solution
according  to  the  temporal  aspect  of  a  partnership  (long  vs.  short
term).  The  choice  of  a  solution  is  therefore  not  solely  related  to  the
non-veri ﬁcation  of  an  interoperability  requirement  but  also  to
numerous  parameters  of  varying  importance  and  for  various
partners.  The  link  between  interoperability  requirements  and
interoperability  solutions  needs  to  be  reﬁned,  and  the  choice  of
solution  is  to  be  guided  with  as  much  ﬁnesse  as  possible.Regarding  the  proposed  DSL,  it  is  highly  correlated  with  the
process  modeling  language  and  extensions  performed  on  it.  As
such,  this  initial  version  must  consider,  if  possible,  other  objects
belonging  to  BPMN  as  well  as  potential  extensions  to  be  added  (e.g.
equipment  and  their  attributes).  The  DSL  thus  needs  to  be  reﬁned
to  take  these  objects  into  consideration  within  a  requirement.  The
mapping  rules  between  DSL  and  the  language  used  by  the  formal
veriﬁcation  technique  (model  checking  plus  the  conceptual  graph)
must  consequently  be  reﬁned.  One  expected  characteristic  of  the
proposed  DSL  is  to  be  usable  by  anyone  with  a  minimal  learning
process.  For  instance,  the  modalities  currently  expressed  are
understandable,  but  other  objects  remain  difﬁcult  to  use  as  is  (e.g.
Invariantly,  for  all  tasks,  task_end[index]  minus  task_start[index]
is_less_than  value )  and  only  a  few  have  been  developed  or
proposed.  Furthermore,  the  TCTL  grammar  offers  other  advanced
objects  (e.g.  urgent),  requiring  knowledge  of  their  relevance  and
utility,  which  in  turn  will  require  developing  their  expression  close
to  the  natural  language  and  implementing  them  in  the  DSL  without
any  loss  of  the  original  meaning.
Finally,  the  use  of  such  an  approach  and,  more  widely,  the
concepts  stemming  from  Systems  Engineering  and  Requirements
Engineering  falls  under  the  responsibility  of  actors  involved  in  the
collaboration.  This  set-up  ﬁts  into  a  change  management  process
that  extends  from  experiential  approaches  to  more  pragmatic
approaches.  Stakeholders  however  must  keep  in  mind  that  the
main  point  is  to  strike  the  right  balance  between  the  weaknesses
(e.g.  loss  of  a  requirement)  along  with  the  broad  freedoms  (e.g.
possibility  to  express  anything)  offered  on  the  one  hand  and  the
difﬁculties  (e.g.  constrained  grammar)  despite  reliable  results  and
supporting  tools  (e.g.  formal  veriﬁcation)  offered  by  the  other.
7.Conclusion  and  outlook
Requirements  engineering  is  crucial  to  designing  a  system  that
achieves  its  own  missions  and  reaches  its  performance  goals.  Prior
to  producing  any  system  design,  it  is  necessary  to  establish
requirements  that  are:  (1)  well  written,  (2)  appropriate  and
relevant  to  the  studied  ﬁeld,  (3)  veriﬁable,  and  (4)  accessible  and
understandable.  The  lack  of  a  clear  repository  for  managing
requirements  and  dedicated  languages  for  writing  requirements
leads  to  taking  the  risk  of  failing  to  meet  certain  expectations  (non-
related  requirement,  conﬂict,  omission,  lack  of  traceability,  etc.).  In
the  work  presented  herein,  these  characteristics  have  been  applied
to  the  ﬁeld  of  collaborative  process  analysis  in  order  to  detect
interoperability  problems  before  implementing  the  process  or
while  running  the  process  so  as  to  make  the  proper  adjustments.
This  article  has  presented  a  repository  for  structuring  interop-
erability  requirements  that:  (1)  constitute  a  set  of  prede ﬁned  and
Fig.  15.  Results  of  interoperability  requirement  veriﬁcation.

--- Page 18 ---
available  requirements  (some  30  in  all,  temporal  as  well  as  non-
temporal,  present  in  the  literature  or  derived  from  stakeholders);
and  2)  may  be  used  as  a  guide  to  elicit  other  interoperability
requirements.  Another  challenge  is  to  allow  stakeholders,  either
with  or  without  a  weak  knowledge  of  formal  veriﬁcation
techniques,  to  accurately  write  interoperability  requirements.  To
this  end,  a  speci ﬁc  DSL  has  been  proposed  to  assist  and  guide
stakeholders  in  writing  their  requirements  and  overcoming  the
problems  of  ambiguity,  redundancy  and  inconsistency.  Finally,  the
proposed  approach  also  allows  instantiating  requirements  in
accordance  with  the  studied  collaborative  process  model  and
rewrite  them  (using  mapping  rules)  into  properties,  in  the  case  of
temporal  requirements,  so  as  to  enable  their  veriﬁcation  using
UPPAAL.
Although  the  repository  for  interoperability  requirements
makes  it  possible  to  select  and  verify  non-temporal  requirements
(based  on  the  conceptual  graphs),  no  dedicated  language  is
available  for  writing  non-temporal  requirements.  As  such,  it  would
be  necessary  to  develop  this  DSL,  in  establishing  proper  mapping
and  mechanisms  for  its  instantiation,  in  order  to  enable  veriﬁca-
tion  with  COGITANT.  The  challenge  here  is  to  tie  a  human  readable
DSL  with  a  graphical  language.
References10
[1] Guide  to  the  Systems  Engineering  Body  of  Knowledge  (SEBoK),  version  1.0,
available  at:  http://www.sebokwiki.org/wiki/Main_Page .
[2] ANS/EIA  632  Standard:  Processes  for  Engineering  a  System  (1998).
[3] ISO/IEC  15288:2008(E)/IEEE  Standards  15288.2008  –  Systems  engineering  –
System  life  cycle  processes  (2nd  edition),  February  (2008).
[4]ISO,  Advanced  Automation  Technologies  and  Their  Applications —Part  1:
Framework  for  Enterprise  Interoperability,  International  Organization  for
Standardization,  2011  (ISO  11354,  ISO/TC  184/SC  5).
[5]D.  Chen,  G.  Doumeingts,  F.  Vernadat,  Architectures  for  enterprise  integration
and  interoperability:  past,  present  and  future,  Comput.  Ind.  59  (7)  (2008)  647 –
659.
[6]R.  Chalmeta,  V.  Pazos,  A  step-by-step  methodology  for  enterprise
interoperability  projects,  Enterp.  Inf.  Syst.  9  (4)  (2015)  436 –464.
[7]C4ISR  Architecture  Working  Group  (AWG),  Levels  of  Information  Systems
Interoperability  (LISI),  USA  Department  of  Defense,  1998 .
[8]C.T.  Ford,  Interoperability  Measurement,  Ph.D.  Thesis,  Department  of  the  Air
Force  Air  University,  Air  Force  Institute  of  Technology,  2008 .
[9]N.  Daclin,  S.  Mallek,  Capturing  and  structuring  interoperability  requirements:
a  framework  for  interoperability  requirements,  Enterprise  Interoperability  VI
Proceedings  of  the  I-ESA  Conferences  Volume  7  (2014)  239 –249.
[10] P.  Dasgupta,  A  Roadmap  for  Formal  Property  Veriﬁcation,  Springer,  2010  (ISBN:
978-90-481-7185-9) .
[11] IEEE,  IEEE  Standard  Computer  Dictionary:  A  Compilation  of  IEEE  Standard
Computer  Glossaries,  Institute  of  Electrical  and  Electronics  Engineers,  New
York,  1990 .
[12] X.  Wang,  X.W.  Xu,  DIMP:  an  interoperable  solution  for  software  integration
and  product  data  exchange,  Enterp.  Inf.  Syst.  6  (3)  (2012)  291 –314.
[13] R.  Jardim-Goncalves,  A.  Grilo,  C.  Agostinho,  F.  Lampathaki,  Y.  Charalabidis,
Systematisation  of  interoperability  body  of  knowledge:  the  foundation  for
enterprise  interoperability  as  a  science,  Enterp.  Inf.  Syst.  7  (1)  (2013)  7–32.
[14] H.  Panetto,  J.  Cecil,  Information  systems  for  enterprise  integration,
interoperability  and  networking:  theory  and  applications,  Enterp.  Inf.  Syst.  7
(1) (2013)  1–6.
[15] B.  Vallespir,  D.  Chen,  Y.  Ducq,  Enterprise  modelling  for  interoperability,  16th
IFAC  World  Congress,  Prague,  Czech  Republic,  July,  2005 .
[16] D.  Chen,  M.  Dassisti,  B.  Elveaeter,  Enterprise  Interoperability  Framework  and
Knowledge  Corpus —Final  Report,  Interop  Deliverable  Di.3,  May,  2007 .
[17] N.  Daclin,  S.  Mallek,  Towards  a  sustainable  implementation  of  interoperability
solutions:  bridging  the  gap  between  interoperability  requirements  and
solutions,  6th  International  IFIP  Working  Conference  on  Enterprise
Interoperability  (IWEI  2015),  Nîmes,  France,  28–29  may,  2015 .
[18] J.  Favaro,  H.S.  De  Koning,  R.  Schreiner,  X.  Olive,  Next  generation  requirements
engineering,  22th  Annual  INCOSE  International  Symposium,  Rome,  Italy,  2012 .
[19] The  Standish  Group,  The  Chaos  Report,  The  Standish  Group  International,  Inc,
1995,  2016 .
[20] G.V.  Bochmann,  Writing  Better  Requirements,  University  of  Ottawa,  2010
(slide  only) .[21] INCOSE.  Systems  Engineering  Handbook —A  guide  for  System  life  cycle  processes
and  activities ,  INCOSE  Systems  Engineering  Handbook  v.  3.2.2INCOSE  TP  2003
002  03.2.2,  October  2011.
[22] A.M.  Ross  Deﬁning  and  using  the  new  ilities,  Systems  Engineering
Advancement  Research  Initiative  (SEARi)  working  paper  series,  2008.
[23] J.  Willis,  Systems  Engineering  and  the  forgotten  ‘-Illities,  14th  Annual  Systems
Engineering  Conference,  San  Diego,  CA,  the  United  States  of  America,  2011 .
[24] INCOSE.  Guide  for  writing  requirements,  v1.0,  Requirements  WG-INCOSE,
INCOSE-TP-2010-006-01,  2012.
[25] ISO/IEC/IEEE.  Systems  and  software  engineering  –  Life  cycle  processes  –
Requirements  engineering,  ISO/IEC/IEEE  29148:2011,  2011.
[26] Open  Management  Group  (OMG):  Business  Process  Model  and  Notation
(BPMN)  /C0  version  2.0,  available  at:  http://www.omg.org/spec/BPMN/2.0/ ,
January  3rd  (2011).
[27] J.F.  Sowa,  Conceptual  graphs,  IBM  J.  Res.  Dev.  20  (4)  (1976)  336 –357.
[28] Cogitant:  CoGITaNT  Version  5.2.0,  Reference  Manual  (http://cogitant.
sourceforge.net )  (2009).
[29] Edmund  M.  Clarke  Jr.,  O.  Grumbereg,  A.P.  Doron,  Model  Checking,  The  MIT
Press,  1999 .
[30] G.  Behrmann,  A.  David,  K.G.  Larsen,  A  Tutorial  on  Uppaal,  Department  of
Computer  Science,  Aalborg  University,  Denmark,  2004 .
[31] S.  Mallek,  N.  Daclin,  V.  Chapurlat,  The  application  of  interoperability
requirement  speci ﬁcation  and  veriﬁcation  to  collaborative  processes  in
industry,  Comput.  Ind.  63  (7)  (2012)  643 –658.
[32] NEHTA.  2007.  Towards  a  Health  Interop  Framework.  Version  1.0.  www.nehta.
gov.au .
[33] A.A.  Sinaci,  G.B.  Laleci  Erturkmen,  A  federated  semantic  metadata  registry
framework  for  enabling  interoperability  across  clinical  research  and  care
domains,  J.  Biomed.  Inf.  46  (5)  (2013)  784 –794.
[34] Department  of  Defense,  Department  of  Defense  Dictionary  of  Military  and
Associated  Terms,  US  Department  of  Defense,  2001 .
[35] ISO.  2002.  ISO  16100,  1  –  Industrial  Automation  Systems  and  Integration  –
Manufacturing  Software  Capability  Proﬁling  for  Interoperability —Part  1:
Framework.  Geneva  :  International  Organization  for  Standardization.  ISO/TC
184/SC  5/WG  4,  2002.
[36] ATHENA  Integrated  Project.  Requirement  for  interoperability  framework,
product-based  and  process-based  interoperability  infrastructures,
interoperability  life-cycle  services,  ATHENA  deliverable  A4.1,  2005.
[37] EIF,  European  Interoperrability  Framework  for  pan-European  eGovernment
services,  European  Commission,  version  2.0,  2008.
[38] C4ISR,  Levels  of  Information  Systems  Interoperability  (LISI),  USA  Department
of  Defense,  Architecture  Working  Group  (AWG),  1998 .
[39] A.  Tolk,  S.Y.  Diallo,  C.D.  Turnitsa,  Applying  the  levels  of  conceptual
interoperability  model  in  support  of  integratability,  interoperability,  and
composability  for  system-of-systemsengineering,  Syst.  Cybern.  Inf.  5  (5)
(2007)  65–74.
[40] S.  Fewell,  T.  Clark,  Organisational  interoperability:  evaluation  and  further
development  of  the  OIM  model,  8th  International  Command  and  Control
Research  and  Technology  Symposium,  Washington  DC,  2003 .
[41] IEC,  Common  Automation  Device —Proﬁle  guideline,  IEC  32390,  TC  65:
Industrial  Process  Measurement  and  Control,  2005.
[42] M.  Kasunic,  W.  Anderson  Measuring  systems  interoperability:  challenges  and
opportunities,  Software  engineering  measurement  and  analysis  initiative,
Technical  note  CMU/SEI –2004 –TN–003,  2004.
[43] R.  Rezaei,  T.K.  Thiam  Kian  Chiew,  S.P.  Sai  Peck  Lee,  Z.S.  Zeinab  Shams  Aliee,
Interoperability  evaluation  models:  a  systematic  review,  Comput.  Ind.  65  (1)
(2014)  1–23.
[44] Kang  Shian  Chin,  Pee  Eng  Yau,  Sim  Kok  Wah,  Pang  Chung  Khiang,  Framework
for  managing  System-of-systems  ilities,  DSTA  Horizons,  2013/14.
[45] The  Open  Group  Architecture  Framework.  TOGAF  version  9,  chapter  29
Interoperability  requirements,  2011.
[46] S.  Harrison,  J.  Brogden  Interoperability  requirements,  Supplier  Requirement
for  SMART  Metering  (SRSM)  project  report,  2007.
[47] A.  Van  lamsweerde,  A.  Dardenne,  B.  Delcourt,  F.  Dubisy,  The  KAOS  Project,
Knowledge  Acquisition  in  Automated  Speci ﬁcation  of  Software,  AAAI  Spring
Symposium  Series,  American  Association  for  Artiﬁcial  Intelligence,  1991 .
[48] G.  Fanmuy,  J.  Llorens,  A.  Fraga,  Requirements  veriﬁcation  in  the  industry,  CSDM
(2016)  2011 .
[49] Use  Case  Map  (UCM)  notation,  available  at:  http://jucmnav.
softwareengineering.ca/ucm/bin/view/UCM/AboutUseCaseMaps .
[50] INCOSE,  REGAL.  Requirements  Engineering  Guide  for  All,  but  applicable  to
Systems  Engineering,  2008.
[51] Itu-T  Z.151  –  Telecommunication  Standardization  Sector  Of  Itu:  Series  Z:
Languages  And  General  Software  Aspects  For  Telecommunication  Systems  –
Formal  description  techniques  (FDT) —User  Requirements  Notation  (URN),
Language,  Deﬁnition  Recommendation  (2008).
[52] University  of  Toronto.  Goal-oriented  Requirement  Language,  available  at:
http://www.cs.toronto.edu/km/GRL/ .
[53] Open  Management  Group  (OMG):  Semantics  of  Business  Vocabulary  and
Business  Rules  (SBVR) —version  1.0,  available  online  at  http://www.omg.org/
spec/SBVR/1.0/PDF  2008.
[54] S.  Mallek,  N.  Daclin,  V.  Chapurlat,  B.  Vallespir,  Enabling  model  checking  for
collaborative  process  analysis:  from  BPMN  to  Network  of  Timed  Automata,
Enterp.  Inf.  Syst.  (2015),  doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/17517575.2013.879211 .
10All  links  in  the  references  are  accessible  as  of  September  2015.

--- Page 19 ---
[55] ISO  (2002).  Enterprise  Integration —Framework  for  Enterprise  Modelling ,
International  Organization  for  Standardization,  ISO/CEN  19439CEN  TC310/
WG1  and  ISO  TC184  SC5/WG1.
[56] ISO.  ISO  14258 —Industrial  Atomation  Systems— Concepts  and  Rules  for
Enterprise  Models,  ISO  TC184/SC5/WG1,  1999.
[57] A.M.  Ross,  D.H.  Rohdes,  Towards  a  prescriptive  semantic  basis  for  change-type
ilities,  Procedia  Comput.  Sci.  44  (2015)  443 –453.
[58] D.  Norfolk  Reducing  the  risk  of  development  failure  .  .  .  with  cost-effective
capture  and  management  of  requirements,  a  white  paper  by  Bloor  Research,
available  online  at  http://www.ibm.com/ ,  July  2013.
[59] Dassault  Systèmes,  ENOVIA  Requirements  Central  Essentials ,  student  guide,
2008 –2011.
[60] INCOSE,  A  world  in  motion —Systems  Engineering  Vision  2025,  2014.
[61] L.  Camarinha-Matos,  H.  Afsarmanesh,  Collaborative  networks:  a  new  scienti ﬁc
discipline,  J.  Intell.  Manuf.  16  (2005)  139 –452.K. Jones,  K.  Kaljurand,  T.  Kuhn,  M.  Luts,  J.  Pool,  M.  Rosner,  R.  Schwitter,  J.  Sowa,
On  Controlled  Natural  languages:  Properties  and  Prospects,  Workshop  on
Controlled  Natural  Language,  CNL.  2009,  Marettimo  Island,  Italy,  June  8–10,
2009 .
[64] R.  Schwitter,  Controlled  natural  languages  for  knowledge  representation,
Proceeding  COLING  ‘10  Proceedings  of  the  23rd  International  Conference  on
Computational  Linguistics:  Posters,  Beijing,  China,  23–27  August,  2010 .
[65] K.J.  Turner,  Using  Formal  Description  Techniques —An  introduction  to  ESTELLE,
LOTOS  and  SDL,  John  Wiley  and  Sons  Ltd.,  1993 .[62] Q.  Li,  Z.  Wang,  W.  Li,  J.  Li,  C.  Wang,  R.  Du,  Application  integration  in  a  hybrid
cloud  computing  environment:  modelling  and  platform,  Enterp.  Inf.  Syst.  7  (3)
(2016)  237–271,  doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/17517575.2012.677479,2013 .
[63] A.  Wyner,  K.  Angelov,  G.  Barzdins,  D.  Damljanovic,  B.  Davis,  N.  Fuchs,  S.  Hoeﬂer,
