--- Page 1 ---
RUNNING .CHRISTEL : A Stochastic Hybrid 
Case-Study Optimizing Battery Pack 
Usage 
Lisa Willemsen1(B) , Anne Remke1,2 , Boudewijn R. Haverkort1 , 
and Johann L. Hurink1 
1 University of Twente, Enschede, The Netherlands 
{l.c.willemsen,b.r.h.m.haverkort,j.l.hurink}@utwente.nl 
2 University of Münster, Münster, Germany 
anne.remke@uni-muenster.de 
Abstract. Over the last two decades, batteries have become essential 
components in many high-tech systems, enabling the storage of (elec-
trical) energy for later use. However, the high costs and scarcity of the materials used for high-end batteries make their eﬃcient use and dimen-
sioning a crucial aspect in system design. Enabling such dimensioning requires accurate modeling of the battery behavior under realistic work-load conditions. In this paper we use the Kinetic Battery Model (KiBaM) 
to eﬀectively capture key behavioral aspects of batteries at reasonable modeling costs. Also an accurate battery workload model is needed that describes the demand of energy over time; such workload models often 
include stochastic elements. Timed automata models have been used to evaluate battery lifetimes under (primarily) deterministic workloads for only small battery conﬁgurations. The previously proposed approach 
required a discretization that led to a computational error that could not be quantiﬁed in general. Instead, this paper adopts a stochastic hybrid modeling (SHM) approach to better capture battery dynamics as well 
as stochastic workloads. This paper, hence, presents an exploration of state-of-the-art SHM methods and tools for the analysis of battery sys-tems under stochastic workloads, and an investigation of the advantages 
and disadvantages of these techniques. 
Keywords: Batteries · Stochastic Hybrid Models · Optimization 
1 Introduction 
Batteries play an important role in a wide range of wireless high-tech systems 
and applications. They also enable signiﬁcant sustainability contributions, by 
their ability to temporarily store energy, hence their capability to decouple energy generation from energy use. In modern households, for example, solar 
panels combined with stationary batteries allow for the storage and later use of self-generated solar electricity, particularly during periods when sunlight is not 
c/circlecopyrtThe Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2026 
N. Bertrand et al. (Eds.): Christel Baier Festschrift, LNCS 15760, pp. 382–407, 2026. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-97439-7 _19

--- Page 2 ---
A Stochastic Hybrid Case-Study Optimizing Battery Pack Usage 383
available. In addition, batteries also support grid stability by enabling energy 
balancing, which improves the overall safety and reliability of the electricity 
grid [ 26]. Despite these advantages, the relatively high cost and limited avail-
abilit
y of battery materials necessitate a careful and eﬃcient use of batteries to 
maximize their utility. Accurate modeling of battery behavior is crucial for opti-
mizing performance in various systems, such as smart home networks and space 
exploration technologies. In particular, understanding battery aging and opti-
mizing their lifetime are essential to ensure that tasks can be completed reliably 
and timely within the constraints of a given battery conﬁguration. A battery 
model that accounts for key non-linear battery-internal phenomena, such as the 
rate-capacity eﬀect and the recovery eﬀect (to be described below) is therefore 
essential. The so-called Kinetic Battery Model (KiBaM) [ 35] has proven to be 
eﬀective in representing such non-linear behavior, making it a valuable tool in 
battery system modeling. 
Fig. 1. 4-cell battery pack. In addition to the battery model itself, 
an eﬀective and realistic workload model is 
required to capture the stochastic nature of 
energy demand and use. Previous studies, 
cf. [ 27, 28], have employed a deterministic 
approac
h to model the combination of two 
batteries and evaluate their lifetimes under 
various ﬁxed workload patterns using model 
checking techniques for timed automata, 
thereby using the tool Uppaal . This app-
roach relies on a discretization of the battery 
storage levels and can predict a system’s life-
time for deterministic workloads. However, it is less suitable for stochastic work-
loads due to the inherent variability. Furthermore, the scalability of this app-
roach is limited by state-space explosion, constraining evaluations to just two 
batteries. To address these limitations, this paper proposes a stochastic hybrid 
modeling (SHM) approach, aiming to capture the complex interactions between 
the battery systems and less predictable stochastic workloads. We explore diﬀer-
ent simulation and analysis tools capable of extracting meaningful insights from 
SHM models, with the goal of improving battery system design and management 
under real-world conditions. 
This paper is dedicated to the 60th birthday of Christel Baier. Its topic is 
a
 deliberate choice, as it connects us to Christel Baier. Since the beginning of 
our cooperation, we have been working on stochastic models, bringing together 
expertise from the formal methods ﬁeld within theoretical computer science, and 
from operations research, including stochastic processes, Markov chains, Markov 
decision processes and computer performance and reliability. We are thankful to 
Christel for her open attitude and admire her willingness to really get to the 
bottom of interesting research questions. Also, we appreciate the many things 
we learned while cooperating, as well as the many fruitful and pleasant days 
of cooperation, in Bonn, Dresden, Aachen and Twente, as well as during other

--- Page 3 ---
384 L. Willemsen et al.
events around the globe. Anne is still grateful for her time as visiting scholar in 
Dresden with Christel’s group in 2014. 
Outline. In Sect. 2 we discuss related work, before we address battery models in 
Sect. 3. In Sect. 4 we brieﬂy present stochastic hybrid models and in Sect. 5 we 
discuss tools that support their analysis. Some of the considered tools support reinforcement learning, which we touch upon in Sect. 
6. In Sect. 7 we introduce 
a case-study addressing the lifetime of a system with N batteries. The imple-mentation of the case-study is described in Sect. 
8 and results are discussed in 
Sect. 9. Finally, we conclude the paper in Sect. 10. 
2 Related Work 
Over the past decades many lines of research focused on quantifying safety prop-erties for safety-critical systems. To provide a quantitative analysis, multiple for-malisms for stochastic hybrid models have been proposed, which extend hybrid 
automata [ 
4, 23] with stochastic components. For example, [ 7] introduces the 
class of stochastic timed automata, which resolves the inherent non-determinism 
in timed automata stochastically. A more general deﬁnition of stochastic hybrid 
models named CTSHA is given in [ 34], where continuous variables evolve accord-
ing to a stochastic diﬀerential equation and two stochastic kernels are used to 
determine the jump times and destinations within the execution of the hybrid 
automaton. Time-discrete versions of CTSHA are discussed in [ 1]. Further, 
[ 14, 46] extend subclasses of HA with random clocks, which model a stochastic 
resolution of continuous non-determinism. While the above formalisms allow to accurately model the interplay of discrete, continuous and stochastic behavior, the formal analysis of such models is a challenging task due to their inherent 
complexity. This issue has been tackled via other lines of work which focus on the simulation of stochastic hybrid models. For instance, in [ 
39, 40] hybrid Petri 
net models of systems are simulated to train a reinforcement learning agent to 
take optimal decisions in the given system. 
The tool Uppaal [ 6] is widely used and oﬀers a range of tools and veriﬁca-
tion techniques for networks of timed automata. Stochastic extensions for more expressive models can be evaluated with statistical model checking (SMC) and 
optimal strategies can be identiﬁed and constructed [ 
5, 13]. Other tools for the 
analytical evaluation of stochastic hybrid models focus on discrete-time stochas-
tic systems [ 11, 47]. Algorithms for non-linear continuous dynamics are provided 
in [ 45]. The tools applied in this paper are introduced in more depth in Sect. 5. 
Next to these research-focused tools, the simulation tool Simulink is well-
established in both industry and research [ 36]. The combination of deductive 
veriﬁcation and SMC-based learning have been considered in [ 2, 3] to obtain safe 
and resilient systems in Simulink. A formal semantics is provided for a subclass 
of Simulink models using a transformation in [ 9]. 
The lifetime of a system with two attached batteries is analyzed in [ 27, 28], 
which corresponds to the time in which at least one battery is not empty. It is assumed that jobs may have diﬀerent service times and energy demands. During

--- Page 4 ---
A Stochastic Hybrid Case-Study Optimizing Battery Pack Usage 385
the system execution, jobs are served sequentially, where idle periods may occur. 
To determine a schedule maximizing the system’s lifetime, [ 27, 28]m o d e l t h et w o 
batteries via a discretized version of the KiBaM and implement the system as a 
priced-timed automata (PTA). This PTA is then analyzed using Uppaal Cora 
resulting in a control schedule which determines which battery should be used to 
serve the job in order to achieve a maximal overall system lifetime. If a battery 
runs empty while serving, it is marked empty and the other battery, if still 
non-empty, continues the job. Note that a battery that has been marked empty cannot be chosen again. Furthermore, the work presented in [ 
27, 28]c o m p a r e s 
the schedule maximizing the lifetime of the battery against other scheduling techniques such as round robin or sequential discharging. To avoid state-space explosion in the model-checking process, the number of scheduling decisions has 
to be kept low in [ 
27, 28]. Thus, the maximum battery capacity and the number 
of batteries needs to be restricted. Furthermore, the discretization of the KiBaM 
leads to small deviations to the behavior of the original KiBaM. The above case-
study is extended in [ 8] by considering a stochastic extension of the KiBaM [ 25]. 
This extension is applied to a nano-sattelite of type GOMX-3, which is also 
considered in [ 56]. Here, the satellite is considered to have one battery and is 
modeled by a stochastic timed automaton in Uppaal Stratego. The work then 
uses reinforcement learning to obtain strategies maximizing the longevity of a battery. 
3 Battery Modeling 
Formally speaking, a battery consists of multiple electrochemical cells, however, 
a single cell is also often called a battery. Within a cell, an electrochemical reaction converts the stored chemical energy into electrical energy. For a more 
detailed overview, we refer to [ 
29]. Depending on the chemical reaction type, 
some batteries can be recharged, while others cannot. In general, the maximal capacity C
max of a battery indicates how much energy can be stored in the 
battery. Furthermore, the eﬀective capacity states how much energy can still be used during the current discharge-cycle. Due to the electrochemical processes, modeling the behavior of batteries is complex. In particular, during discharge 
two main non-linear eﬀects occur [ 
30]: 
– If a battery (cell) is discharged with a high current, the voltage drops slowly and the resulting eﬀective capacity of the battery is lower, which is called the 
rate-capacity eﬀect. 
– The eﬀective capacity can recover in an idle period after periods of discharge. This recovery eﬀect may again increase the perceived battery lifetime. 
Clearly, a linear battery model is unable to capture these eﬀects but instead models only an ideal case, where voltage remains constant during discharge, and the eﬀective capacity drops to zero as soon as the battery is empty (and 
not earlier than that). To better capture the above two physical eﬀects, a large variety of models have been proposed ranging from simple analytical models, e.g.,

--- Page 5 ---
386 L. Willemsen et al.
based on Peukert’s law [ 42], to detailed electrochemical models, as summarized 
in
 [ 12, 30]. Detailed electrochemical models allow for more precise modeling but 
are
 also more complex and more diﬃcult to use in practice [ 32]. 
In the remainder of this section we discuss an intuitive analytical model, 
the
 so-called Kinetic Battery Model (KiBaM) [ 35], which oﬀers a good balance 
b
etween accuracy and complexity. The KiBaM, as depicted in Fig. 2, assumes 
that the charge of the battery is distributed over two wells, called available (a) 
and bounded (b)c h a r g e . 
Fig. 2. Graphical representation of 
the KiBaM. The proportional width of the available 
charge is given by a parameter c ∈ (0, 1) 
and the proportional width of the bounded 
charge well is 1 − c. When applying a load 
s to the battery, the energy is taken (con-
sumed) from the available charge. Mean-
while, the available charge well is reﬁlled 
from the bounded charge, via a pipe with 
ﬁxed conductance k. The change of charge 
within each well is described by diﬀerential 
equations with parameters c, k,a n d Cmax, 
as follows: 
˙a(t)= k ·/parenleftbiggb(t) 
1 − c − a(t) 
c/parenrightbigg
+ s(t), 
˙b(t)= k ·/parenleftbigga(t) 
c − b(t) 
1 − c/parenrightbigg
, (1) 
where a(t) and b(t) denote the available and bounded charge at time t and s(t) 
is the load that is applied to the battery at time t. If the available charge is at 
its upper (lower) boundary and s(t) is larger (smaller) than −k ·/parenleftBig
b(t) 
1−c − a(t) 
c/parenrightBig
, 
˙a(t) is deﬁned to be 0. 
In the following we assume that the initial charge is distributed over the wells 
according to the proportional width, i.e., a(0) = c·Cmax and b(0) = (1−c)·Cmax 
and we assume that the workload s(t) only changes at given discrete time points 
t1,t2,...,t n. Note, that the KiBaM model indeed captures certain non-linear 
behavior, like the rate-capacity eﬀect and the recovery eﬀect. 
4 Stochastic Hybrid Automata 
Hybrid automata (HA) [ 24] are a well-established formalism to model complex 
real-w
orld applications, as they can capture the interplay of discrete and con-
tinuous behavior. Naturally, HA include inherent non-determinism via multiple 
possible discrete or continuous actions and can be used to perform a qualitative 
analysis, however, in many cases a quantitative analysis is desired. We give a 
formal deﬁnition below.

--- Page 6 ---
A Stochastic Hybrid Case-Study Optimizing Battery Pack Usage 387
Deﬁnition 1. (Hybrid Automata: Syntax [ 4]). AH A H is a tuple 
(Loc, Var , Flow, Inv , Edge, Init), with the following components: 
– Loc denotes a ﬁnite set of locations. 
– Var is a ﬁnite set of real-valued variables. A function v : Var → R assigns 
a real valuation to each variable. The set of all valuations is denoted V .T h e 
state of a HA is given by the tuple (q, v), which consists of a location q ∈ Loc 
and a valuation v ∈ V . The location of the current state is called the control 
location. 
– Flow is a labeling function that assigns a set of ﬂows to each location. Each 
ﬂow f ∈ Flow(q) is given by a function f : R ≥0 → V and speciﬁes the 
evolution of the continuous state. It is required that ﬂows are time-invariant. Thus, for all locations q ∈ Loc, all ﬂows f ∈ Flow(q) and t ∈ R
≥0 also 
(f + t) ∈ Flow(q), with (f + t)(t/prime)= f(t + t/prime), for all t/prime∈ R≥0. 
– Inv is a labeling function which assigns an invariant Inv(q) ⊆ V to each 
location q ∈ Loc. The invariant indicates the domain of the continuous state within the current location. 
– Edge ⊆ Loc × 2V × (V → V ) × Loc is a ﬁnite set of discrete transitions 
or jumps.F o raj u m p (/lscript, g, r,/lscript/prime) ∈ Edge,/lscriptand/lscript/primeare its source resp. target 
locations, a its label, g its guard,a n d r its reset. 
– Init is a non-empty set of initial states. 
Note that compared to [ 4], we omit labels from the above deﬁnition. Adding 
labels would allow us to specify the parallel compositions of HA which, however, is not required for the course of this paper. 
The execution of an HA distinguishes between discrete and timed steps, 
where discrete steps correspond to taking a transition and timed steps correspond to the passage of time within the control location. A discrete step can only be 
taken if the continuous state fulﬁlls the speciﬁed guard and invariant at the target location. Similarly, a timed step is only possible if a passage of time would not violate the invariant of the current location. 
Deﬁnition 2. (Hybrid Automata: Semantics [ 4]). F o raH A (Loc, Var , 
Flow, Inv , Edge, Init), the semantics of a discrete step is: 
(q, μ, q/prime) ∈ Edge(v, v/prime) ∈ μv ∈ Inv(q)v/prime∈ Inv(q/prime) 
(q, v) − → (q/prime,v/prime) Rule discrete . 
The timed step semantics of the automaton is given by: 
f ∈ Flow(q)f(0) = vf (t)= v/prime∀0 ≤ t/prime≤ t : f(t/prime) ∈ Inv(q) 
(q, v) t− → (q, v/prime) Rule time. 
A path/rho1 H of an HA H is a ﬁnite or inﬁnite sequence of states, where changes 
in the state happen according to either a timed step or a discrete step. 
HA have been extended with stochastic components [ 1, 7, 15, 21, 34]w h i c h 
(partially) resolve the HA’s inherent non-determinism. Several approaches to include stochastic behavior have been generalized as well as classiﬁed w.r.t. their

--- Page 7 ---
388 L. Willemsen et al.
expressivity in [ 53, 54]. In particular, they extend HA with stochastic kernels in 
various ways to allow for stochastic decisions on the discrete or continuous action, 
as summarized in the following deﬁnition. 
Deﬁnition 3. (Stochastic Hybrid Automaton: Syntax ). A stochastic hybrid automaton is a tuple S =(H, Ψ),w h e r e : 
– H =(Loc, Var , Flow, Inv , Edge, Init) is a hybrid automaton, 
– Ψ is a set of stochastic kernels [ 31]. 
Depending on how the stochastic kernels are used in the semantics, ﬁve dif-
ferent subclasses of stochastic hybrid automata can be identiﬁed. To keep this 
paper focused, we refer the interested reader to [ 53, 54] and do not further discuss 
these diﬀerences here. 
5 Tools for SHA 
In the following we present the tools for the analysis of SHA that are used to 
evaluate the case-study in this paper. 
Modest toolset.T h e Modest toolset [ 21, 22]p r o v i d e sa single-formalism, 
multiple solution approach. It contains a collection of tools suitable for the analy-
sis of diﬀerent subclasses of networks of stochastic hybrid automata (SHAs) [ 21]. 
In general, SHAs allow to use continuous time and to specify the evolution of 
variables according to diﬀerential (in)equations. Moreover, choices within the 
execution of the model can be resolved non-deterministically or probabilistically. 
While the Modest toolset supports various input formats, models are typi-
cally speciﬁed using the Modest language, which is inspired by process algebras. 
The Modest toolset includes the modes [ 10] statistical model checker which 
supports SHM with linear dynamics as well as lightweight scheduler sampling [ 33] 
for non-hybrid models [ 17, 18]. Further, the Modest toolset includes the tool 
prohver [ 21], which relies on a modiﬁcation of PHAVer [ 19] and computes safe 
upper bounds for maximum reachability properties. 
RealySt. The tool RealySt 1[ 14, 15] is capable of computing maximal reacha-
bility probabilities for the class of rectangular hybrid automata extended with 
random clocks. It uses a combination of forward reachability analysis with back-ward reﬁnement to optimize the reachability probabilities. For the ﬂowpipe-
based reachability analysis RealySt uses the library HyPro [ 
44]. Moreover, the 
GNU Scientiﬁc Library (GSL) [ 20] provides Monte Carlo integration methods, 
which are used during the analysis performed in RealySt. 
Simulink Toolbox. Simulink [ 36] is an industrially well established, graphical 
modeling language for hybrid systems. Simulink models consist of blocks with discrete or continuous behavior that are connected by so-called signals. The 
Simulink block library provides a large set of predeﬁned blocks, from arith-metic over control ﬂow blocks to integrators and complex transformations. The
1 Available at https:// zivgitlab. uni-muenster. de/ag-sks/tools/ realyst . 

--- Page 8 ---
A Stochastic Hybrid Case-Study Optimizing Battery Pack Usage 389
reinforcement learning Toolbox [ 50] provides an RL agent block, which enables 
executing RL algorithms within Simulink. It periodically samples observations, 
provides rewards and chooses actions. 
6 Reinforcement Learning 
As some of the above-mentioned tools apply Reinforcement Learning (RL), we 
give a brief overview on the topic. RL is a class of machine learning methods 
in which an agent learns via trial and error to take actions in a dynamic envi-ronment in order to maximize some given reward [ 
49]. Often the environment 
is expressed as a Markov decision process (MDP). An MDP [ 43] is deﬁned by a 
tuple (S, A, R, P ),w h e r e S is a set of states, A is a set of actions, R ⊂ R is a 
set of rewards, where R a(s, s/prime) indicates the reward for a transition from state 
s to state s/primeaccording to action a. Finally, P speciﬁes the transition probabil-
ities of the MDP and P a(s, s/prime) gives the probability of moving from state s to 
s/primein case action a has been chosen. The agent interacts with the environment 
at discrete time steps. Each step t, the agent observes the current state s t ∈ S 
of the environment and chooses an action a t ∈ A, which may depend on the 
current state s t. The environment then responds with the state s t+1 ∈ S that 
was reached as well as a numerical reward R at(st,st+1) ∈ R which is associated 
with the transition from state s t to state s t+1 via the action a t. A so-called policy 
π(a|s) of an RL agent indicates the action a that is taken when observing state 
s. The aim of RL is that the agent learns a policy π(a|s), which maximizes the 
cumulative reward. 
Two well-established algorithms for RL are Q-Learning [ 51]a n d Deep Q-
Learning (DQN) [ 38]. The ﬁrst maintains a discrete Q-Table, where each state-
action pair is explicitly stored. Thus, the (i, j)-th entry of the table indicates the 
reward for action j, when being in state s i. During the training, the entries of 
the Q-Table are updated according to the observed rewards and actions. After 
training, in state s i, the action a is chosen for which the Q-Table indicates the 
highest reward. Q-Learning requires discrete and ﬁnite state-spaces, as well as discrete and ﬁnite action spaces. DQN replaces that Q-Table by a deep neuronal network. This allows to handle high-dimensional and continuous state-spaces. 
7 Case-Study: An Optimal Route for R UNNING .CHRISTEL 
As a case-study, we address a new research project of the Algebraic and Logic 
Foundations of Computer Science group at the TU Dresden, which aims to ﬁnd 
the most eﬃcient route to run around the world in an interactive way. To achieve this, a stochastic model of a runner is developed, denoted Running.Christel. 
Next to that, a nano-satellite is being employed, as previously modeled by her friends and long-time co-authors Hermanns and Haverkort [ 
41, 48]. 
The nano-satellite is equipped with multiple batteries and an integrated cam-
era. It orbits the earth and carries out three tasks: (1) its camera takes a batch of pictures of the earth’s surface, (2) the images of the batch are compressed

--- Page 9 ---
390 L. Willemsen et al.
to reduce their overall size, and (3) the compressed images are sent to a base 
station in Dresden, where they are used to ﬁnd the optimal route for Run-ning.Christel. After the compressed images have been sent, the procedure 
repeats as long as at least one battery in the satellite has enough charge to operate the system. 
To take as many images as possible, the system’s lifetime should be maxi-
mized, i.e., the time in which at least one of the on-system batteries has some charge left. This can be achieved by switching between the batteries to make use of the non-linear recovery eﬀect of batteries. The case-study at hand uses the 
approach of [ 
27, 28] and aims at predicting the best switching strategy (between 
the batteries) such that the overall lifetime of the nano-satellite reaches at least a certain threshold L. 
7.1 Modeling R UNNING .CHRISTEL 
Within the satellite a controller decides which of the batteries is used as power source for an incoming job, based on a given workload model that characterizes the arrival time of jobs, their power demand and required service time. We 
formalize the workload model as follows. 
Deﬁnition 4. (Workload Model). A workload model W for horizon h is a sequence of tuples 
W =[ (I
i, arr i, dur i, dem i)]1≤i≤h, 
where the i-th tuple represents a job i with job ID I i, arrival time arr i,r e q u i r e d 
service time dur i and power demand dem i. 
In the following, we denote the workload speciﬁcation of a job k for a given 
workload model W as W (k). While serving the jobs according to the given 
workload model W , the controller can only choose a non-empty battery. If a battery runs empty while serving, it is marked as empty and a non-empty battery 
is chosen immediately to continue the job. The lifetime of the system corresponds to the time in which at least one battery is still not marked as empty. We aim to identify the lower bound of the system’s maximal lifetime, hence we only 
consider one charging cycle of the batteries and assume that the batteries are not recharged. Depending on the decisions of the controller, diﬀerent lifetimes 
can be reached. To evaluate which lifetimes are possible for the workload model W representing jobs 1 to h, the system can be modeled as an hybrid automaton 
H
W . An example for an HA modeling a 2-battery system can be found in Fig. 3. 
Table 1 indicates the initial values for each variable as well as their ﬂow that holds 
unless given otherwise in Fig. 3. Here, batteries are modeled by the KiBaM which 
requires three continuous variables for each battery: a i and b i to keep track of 
the available resp. bounded charge of the i-th battery and e i to track whether 
the i-th battery is marked as empty (in which case we set e i =1; initially, all 
ei =0). A battery is marked as empty as soon as its available charge runs empty 
for the ﬁrst time. Additionally, ﬁve continuous variables are needed to monitor the state of the system: the stopwatch L tracks the lifetime of the system and is

--- Page 10 ---
A Stochastic Hybrid Case-Study Optimizing Battery Pack Usage 391
Fig. 3. HA model for a system with 2 batteries. If not stated otherwise in the location, 
variables evolve according to Table 1. 
Table 1. Overview of continuous variables, their derivatives and initial conditions. 
Variable Flow Initial condition 
ai ˙ai = k( bi 
1−c − ai 
c )c · C max 
bi ˙bi = −k( bi 
1−c − ai 
c ) (1 − c) · C max 
ei ˙ei =0 0 
d ˙d = −1 0 
p ˙p =0 0 
L ˙L =1 0 
y ˙y =1 0 
z ˙z =0 1 
paused as soon as all batteries are marked as empty. The variable z stores the 
id of the job that is currently served, p indicates the power demand of the job 
that is currently served and d the remaining serving time of that job. Finally, y 
is an auxiliary variable. 
If we have N batteries there are 3N +5 continuous variables in the hybrid 
automaton. The HA has N +3 locations and initially, the control location of the

--- Page 11 ---
392 L. Willemsen et al.
HA is idle, where it remains until the arrival of W (1). Afterwards the system 
moves from location idle to location select_battery and the values for p and d 
are set to the speciﬁcations of W (1). As long as there exists an i ∈{1,...,N} 
with e i =0, the systems moves immediately from select_battery t oal o c a -
tion discharge_j,w h e r e e j =0 with j ∈{1,...,N} holds. This corresponds to 
choosing battery j to serve the current job. Location discharge_j models the dis-
charging of the chosen battery. From location discharge_j we move to location 
select_battery as soon as either d =0 holds, which corresponds to successfully 
completing the job, or as soon as a j =0. In the latter case, the variable e j is set 
to 1, meaning that battery j can no longer be chosen for future jobs. If d =0 
location select_battery is left immediately to location idle.I f d> 0 we either 
move immediately to location all_empty if for all i ∈{1,...,N} we have e i =1, 
or to location discharge_k with e k =0 otherwise. 
After moving to location idle, the process repeats with the next job according 
to the workload proﬁle. Note that the horizon of the applied workload model is chosen in such a way that regardless of the scheduler which resolves the inherent non-determinism between choosing a discharge location, location all_empty is 
eventually reached. 
7.2 Workload Model 
In the following we parametrize the workload model. Note that the chosen values 
are primarily chosen to highlight the stochastic impact and do not necessarily 
reﬂect reality. During its lifetime, the satellite orbits the earth and takes images of its surface for exactly two hours and has a power demand of 0.2 W. After two 
hours of taking images, the satellite starts compressing the images and moves to a position above Dresden from where it can send the images back to earth. 
The size of the compression and with that the time until the full batch is 
sent to earth is not ﬁxed, but strongly depends on the content of the images. Thus, the time taken for compression and sending may vary, where we assume it 
to be uniformly distributed between 1 and 2 h. Furthermore, the power demand for compressing and sending is 0.9 W. 
After the images have been sent, the satellite immediately continues with the 
task of taking images. Thus, our workload model of horizon h is given by 
W s = [(1, 0,dur 1,dur 1,dem 1), (2,dur 1,dur 2,dem 2), 
..., (k, arr k−1 + dur k−1,dur k,dem k), 
..., (n, arr h−1 + dur h−1,dur h,dem h)], where 
dem i =/braceleftBigg
0.2W, if i mod 2 = 0, 
0.9W, otherwise. and dur i =/braceleftBigg
2h,if i mod 2 = 0, 
Unif(1, 2)h, otherwise.

--- Page 12 ---
A Stochastic Hybrid Case-Study Optimizing Battery Pack Usage 393
We also consider a deterministic workload model taken from [ 27, 28], where all 
jobs have a required service time of 1h, a power demand of 0.25W and no idling 
time occurs between jobs. Thus, for an h ∈ N: 
W d = [(1, 0, 1, 0.25W ), (2, 1, 0.25W ),... , (h, h, 1, 0.25W )]. 
Since W d is purely deterministic, H W d is a hybrid automaton as described 
in Sect. 4. In contrast, the workload model H W s includes stochasticity and H W s 
is a SHA. If W s(z) corresponds to the job which compresses images and sends 
them to earth, the required service time of the sending and compression process 
is set according to a uniform distribution. 
The maximal lifetime of the system can possibly be improved by choosing 
only batteries with suﬃcient eﬀective capacity for the current job. However, 
precomputing the power demand requires solving the diﬀerential equations of 
the KiBaM. In general, this is only possible for a deterministic workload model, but not if the required service time is sampled from a probability distribution. 
Numerical Parameters. We assume that the nano-satellite is equipped with a 
battery system similar to Fig. 1 and has four attached batteries, where each has 
a nominal voltage of 3.6 V and range in capacity from 1800 mAh to 3600 mAh. 
As this corresponds to a range from 6.48 Wh to 12.96 Wh, we ﬁxed the capacities 
of the batteries in this case-study such that the ﬁrst battery (B 1) has a capacity 
of 7 Wh, the second battery (B 2) has a capacity of 8.5 Wh, the third one (B 3) 
a capacity of 10 Wh and the last battery (B 4) a capacity of 12 Wh. 
Since each battery is modeled by the KiBaM, the systems lifetime strongly 
depends on the choice of the parameters c and k, as they govern the recovery 
eﬀect of each battery (see Sect. 3). It follows directly from Equation ( 1)t h a t 
the ﬂow from the bounded charge to the available charge is maximal if the height diﬀerence between the two wells is maximal, i.e., if a(t)=0 and b(t)= 
(1 − c) · C
max. In this case, the ﬂow would be k · C max. During our evaluation 
we set c =0.5 to ensure that enough energy is stored in the available charge to increase the number of batteries from which the scheduler can choose, while 
also ensuring that the bounded charge stores enough energy, to showcase the recovery eﬀect. According to [ 
27, 28], we set k =0.017. 
8 Modeling the N-Battery System in Diﬀerent Tools 
We implemented the N-battery system in each of the considered tools given in Sect. 
5. The corresponding source ﬁles are available online 2.T h e Simulink 
model is explained in Sect. 8.1 followed by a speciﬁcation of the case-study in 
the input language of the Modest toolset in Sect. 8.2 and a discussion of the 
implementation in RealySt in Sect. 8.3. Even though the case-study of [ 27, 28] 
was performed in Uppaal Cora, for this Festschrift we used academic tools 
developed at the University of Münster and the University of Twente.
2 https:// zivgitlab. uni-muenster. de/ag-sks/tools/ misc/execution- scripts/ 2025-04-
optimal- battery- pack-usage. 

--- Page 13 ---
394 L. Willemsen et al.
Fig. 4. Schematic overview on the setup of the Simulink Model. 
8.1 Setup Simulink 
The Simulink model shown in Fig. 4 consists of ﬁve subsystems: ManageJobs, 
ObservationAndReward, Batteries, RL agent and LifetimeCalculation. 
Note that this model can easily be adapted for a diﬀerent number of batteries and 
for diﬀerent workload models. In the following we describe the tasks assigned to the diﬀerent subsystems. ManageJobs processes the given workload model (either 
deterministic or stochastic) and forwards information on the current job W (z), 
i.e., its demand and its remaining service time, to ObservationAndReward and 
Batteries. ObservationAndReward collects and processes information from all 
other subsystems and provides the system state and a reward to the RL agent. 
Since Simulink performs discrete-time simulation, the RL agent makes a 
decision after each time-step. This decision is based on its observations (as 
explained below) and identiﬁes a battery to be used until the next decision. Note 
that in case a battery runs empty or the job is completed in-between two time 
steps, the model evolution is paused, hence, the lifetime and the available and 
bounded charge of the batteries do not evolve further until the next decision of the agent. The decision of the RL agent is forwarded to ObservationAndReward 
and to Batteries. The latter uses the input from the RL agent and the received job information, to initiate the discharging of the corresponding battery. Recall from Sect. 
7 that each battery is modeled as a KiBaM in its own subsystem 
(see Fig. 5b). Finally, LifetimeCalculation computes the current lifetime of 
the system and performs the statistical evaluation. Thus, in case the stochastic workload model is applied, subsystem Lifetime Calculation checks whether 
the lifetime surpasses a given threshold. For the stochastic workload model, we compute the Wilson-Score Conﬁdence Interval [ 
55].

--- Page 14 ---
A Stochastic Hybrid Case-Study Optimizing Battery Pack Usage 395
Fig. 5. Two subsystems in a Simulink model of a 2-battery system. 
We run Simulink with a variable-step solver with a maximum step size of 0.025. 
Diﬀerential equations are solved with the Dormand-Prince method (ode45) [ 16]. 
We use the parallel training and simulation option of Simulink. 
The RL agent is implemented as a Deep Q-Network agent and receives a set 
of observations on the state of the system, which include: the previously chosen

--- Page 15 ---
396 L. Willemsen et al.
battery, the current number of battery changes, the current lifetime as well 
as the current job information. Furthermore, the observation includes features based on information on the state of each battery, i.e., the bounded and the 
available charge, as well as the information whether the battery is marked as empty. The action space of the agent corresponds to the IDs of the N batteries, 
ranging from 1 to N . During training, the features in the observation space are 
used to learn the weights of the deep neuronal network, which determines the action of the controller. The impact of an observation to the result is driven by a complex interplay of diﬀerent weights. Thus, it is generally challenging to 
predict the inﬂuence that a single element from the observation space has. Note that the chosen observation space for this paper is not necessarily minimal, but could be reduced without aﬀecting the overall performance of the DQN agent. 
The importance of single features from the observation space could be evaluated with methods from the ﬁeld of explainable AI (see [ 
37] for a survey). The ﬁrst 
layer of the deep neural network used by the agent is an input layer which processes the observations. This is followed by two alternating layers of fully connected units (256 each) and ReLU activation functions. The ﬁnal layer is a 
fully connected output layer, which generates a Q-value for each possible action for the given observation. As introduced in [ 
38], Simulink uses a target critic 
and memory replay. We use a learning rate of 5 · 10−3 for the critic and adapt 
the standard settings of the agent to ExperienceBufferLength=25 · 10−3.T o 
enhance learning, we normalize the observations. 
The aim is to train the agent, such that its decisions maximize the overall 
lifetime of the system. For this, a reward function calculates for each action of the agent a reward within a subsystem that is depicted in Fig. 
5aa n d i n t e -
grated into Observation & Reward. The reward is composed out of three dif-
ferent components, where the ﬁrst is the Lifetime reward (indicated in green), 
which rewards the agent with a value from the interval [0, 1], corresponding to 
the increase in lifetime since the last decision of the agent. Furthermore, we use 
reward shaping to ensure that the agent only takes valid actions, i.e., no empty 
battery is chosen and a new battery is only chosen if either the previous job is completed or the previous battery ran empty. The subsystems Check empty and 
Check completion (indicated in red) provide the agent with a high negative 
reward of −2 in case the last action was not valid. 
8.2 Setup M ODEST TOOLSET 
We implemented the HA of Fig. 3 within the Modest Toolset. Hereby, each loca-
tion of the HA is described as a separate process and the changes between the 
processes are speciﬁed according to the guard conditions. Listing 1.1 shows the 
speciﬁcation of location discharge1 of Fig. 3 in Modest. The invariant of the pro-
cess speciﬁes the ﬂows for each continuous variable, as well as the conditions on the continuous state. The transitions leading to location select_battery are 
encoded into the alt statement. If a process is changed, Modest allows to reset 
variables to samples of a given probability distribution. Thus, the speciﬁcations

--- Page 16 ---
A Stochastic Hybrid Case-Study Optimizing Battery Pack Usage 397
for an HA with W d or W s in Modest only diﬀer in the speciﬁcation of the condi-
tions when the process Idle is left. Note that for the analysis with modes,g u a r d 
conditions cannot be speciﬁed as an open interval. To avoid Zeno behavior, we 
therefore replace the guard condition d> 0 with d ≥ 0.000001. 
Listing 1.1. Implementation of location discharge1 from Fig. 3 in Modest. 
process discharge1 () 
{ 
invariant ( der ( a 1 ) = = ( k*( b 1 / ( 1-c )-a 1 /c ) )-p 
&& der ( b 1 ) = = k*( a 1 /c-b 1 / ( 1-c ) ) 
&& der ( a 2 ) = = k*( b 2 / ( 1-c )-a 2 /c ) 
&& der ( b 2 ) = = k*( a 2 /c-b 2 / ( 1-c ) ) && der (p) == 0 && der (d) == (-1) && der (L) == 1 
&& der (h) == 1 && der (T) == 1 && a1 >= 0 && d >= 0) 
alt { 
:: when ((d >= eps ) && (a1 <= 0)) 
tau {= e1 = 1,h = 0 =}; Select_Battery () 
:: when (d <= 0) tau {= h = 0 =}; Select_Battery () 
} 
} 
We use the simulation tool modes with its Q-Learning extension to analyze 
whether the lifetime of the system can exceed a given threshold L. The agent 
aims at resolving the discrete non-determinism arising in the HA of Fig. 3 such 
that the probability to exceed the given threshold is maximized. Unless stated 
otherwise, we use the Q-Learning extension with the following settings: 
rate = 0.1, disc-factor = 10, final-rate = 0.05, discount = 1.0, 
epsilon = 0.15, final-epsilon = 0.05. 
For the statistical evaluation, again a Wilson-Score Conﬁdence Interval is 
computed. Note that the agent observes the current sampling of the random 
variable and the remaining duration of stochastic delays is part of the obser-
vation space. Hence, we obtain a prophetic scheduler if a stochastic workload 
model is applied, which corresponds to the computation of a best case that can 
be achieved in this setting. For deterministic workload models, we also apply a uniform scheduler to all non-deterministic decisions instead of Q-Learning. In 
that case each decision is resolved probabilistically, where each choice has the same probability. We then evaluate the maximal threshold L for which the prob-ability to eventually reach a lifetime of L is larger than 0. Note that the uniform 
scheduler returns a probability for reaching a predeﬁned lifetime L, but is not 
able to return a schedule. 
8.3 Setup RealySt 
For a proper analytical evaluation of the model in RealySt, the support of 
continuous dynamics in the form of Linear-Time-Invariant (LTI) systems [ 52]i s

--- Page 17 ---
398 L. Willemsen et al.
required. However, this kind of analysis is not yet supported in RealySt,n o r i n 
prohver. However, by adapting the HA shown in Fig. 3 to continuous variables 
with constant rates, the tool can be used to determine an over-approximation of 
the system lifetime. For this, we construct a singular automaton [ 24] as follows: 
The lifetime of the model strongly depends on the KiBaM parameters, as 
discussed in Sect. 7. To make the model analyzable for the analytical tools, we 
have to assume a maximal ﬂow between the two wells of the KiBaM and we set 
˙ai = k ·C max, when the battery i is idling and ˙a i = k · C max − p, otherwise. This 
over-approximates the lifetime of the model as explained in Sect. 7.2.M o r e o v e r , 
we ensure that 0 ≤ a i ≤ c · C max holds at each time. The resulting singular 
automaton is speciﬁed in the input format of RealySt. To improve computation 
time, we replace guards of the form d> 0 by d ≥ 0.000001. 
9 Evaluation 
In this section the lifetime of the nano-satellite is evaluated by checking whether it reaches a certain threshold L. In Sect. 
9.1, we introduce the speciﬁca-
tions of our experiments. Section 9.2 considers a two-battery system with a deter-
ministic workload model which is analyzed with analytical tools. In Sect. 9.3 we 
consider various settings which are analyzed with simulation-based tools. 
9.1 Speciﬁcations 
We consider diﬀerent settings to showcase important aspects in the analysis of 
our proposed hybrid models with the tools discussed in Sect. 5. We identify the 
diﬀerent settings via a tuple of the form (N , C max, c), where N indicates the 
number of batteries used, C max the maximal capacity of each battery and c the 
chosen value for the parameter c of the KiBaM. Note that in each setting, we 
set k =0.017, therefore, this parameter is not included in the tuple. 
All experiments using Simulink or a tool from the Modest toolset have 
been conducted on a machine equipped with two AMD EPYC 9354 proces-sors with 32 kernels running at 3.25 GHz and a total of 512 GB of RAM. The 
experiments using RealySt have been conducted on a machine equipped with 
an Intel 
R/circlecopyrtCore TM i7 processor running at 10 × 1.7 GHz with 64 GB of RAM. 
Unless stated otherwise we train the DQN-agent in Simulink for 600 and the 
Q-Learning agent in modes for 10000 episodes, as these two training techniques 
require a diﬀerent number of training episodes. In both tools one simulation 
run is performed with the learned strategy. To simulate modes with the uniform 
scheduler, we use 10000 simulation runs.

--- Page 18 ---
A Stochastic Hybrid Case-Study Optimizing Battery Pack Usage 399
Table 2. Lifetime obtained for a (2, 5.5 Wh, 0.166) system with deterministic workload 
and jobs with power demand 0.4 W and service time 1 h. Per setting, 10 simulation 
runs are performed. The lifetime (LT) is indicated by the maximum and the training 
time (TT) by the average. 
RealySt prohver modes Simulink 
Q-Learning Uniform Scheduler 
9.2 9.2 5.75 5.75 5.73 LT [h] 
58.82 1.36 2.28 6.64 94.09 TT [s] 
9.2 Results Obtained by Analytical Tools 
As mentioned in Sect. 8.3, both analytical tools prohver and RealySt do not 
support the analysis of systems with linear dynamics such as the KiBaM (yet). 
However, by over-approximating the recovery eﬀect modeled in the KiBaM via 
a singular automaton, an upper bound for the lifetime can be determined. 
Table 2 compares the results achieved by the diﬀerent tools for the setting 
(2, 5.5 Wh, 0.166) when applying a deterministic workload model, where jobs 
with demand 0.4 W and a required service time of 1h arrive consecutively. While 
the analytical models over-approximate the recovery eﬀect as explained above, 
Modes and Simulink analyze the lifetime taking into account the non-linear 
eﬀects modeled by the KiBaM. 
The over-approximations provided by RealySt and prohver both lead to a 
lifetime of 9.2h. Hereby, the computation time of prohver is much smaller than 
RealySt. Also the results obtained by the simulation-based tools coincide, where 
modes is considerably faster than Simulink. Due to the deterministic workload model no conﬁdence intervals are provided. The over-approximation results in a 
lifetime that is approximately 60% larger than the simulated lifetimes. To obtain a meaningful upper bound it could be interesting to investigate a tighter over-
approximation of the recovery eﬀect in the KiBaM in future work. Because the over-approximation of the recovery eﬀect increases the lifetime signiﬁcantly, also 
the number of scheduling decisions increases drastically. Similar to [ 
27, 28], this 
leads to a state-space explosion resulting in very high computation times. Hence, in the following, we only consider simulation-based tools which are able to deal 
with larger state-spaces and with the nonlinear dynamic induced by the KiBaM. 
9.3 Results Obtained by Simulation 
2- or 3-Battery Systems. We ﬁrst consider the setting (2, 5.5 Wh, 0.166)w h i c h 
corresponds to one of the settings in [ 27, 28]. To highlight the scalability of our 
model we further extend this setting towards higher values of c and C max,a s 
well as towards 3 batteries. Each of these changes leads to a larger amount of 
scheduling decisions, increasing the complexity of the problem.

--- Page 19 ---
400 L. Willemsen et al.
Table 3. Lifetimes and computation times for settings (i) (2, 5.5 Wh, 0.166), (ii) 
(2, 5.5 Wh, 0.5), (iii) (2, 11 Wh, 0.5)( i v )(2, 30 Wh, 0.5)a n d ( v )(3, 5.5 Wh, 0.166), 
for a deterministic workload model W d. The computation time (TT) is the average of 
the 10 training runs performed, and the lifetime (LT) is their maximum. 
Simulink modes 
Q-Learning Uniform 
(i) 11.89 11.89 11.93 LT [h] 
78.36 6.83 12.57 TT [s] 
(ii) 30.97 30.75 30.98 LT [h] 
114.87 11.42 27.87 TT [s] 
(iii) 73.23 73.2 73.24 LT [h] 
202.10 24.00 59.02 TT [s] 
(iv) 224.97 225.1 225.15 LT [h] 
602.37 64.75 155.47 TT [s] 
(v) 23.58 15.8 24.05 LT [h] 
101.75 7.57 22.90 TT [s] 
Table 3 shows results for setting (i) (2, 5.5 Wh, 0.166), (ii) (2, 5.5 Wh, 0.5), 
(iii) (2, 11 Wh, 0.5), (iv) (2, 30 Wh, 0.5)a n d (iv) (3, 5.5 Wh, 0.166)i n 
combination with the deterministic workload model W d. For each case, we use 
the uniform scheduler of modes, to obtain the maximal possible lifetime for this 
scenario. For a system with two batteries, both Deep Q-Learning in Simulink and Q-Learning in modes obtain schedules which maximize the system’s lifetime. 
The computation time of modes with Q-Learning outperform Simulink in all cases, while the resulting lifetime is similar in all cases, except for setting(v), 
which is discussed together with two other interesting settings below. 
For setting (i) an optimal schedule is provided in [ 27, 28] which is computed 
for a discretized version of the KiBaM and results in a lifetime of 12.04h. As the 
source code of [ 27, 28] is not available, we could not analyze the computation 
time of Uppaal on a modern machine. The results of our models are within the 1% error induced by the discretization of the KiBaM for the considered workload 
model, as indicated by the authors. 
For setting (iv) the discretization factor which determines the discretization, 
h a dt ob er e d u c e d t o1i n modes to allow its Q-Learning agent to learn opti-
mal decisions. This reduces the amount of possible states drastically and implies that it is more challenging to ﬁnd an optimal solution using Q-Learning for set-tings with a large state-space. Both, the number of batteries and their maximal 
capacity increase the state-space, hence, the lifetime obtained via Q-Learning for setting (v), which is a setting with three batteries, is signiﬁcantly lower than the one obtained via Deep Q-Learning in Simulink.

--- Page 20 ---
A Stochastic Hybrid Case-Study Optimizing Battery Pack Usage 401
Table 4. Probability to reach a lifetime of at least threshold L for setting (i) and a 
stochastic workload model. Conﬁdence intervals (CI) are Wilson-score with conﬁdence 
level 0.95 for 5000 simulation runs. Computation time is speciﬁed for training (TT) and simulation (ST). 
L ≥ 7 ≥ 8 ≥ 9 
modes [1.00,1.00] [0.44,0.47] [0.00,0.00] CI 
2.58 4.82 6.01 TT [s] 
1.01 2.09 2.88 ST[s] 
Simulink [1.00, 1.00] [0.44, 0.47] [0.00,0.00] CI 
100.22 100.22 100.22 TT[s] 
112.67 112.67 112.67 ST [s] 
For each setting, the uniform scheduler in modes outperforms the results 
obtained by Q-Learning. We suppose that this is caused by the high number 
of possible schedules, where ﬁnding the optimal one is very rare and therefore 
hard to learn for RL agents. Recall that, simulation with a uniform scheduler, do 
not lead to schedules which maximizes the lifetime. In contrast, applying modes with Q-learning or Simulink with Deep Q-learning results in a trained agent 
that provides a scheduling strategy. 
When a stochastic workload model, as in Table 4 is applied, the lifetime 
strongly depends on the samples of the service times. Hence, a maximal lifetime 
cannot be determined as for the previous case in which a deterministic workload 
model was applied. Instead, statistical model checking is used to indicate the probability that a certain lifetime is reached. Table 
4 shows the results obtained 
for a stochastic workload model where every second job has a service time that is uniformly distributed over (0, 1) and a demand of 0.4W. This workload model is 
applied to the setting (2, 5.5 Wh, 0.166), where results obtained with Simulink 
and modes match. Even though Simulink is able to compute results for all three 
considered lifetimes in one run, i.e., the indicated computation time is only 
needed once, modes again has a lower execution time than Simulink. 
4-battery system for Running.Christel The simulation tools are able to eval-uate a system with four batteries, which was not possible in [ 
28], and is also not 
possible for the analytical tools considered in this paper. Tables 6 and 5 summa-
rize the simulation results for the 4-battery system with a deterministic and a stochastic workload, respectively. 
First, Table 5 shows the lifetimes in a setting with four batteries and a work-
load model in which the required service time of every second job is ﬁxed to either 1, 1.5 or 2 h. The values in column Max. indicate the lifetime that can 
be achieved if for each battery the available charge and the bounded charge are 
fully depleted. Similarly, column Min. indicates the smallest lifetime achieved by 
a scheduler that only discharges the available charge of each battery. Note that 
Min. and Max. provide a theoretical range for the lifetime, where Max. cannot 
be reached in practice, as it is usually not possible to completely drain a battery.

--- Page 21 ---
402 L. Willemsen et al.
Table 5.Lifetime in hours for a the deterministic workload model 
[(0, 0, 2h, 200W ), (1, 2,x 1, 900W ), (3, 2+ x, 2h, 200W ), (4, 4+ x, xh, 900W ),...] with 
x = {1, 1.5, 2}, applied to the setting (4, [7 Wh, 8.5 Wh, 10Wh, 12 Wh], 0.5). Trainings 
have been run 10 times, the time (TT) is the average of these runs and the lifetime 
the maximum obtained from these runs. 
Min. Max. Simulink modes 
Q-Learning Uniform Scheduler 
x =1 43.26 86.53 71.08 57.6 71.2 LT [h] 
222.18 17.10 56.39 TT[s] 
x =1.5 37.5 75 59.01 48.8 59.2 LT [h] 
223.51 13.12 41.20 TT[s] 
x =2 34.09 68.18 51.28 43.3 52 LT [h] 
216.58 s 11.29 33.89 TT [s] 
Table 6. Probability to reach a life-time of at least L for the stochastic workload model W
s in settings (4, [7 Wh, 8.5 Wh, 10 Wh, 12 Wh], 0.5). Conﬁdence intervals (CI) 
are computed using the Wilson-score interval method with conﬁdence level 0.95 and 
5000 simulation runs. Computation time is speciﬁed for training (TT) and simulation (ST). 
L ≥ 52 ≥ 54 ≥ 55 ≥ 56 ≥ 58 
modes [0.53, 0.55] [0.26,0.29] [0.14, 0.16] [0.07, 0.08] [0.01, 0.02] CI 
14.23 15.54 16.21 16.64 16.97 TT[s] 
7.06 7.62 7.95 8.09 8.18 ST[s] 
Simulink [0.99, 1.00] [0.97, 0.98] [0.97, 094] [0.84, 0.84] [0.46, 0.49] CI 
232.26 232.26 232.26 232.26 232.26 TT [s] 
130.49 130.49 130.49 130.49 130.49 ST[s] 
Table 5 indicates that the DQN-agent in Simulink is able to learn schedules 
which lead to lifetimes close to the lifetimes obtained by the uniform scheduler 
with modes. The best results learned by modes are achieved for a discretization 
factor of 1000, which however still leads to signiﬁcantly lower lifetimes. This can 
be explained by the large state-space for the system with four batteries. 
If the stochastic workload model W s is applied, in which every second job 
has a service time that is uniformly distributed on [1, 2], the lifetime strongly 
depends on the sampled delay. As expected, results for the stochastic workload 
model lie between the results for x =1 and x =2, i.e., between 52 and 71.2.A s 
higher lifetimes can only be reached, when small service times are sampled, the probability to reach higher lifetime decreases. This can be seen in Table 
6,w h e r e 
the conﬁdence intervals for the probability to reach a certain threshold in the 
lifetime are given. Within Simulink it is much more likely to reach a lifetime 
that exceeds certain threshold than with modes. This matches the results of

--- Page 22 ---
A Stochastic Hybrid Case-Study Optimizing Battery Pack Usage 403
Table 5, where Q-Learning in modes resulted in signiﬁcantly lower lifetimes for 
the model with four batteries. This is due to the increasing size of the Q-Table, 
which makes eﬃcient Q-Learning infeasible. Finally, the results of Table 6 show 
that the probability that the satellite can be used for at least 56 hi s 84%. 
10 Conclusion 
This paper presented how the maximal lifetime of a system equipped with N bat-
teries can be determined in the presence of stochastic or deterministic workload models. To achieve this, we proposed a hybrid automaton modeling the system 
and we speciﬁed it in four state-of the art tools. In particular for this paper, we focused on two simulation-based tools in which a reinforcement learning agent 
is trained to resolve the decisions on which battery to use. In both tools, the RL agent is trained in such a way that it aims to make decisions leading to a long lifetime of the system. Both tools train with a diﬀerent RL algorithm. 
The achieved results are compared to results obtained by two tools providing a formal analysis of hybrid systems. 
Our results show that for small systems with a relatively small state-space, 
both the DQN-agent included in the Simulink and the Q-Learning agent trained 
with modes, learn schedules that maximize the system’s lifetime even for stochas-
tic workload models. This shows that the discretization of the state-space 
required for the Q-Learning approach in modes has no negative impact on the 
result for small systems. For such systems modes shows a lower runtime and 
it is guaranteed that only valid actions (i.e. no empty battery is chosen and 
the used battery is not changed within a job) are carried out. In the Simulink 
model, we use reward shaping which gives a high incentive for the agent to avoid invalid actions. However, it is not guaranteed that they do not occur. Our eval-
uations also showed that for systems with more than two batteries, the schedule induced by the Q-agent results in signiﬁcantly lower lifetimes than the sched-
ule induced by the DQN-agent. This shows, that adding more batteries results in a higher dimensional state-space which cannot be eﬃciently handled by Q-Learning. Adding a pre- or post shield to the RL-agent of the Simulink model 
guarantees that the agent only takes valid actions. In future work we plan to evaluate how a shield can be added and how it inﬂuences the learning behavior. Further, we plan to investigate a tighter over-approximation for the KiBaM. 
References 
1. Abate, A., Prandini, M., Lygeros, J., Sastry, S.: Probabilistic reachability and 
safety for controlled discrete time stochastic hybrid systems. Automatica 44(11), 
2724–2734 (2008). https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.automatica. 2008.03.027 
2. Adelt, J., Bruch, S., Herber, P., Niehage, M., Remke, A.: Shielded learning for 
resilience and performance based on statistical model checking in Simulink. In: 
Proceedings of the ﬁrst Int. Conf. on Bridging the Gap Between AI and Reality, 
pp. 94–118. Springer Nature Switzerland (2024). https:// doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
031-46002- 9_6

--- Page 23 ---
404 L. Willemsen et al.
3. Adelt, J., Herber, P., Niehage, M., Remke, A.: Towards safe and resilient hybrid 
systems in the presence of learning and uncertainty. In: Proceedings of the 11th 
Int. Symposium on Leveraging Applications of Formal Methods, Veriﬁcation and Validation. Veriﬁcation Principles, pp. 299–319. Springer (2022). 
https:// doi.org/ 
10.1007/978-3-031-19849- 6_18 
4. Alur, R., et al.: The algorithmic analysis of hybrid systems. Theor. Comput. Sci. 
138(1), 3–34 (1995). https:// doi.org/10.1016/0304-3975(94)00202- T 
5. Behrmann, G., Cougnard, A., David, A., Fleury, E., Larsen, K.G., Lime, D.: 
UPPAAL-Tiga: time for playing games! In: Proceedings of the 19th Int. Conf. 
on Computer Aided Veriﬁcation, pp. 121–125. Springer (2007). https:// doi.org/10. 
1007/978-3-540-73368- 3_14 
6. Bengtsson, J., Larsen, K., Larsson, F., Pettersson, P., Yi, W.: UPPAAL — a tool 
suite for automatic veriﬁcation of real-time systems. In: Alur, R., Henzinger, T.A., 
Sontag, E.D. (eds.) HS 1995. LNCS, vol. 1066, pp. 232–243. Springer, Heidelberg (1996). 
https:// doi.org/10.1007/BFb0020949 
7. Bertrand, N., Bouyer, P., Brihaye, T., Menet, Q., Baier, C., Größer, M., Jurdzin-
ski, M.: Stochastic timed automata. Logical Methods in Computer Science 10(4) (2014). 
https:// doi.org/10.2168/LMCS- 10(4:6)2014 
8. Bisgaard, M., Gerhardt, D., Hermanns, H., Krčál, J., Nies, G., Stenger, M.: 
Battery-aware scheduling in low orbit: the GomX–3 case. Formal Aspects Comput. 31(2), 261–285 (2018). 
https:// doi.org/10.1007/s00165- 018-0458-2 
9. Blohm, P., Herber, P., Remke, A.: Towards quantitative analysis of simulink models 
using stochastic hybrid automata. In: Proceedigs of the 19th Int. Conf. on Inte-grated Formal Methods, pp. 172–193. Springer Nature Switzerland (2025). 
https:// 
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-76554- 4_10 
10. Budde, C.E., D’Argenio, P.R., Hartmanns, A., Sedwards, S.: An eﬃcient statistical 
model checker for nondeterminism and rare events. Int. J. Softw. Tools Technol. 
Transf. 22(6), 759–780 (2020). https:// doi.org/10.1007/s10009- 020-00563- 2 
11. Cauchi, N., Abate, A.: Stochy - automated veriﬁcation and synthesis of stochas-
tic processes: poster abstract. In: Proceedings of the 22nd ACM Int. Conf. on Hybrid Systems: Computation and Control, pp. 258–259. Association for Comput-
ing Machinery (2019). 
https:// doi.org/10.1145/3302504. 3313349 
12. Cloth, L., Jongerden, M.R., Haverkort, B.R.: Computing battery lifetime distri-
butions. In: Proceedings of the 37th Annual IEEE/IFIP Int. Conf. on Dependable 
Systems and Networks, pp. 780–789 (2007). https:// doi.org/10.1109/DSN.2007.26 
13. David, A., Jensen, P.G., Larsen, K.G., Mikučionis, M., Taankvist, J.H.: UPPAAL 
Stratego. In: Proceedings of the 21st Int. Conf. on Tools and Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis of Systems, pp. 206–211. Springer (2015). 
https:// doi. 
org/10.1007/978-3-662-46681- 0_16 
14. Delicaris, J., Schupp, S., Ábrahám, E., Remke, A.: Maximizing reachability prob-
abilities in rectangular automata with random clocks. In: Proceedings of the 17th 
Int. Symposium on Theoretical Aspects of Software Engineering, pp. 164–182. 
Springer (2023). https:// doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-35257- 7_10 
15. Delicaris, J., Stübbe, J., Schupp, S., Remke, A.: RealySt: A C++ tool for opti-
mizing reachability probabilities in stochastic hybrid systems. In: Proceedings of the 16th EAI Int. Conf. on Performance Evaluation Methodologies and Tools, pp. 170–182. Springer Nature Switzerland (2024). 
https:// doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-
48885- 6_11 
16. Dormand, J.R.: Numerical Methods for Diﬀerential Equations: A Computational 
Approach. CRC Press, 1st edn. (1996). https:// doi.org/10.1201/9781351075107

--- Page 24 ---
A Stochastic Hybrid Case-Study Optimizing Battery Pack Usage 405
17. D’Argenio, P., Legay, A., Sedwards, S., Traonouez, L.-M.: Smart sampling for 
lightweight veriﬁcation of Markov decision processes. Int. J. Softw. Tools Technol. 
Transfer 17(4), 469–484 (2015). https:// doi.org/10.1007/s10009- 015-0383-0 
18. D’Argenio, P.R., Hartmanns, A., Sedwards, S.: Lightweight statistical model check-
ing in nondeterministic continuous time. In: Margaria, T., Steﬀen, B. (eds.) ISoLA 2018. LNCS, vol. 11245, pp. 336–353. Springer, Cham (2018). 
https:// doi.org/10. 
1007/978-3-030-03421- 4_22 
19. Frehse, G.: PHAVer: algorithmic veriﬁcation of hybrid systems past HyTech. In: 
Proceedings of the 8th Int. Workshop on Hybrid Systems: Computation and Con-
trol, pp. 258–273. Springer (2005). https:// doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-31954- 2_17 
20. Galassi, M., Davies, J., Theiler, J., Gough, B., Jungman, G.: GNU Scientiﬁc 
Library - Reference Manual, Third Edition, for GSL Version 1.12. Network Theory 
Ltd (2009) 
21. Hahn, E., Hartmanns, A., Hermanns, H., Katoen, J.P.: A compositional modelling 
and analysis framework for stochastic hybrid systems. Formal Methods Syst. Des. 43 (2013). 
https:// doi.org/10.1007/s10703- 012-0167-z 
22. Hartmanns, A., Hermanns, H.: The modest toolset: an integrated environment for 
quantitative modelling and veriﬁcation. In: Proceedings of the 20th Int. Conf. on Tools and Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis of Systems, pp. 593–598. 
Springer (2014). 
https:// doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-54862- 8_51 
23. Henzinger, T.A.: The theory of hybrid automata. In: Proceedings of the 11th 
Annual IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science, pp. 278–292. IEEE Com-puter Society (1996). 
https:// doi.org/10.1109/LICS. 1996.561342 
24. Henzinger, T.A., Kopke, P.W., Puri, A., Varaiya, P.: What’s decidable about hybrid 
automata? J. Comput. Syst. Sci. 57(1), 94–124 (1998). https:// doi.org/10.1006/ 
jcss.1998.1581 
25. Hermanns, H., Krčál, J., Nies, G.: How is your satellite doing? Battery kinetics with 
recharging and uncertainty. Leibniz Trans. Embed. Syst. 4(1), 1–28 (2017). https:// 
doi.org/10.4230/LITES- v004-i001-a004 
26. Hoogsteen, G., Molderink, A., Smit, G., Hurink, J., Kootstra, B., Schuring, F.: 
Charging electric vehicles, baking pizzas, and melting a fuse in Lochem. Int. Conf. Exhib. Electr. Distrib. 2017(1), 1629–1633 (2017). 
https:// doi.org/10.1049/oap-
cired.2017.0340 
27. Jongerden, M., Haverkort, B., Bohnenkamp, H., Katoen, J.P.: Maximizing system 
lifetime by battery scheduling. In: Proceedings of the 2009 IEEE/IFIP Int. Conf. on Dependable Systems & Networks, pp. 63–72 (2009).
https:// doi.org/10.1109/ 
DSN.2009.5270351 
28. Jongerden, M., Mereacre, A., Bohnenkamp, H., Haverkort, B., Katoen, J.P.: Com-
puting optimal schedules of battery usage in embedded systems. IEEE Trans. 
Industr. Inf. 6(3), 276–286 (2010). https:// doi.org/10.1109/TII.2010.2051813 
29. Jongerden, M.: Model-based energy analysis of battery powered systems. Phd the-
sis - research UT, graduation UT, University of Twente (2010). https:// doi.org/10. 
3990/1.9789036531146 
30. Jongerden, M., Haverkort, B.: Which battery model to use? IET Softw. 3(6), 445– 
457 (2009). https:// doi.org/10.1049/iet-sen.2009.0001 
31. Klenke, A.: Probability Theory: A Comprehensive Course. Springer, Cham (2014). 
https:// doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4471-5361-0_1 
32. Lahiri, K., Raghunathan, A., Dey, S., Panigrahi, D.: Battery-driven system design: 
a new frontier in low power design. In: Proceedings the 7th Asia and South Paciﬁc Design Automation Conf. and 15h Int. Conf. on VLSI Design, pp. 261–267 (2002). 
https:// doi.org/10.1109/ASPDAC. 2002.994932

--- Page 25 ---
406 L. Willemsen et al.
33. Legay, A., Sedwards, S., Traonouez, L.-M.: Scalable veriﬁcation of Markov decision 
processes. In: Canal, C., Idani, A. (eds.) SEFM 2014. LNCS, vol. 8938, pp. 350–362. 
Springer, Cham (2015). https:// doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-15201- 1_23 
34. Lygeros, J., Prandini, M.: Stochastic hybrid systems: a powerful framework for 
complex, large scale applications. Eur. J. Control 16(6), 583–594 (2010). https:// 
doi.org/10.3166/ejc.16.583-594 
35. Manwell, J.F., McGowan, J.G.: Lead acid battery storage model for hybrid 
energy systems. Sol. Energy 50(5), 399–405 (1993). https:// doi.org/10.1016/0038-
092X(93)90060- 2 
36. MathWorks: MATLAB Simulink. www.mathworks. com/products/ simulink. html 
37. Milani, S., Topin, N., Veloso, M., Fang, F.: Explainable reinforcement learning: a 
survey and comparative review. ACM Comput. Surv. 56(7) (2024). https:// doi. 
org/10.1145/3616864 
38. Mnih, V., et al.: Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning. Nature 
518(7540), 529–533 (2015). https:// doi.org/10.1038/nature14236 
39. Niehage, M., Hartmanns, A., Remke, A.: Learning optimal decisions for stochastic 
hybrid systems. In: Proceedings of the 19th ACM-IEEE Int. Conf. on Formal Meth-ods and Models for System Design, p. 44–55. Association for Computing Machinery 
(2021). 
https:// doi.org/10.1145/3487212. 3487339 
40. Niehage, M., Remke, A.: Learning that grid-convenience does not hurt resilience 
in the presence of uncertainty. In: Proceedings of the 20th Int. Conf. on Formal 
Modeling and Analysis of Timed Systems, pp. 298–306. Springer (2022). https:// 
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-15839- 1_17 
41. Nies, G., et al..: Mastering operational limitations of LEO satellites – the GOMX-
3 approach. Acta Astronautica 151, 726–735 (2018). https:// doi.org/10.1016/j. 
actaastro. 2018.04.040 
42. Rakhmatov, D., Vrudhula, S.: An analytical high-level battery model for use in 
energy management of portable electronic systems. In: Proceedings of the 2001 
Int. Conf. on Computer Aided Design, pp. 488–493 (2001). https:// doi.org/10.1109/ 
ICCAD. 2001.968687 
43. Schneider, S., Wagner, D.H.: Error detection in redundant systems. In: Proceedings 
of the Western Joint Computer Conf, pp. 115–121. Association for Computing Machinery (1957). 
https:// doi.org/10.1145/1455567. 1455587 
44. Schupp, S., Ábrahám, E., Makhlouf, I.B., Kowalewski, S.: HyPro: a C++ library of 
state set representations for hybrid systems reachability analysis. In: Proceedings of the 9th Int. Symposium on NASA Formal Methods, pp. 288–294. Springer (2017). 
https:// doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-57288- 8_20 
45. Shmarov, F., Zuliani, P.: ProbReach: veriﬁed probabilistic δ-reachability for 
stochastic hybrid systems. In: Proceedings of the 18th Int. Conf. on Hybrid Sys-
tems: Computation and Control, pp. 134–139. Association for Computing Machin-
ery (2015). https:// doi.org/10.1145/2728606. 2728625 
46. da Silva, C., Schupp, S., Remke, A.: Optimizing reachability probabilities for a 
restricted class of stochastic hybrid automata via Flowpipe-construction. ACM Trans. Model. Comput. Simul. 33(4) (2023). 
https:// doi.org/10.1145/3607197 
47. Soudjani, S.E.Z., Gevaerts, C., Abate, A.: FAUST2 : formal abstractions of 
uncountable-state stochastic processes. In: Proceedings of the 21st Int. Conf. on Tools and Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis of Systems, pp. 272–286. 
Springer (2015).
https:// doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-46681- 0_23 
48. Stock, G., Fraire, J.A., Mömke, T., Hermanns, H., Babayev, F., Cruz, E.: Managing 
ﬂeets of LEO satellites: nonlinear, optimal, eﬃcient, scalable, usable, and robust.

--- Page 26 ---
A Stochastic Hybrid Case-Study Optimizing Battery Pack Usage 407
IEEE Trans. Comput. Aided Des. Integr. Circuits Syst. 39(11), 3762–3773 (2020). 
https:// doi.org/10.1109/TCAD. 2020.3012751 
49. Sutton, R.S., Barto, A.G.: Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction, 2nd edn. The 
MIT Press (2018) 
50. The MathWorks: Reinforcement Learning Toolbox. https:// www.mathworks. com/ 
products/ reinforcement- learning. html 
51. Watkins, C., Dayan, P.: Q-learning. Mach. Learn. 8(3), 279–292 (1992). https:// 
doi.org/10.1007/BF00992698 
52. Willems, J.C.: From time series to linear system – part i. ﬁnite dimensional lin-
ear time invariant systems. Automatica 22(5), 561–580 (1986). https:// doi.org/10. 
1016/0005-1098(86)90066- X 
53. Willemsen, L., Remke, A., Ábrahám, E.: Comparing two approaches to include 
stochasticity in hybrid automata. In: Proceedings of the 20th Int. Conf. on Quan-
titative Evaluation of Systems, pp. 238–254. Springer Nature (2023). https:// doi. 
org/10.1007/978-3-031-43835- 6_17 
54. Willemsen, L., Remke, A., Ábrahám, E.: (de-)composed and more: Eager and lazy 
speciﬁcations (camels) for stochastic hybrid systems. In: Principles of Veriﬁcation: Cycling the Probabilistic Landscape : Essays Dedicated to Joost-Pieter Katoen on 
the Occasion of His 60th Birthday, Part III. Springer Nature (2025). 
https:// doi. 
org/10.1007/978-3-031-75778- 5_15 
55. Wilson, E.B.: Probable inference, the law of succession, and statistical inference. 
J. Am. Stat. Assoc. 22(158), 209–212 (1927). https:// doi.org/10.1080/01621459. 
1927.10502953 
56. Wognsen, E.R., Haverkort, B.R., Jongerden, M., Hansen, R.R., Larsen, K.G.: A 
score function for optimizing the cycle-life of battery-powered embedded systems. In: Sankaranarayanan, S., Vicario, E. (eds.) FORMATS 2015. LNCS, vol. 9268, pp. 305–320. Springer, Cham (2015). 
https:// doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-22975- 1_20
