--- Page 1 ---
ARCHIVES  OF TRANSPORT  ISSN  (print):   0866 -9546  
Volume  61, Issue  1, 2022 e-ISSN  (online ):  2300 -8830  
 DOI: 10.5604/ 01.3001.0015.8147  
Article  is available  in open  access  and licensed  under  a Creative  Commons  Attribution  4.0 International  (CC BY 4.0) QUANTITATIVE SAFETY ANALYSIS OF TRAIN  
CONTROL SYSTEM BASED ON STATISTICAL MODEL 
CHECKING  
Junting LIN1, Xiaoqin MIN2 
1, 2 Lanzhou Jiaotong  University, School of Automation and Electrical Engineering, Lanzhou, China  
 
Abstract : 
With the rapid development of communication technology, the Train -centric Communication -based Train Control 
(TcCBTC ) system adopting the train -train communication mode to reduce the transmission link of control information, will 
become the direction of urban rail transit field development. At present, TcCBTC system is in the stage of key technology 
research and prototy pe development. Uncertain behavior in the process of system operation may lead to operation acci-
dents. Therefore, before the system is put into use, it must undergo strict testing and security verification to ensure the s afe 
and efficient operation of the system. In the paper, the formal modeling and quantitative analysis of train tracking operation 
under moving block are carried out. Firstly, the structure of TcCBTC system and the train tracking interval control strategy 
under moving block conditions are a nalyzed. The subsystem involved in train tracking and the uncertain factors in system 
operation are determined. Then, based on the Stochastic Hybrid Automata (SHA), a network of SHA model of train dynam-
ics model, communication components and on -board contr oller in the process of train tracking is established, which can 
formally describe the uncertain environment in the process of system operation. UPPAAL -SMC is used to simulate the 
change curve of train position and speed during tracking, it is verified tha t the model meets the safety requirements in static 
environment. Finally, taking Statistical Model Checking (SMC) as the basis of safety analysis, the probability of train 
collision in uncertain environment is calculated. The results show that after accura tely modeling the train tracking opera-
tion control mechanism through network of SHA, the SMC method can accurately calculate the probability of train rear 
end collision, which proves that the method has strong feasibility and effectiveness. Formal modeling  and analysis of safety -
critical system is very important, which enables designers to grasp the hidden dangers of the system in the design stage 
and safety evaluation stage of train control system, and further provides theoretical reference for the subsequ ent TcCBTC 
system design and development, practical application and related specification improvement.  
Keywords:  statistical model checking, train control system, quantitative safety analysis, stochastic hybrid automata, 
UPPAAL -SMC  
To cite this article : 
Lin, J., Min, X.,  (2022). Quantitative safety analysis of train control system based on 
statistical model checking . Archives  of Transport,  61(1), 7-19. DOI:  
https://doi.org/ 10.5604/ 01.3001.0015.8147  
 
 
Contact:  
1) linjt@mail.lzjtu.cn  [https://orcid.org/0000 -0002 -5763 -5256 ],  
2) 1947475837@qq.com  [https://orcid.org/0000 -0002 -3374 -4108 ] – corre sponding author  
 


--- Page 2 ---
8 
 Lin, J., Min, X.,  
Archives  of Transport , 61(1), 7-19, 2022 
 
 
1. Introduction  
With the rapid development of urban rail transit con-
struction, the safe driving distance between trains  con-
tinues to shorten, consequently the safety require-
ments of trains have also improved. The train control 
system is the key factor to ensure the safe and efficient 
operation of trains on the line (Gao, 2018). At present, 
the reliable operation of the wide ly used Communica-
tion-based Train Control (CBTC) system, which de-
pends on numerous ground equipment, has some 
problems such as low intelligence degree and compli-
cated information interaction  (Wang et al., 2018) . In 
order to further optimize the structure o f the train con-
trol system thus improving operation efficiency, it is 
imperative to develop a Train -centric CBTC 
(TcCBTC) system. This system integrates the func-
tions of interlocking routes calculation and movement 
authority (MA) generation of the tracksid e equipment 
of CBTC system into the on -board equipment, which 
optimizes the system structure, and improves the inte-
gration degree of each subsystem. LTE -M technology 
is used in two -way and direct communication be-
tween trains with real -time and large capaci ty, which 
can simplify the complicated information interac-
tions, as well as further improves the efficiency of 
train tracking operation while ensuring safety  (Zhu et 
al., 2018) . However, uncertain factors in the train op-
eration process may affect the safe operation of the 
train. Therefore, to model and analyze the TcCBTC 
system operation process in an uncertain environment 
can timely find out the potential risks in the system 
requirements specification, subsequently providing a 
theoretical basis for TcCBTC development and the 
development of the train tracking operation plan of 
the TcCBTC system . 
Train control system is a typical safety -critical sys-
tem. Researchers always attached great  importance to 
the safety of system operation in each stage of the 
whole l ife cycle of safety -critical system. In recent 
years, many researchers have investigated the safety 
of train control systems. The methods used are mainly 
divided into five classes. (1) the event chain -based 
analysis method; Guo et al. (2018) proposed a saf ety 
analysis method based on the combination of evi-
dence theory and Failure Mode and Effects Analysis 
(FMEA). They provided a reasonable basis for evalu-
ating the safety of the train control system by estab-
lishing a set of risk factors for temporary speed r e-
striction and using evidence theory to identify con-
flicting evidences. (2) the probability graph mode -based analysis method; Yang et al. (2016) and Zhang 
et al. (2020) built a Bayesian network model based on 
the conventional fault tree changes regarding t o the 
common -cause failure, uncertain information and re-
covery mechanism problems in CTCS -3 (Chinese 
Train Control System level three). They not only iden-
tified the combination mode of leading to train control 
failures, but also found out the weak links of  the sys-
tem by combining its two -way thrust capability. (3) 
the network -based analysis method, Lin et al. (2020) 
verified the functional safety of the train control pro-
cess in TcCBTC system based on CPN model, and 
proved that the modeling system has no des ign defects 
by using state space analysis. Wu et.al (2016) pro-
posed a top -down approach of scenario -based model-
ling CPNs to design the on -board subsystem of a sat-
ellite -based train control system. (4) the system view -
based analysis method; Regarding to the  validation 
and security analysis problems of train control system 
in the demand stage, Liu et al. (2015) proposed a for-
mal analysis method based on the system -theory pro-
cess analysis theory. They transformed the control ac-
tion temporal logic into a combin ation of equivalent 
simple logic formulas to analyze the improper control 
action through reduction rules. (5) the Statistical 
Model Checking  (SMC) -based analysis method; 
Compared with other four types of methods, the SMC 
method is easy to implement, and ef fective to express 
the discrete, continuous and random behaviors and ac-
tions of the system. It can avoid the state space explo-
sion problem through statical analysis of a small num-
ber of Trace samples generated by the system.  
Stochastic Hybrid Automata (SHA ) can be used to 
formal modeling and analysis of hybrid systems with 
random behavior. The SHA model can represent the 
discrete parts of the system by directed graph, and rep-
resent the dynamic properties of continuous parts of 
each discrete state with diffe rential equations, and the 
modeling language has strict definition. SMC, a new 
proposed method in recent years, can be used to ana-
lyze and evaluate the security and reliability of large -
scale complex systems (Du et al., 2015; Qiao et al., 
2020). Its basic idea is to generate the system simula-
tion Trace samples based on the model simulation. By 
analyzing the sample space with statistical method, 
the system attributes can be quantitatively evaluated. 
The SMC -based method has been successfully ap-
plied to safet y analysis engineering in the rail transit 
field.  For example, David et al. (2019) used Simulink 
and UPPAAL -SMC to formally model the movement 

--- Page 3 ---
Lin, J., Min, X.,  
Archives  of Transport,  61(1), 7-19, 2022 9 
 
 
block signal system, and validated the feasibility of 
applying SMC method in the train control system. 
Bao et al.  (2017) proposed an uncertainty AADL 
modeling method based on statistical model check-
ing. Taking the mobile authorization scenario in 
CTCS -3 as the research object, the security and per-
formance of the scenario in uncertain environment are 
quantitatively an alyzed and evaluated.  The existing 
research on analyzing the safety of train control sys-
tem based on SMC method provides a basis for ana-
lyzing TcCBTC system in this paper.  At present, 
there are few papers on formal modeling and safety 
analysis of TcCBTC  system. More importantly, the 
research of the existing TcCBTC  system mainly fo-
cused on using the static modeling technology to 
conduct simulation analysis on the related prop erties 
of the system, which was difficult to reflect the un-
certain operating environment of the system. There-
fore, how to accurately describe the operation pro-
cess of TcCBTC  system and analyze the system 
safety deserves further research. The research gaps 
inspire us to adopt the SMC method based on SHA 
model to quantitatively analyze the safety under an 
uncertain environment in the TcCBTC system.  
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. 
The Section 2 illustrates the system -level functional 
requi rements structures of the TcCBTC and the con-
trol strategy of train tracking in section under moving 
block condition. In Section 3, we present an overview 
of the model -based safety analysis method, which 
provides preparation for formal modeling and safety 
analysis of subsequent TcCBTC  system. In Section 
4, this paper introduces how to model the discrete be-
havior, continuous behavior and random behavior of 
train operation in TcCBTC system. Then, through the 
static simulation analysis in UPPAAL -SMC, the cor-
rectness of the model is proved. Finally, the safety of 
the system model is quantitatively analyzed based on 
SMC method . We conclude our work in Section 5.  
 
2. TcCBTC system  
2.1. Structure of TcCBTC system  
Fig. 1 shows the structure of TcCBTC system. The 
TcCBTC is a  distributed control system with intelli-
gent on -board equipment as the core that breaks the 
ground Zone Controller (ZC) centralized control 
method of conventional CBTC system. The TcCBTC 
system is mainly composed of an Intelligent Vehicle 
On-board Controll er (IVOC), ground equipment, and 
Data Communication System (DCS) (Guo, 2019). Among them, the IVOC includes an interlocking cal-
culation module, a train -train communication man-
agement module, an electronic map module, a move-
ment authority calculation module , an overspeed pro-
tection module, an automatic train speed measure-
ment and safety positioning module, as well as an au-
tomatic train operation module. The ground equip-
ment mainly includes Resource Management Unit 
(RMU), Dynamic Capacity Decision (DCD), grou nd 
balise, Object Controller (OC) and other trackside 
equipment (such as switch), etc. The DCS mainly in-
cludes train -train communication network, train -
ground communication network (Chrzan, 2021) and 
ground wired network.  
The ground equipment of tradition al CBTC system 
transmits the information such as the section status in 
front of the train, the current position of the train and 
the end of authority for the train to the on -board equip-
ment (Zhang et al., 2020). The TcCBTC system inte-
grates more functions of the train control system into 
the on -board equipment, such as ZC calculating MA 
and Computer -based Interlocking (CBI) calculating 
interlocking route in CBTC , which greatly simplifies 
the functions of the ground equipment. The IVOC 
communicates with OC to obtain the real -time status 
of the switch, Emergency Stop Button (ESB), and 
Platform Screen Door (PSD) , and reserves movable 
resources. Meanwhile, train MA is calculated by re-
ceiving line information and location information of 
corresponding trains. Then it calculates train safety 
protection curve in real time according to the end of 
authority, the line information and running status of 
the front train under the moving block condition. The 
IVOC ensures automatic and safe operation of  trains 
by supervising the safety protection curve (Wang et 
al., 2018). The TcCBTC system solves the problem 
that the existing CBTC system is highly dependent on 
the trackside equipment. It also reduces the control in-
formation transmission links and enhanc es system op-
eration reliability, consequently cutting the construc-
tion, maintenance and operation costs of trains and 
line facilities, and further improves the operation ca-
pacity of the rail transit system.  
 
2.2. Analysis of two -train tracking scenario  
This stu dy takes the tracking operation process of two 
mutually communicating trains in TcCBTC system as 
the modeling background, and the minimum safe 
tracking distance d as validation criteria. In TcCBTC 
system, the following train tracks the front train with  

--- Page 4 ---
10 
 Lin, J., Min, X.,  
Archives  of Transport , 61(1), 7-19, 2022 
 
 
Train -ground communication
Head -rear communication link
Information exchange MA Autonomic 
computing
Switch resource preemption
DCDOC1OC2 Station ZC CBIESB PSD
DCSRMU
Fig. 1. Architecture of TcCBTC system  
 
‘hit soft wall’ mode as shown in Fig. 2, that is the 
tracking terminal is the real position where the front 
train stops after emergency braking  (Pan, et al, 2018).  
In the process that the following train tracks the front 
train, the IVOC of following train first analyzes and 
stores the tracking plan sent by the DCD center, and 
its on -board computer interlocking determi nes the 
fixed resource status and arranges the route automati-
cally. Then, the on -board equipment communicates 
with RMU. The RMU transmits the line status infor-
mation to the following train after receiving and stor-
ing basic information of the following trai n. Finally, 
the following train communicates with all trains 
within the communication range through LTE -M. By 
querying the electronic map, the unique front train ID 
of the local train is determined to maintain periodic 
communication with it. The IVOC of fo llowing train 
calculates the real -time MA according to the status in-
formation of the front train, and generates the auto-
matic train protection (ATP) curve according to the 
minimum safe tracking distance in the movement block mode (Chen, 2019). The train th us is controlled 
within the minimum safe tracking distance d for 
safely running.  
By summarizing the tracking interval of the train un-
der the ‘hit soft wall’ mode and referring to Chen’s 
research (2019), it can be seen that the minimum safe 
train tracking d istance d of TcCBTC system in Fig. 2 
was calculated by:  
 
RF d D L D= + −
 (1) 
 
where, DR is the braking distance required by the fol-
lowing train from triggering emergency brake to the 
train stop under the worst situation. DR is calculated 
with Eq. (2). L is the safety margin reserved by the 
system. DF is the braking distance required by the 
front running train from triggering emergency brake 
to the train stop under the best situation (note: the 
braking is instantly completed from triggering to tak-
ing effect). DF is calculated by Eq. (3).

--- Page 5 ---
Lin, J., Min, X.,  
Archives  of Transport,  61(1), 7-19, 2022 11 
 
 
LTE-M
position, speedv
Sd
DR LDF
DCD
operation plantrain statusline 
datatrain 
informationRMU
train2 train1
 
Fig. 2.  TcCBTC system of train tracking scenario  
 
2
2 1 1 2 1 2
2
2 1 2 2
2   1= ( )2
() 1      22rq rq
rq rd
rd
rwRv t a t v a t t
v a t a tatD
a+ + +
++++
 (2) 
2
1
fb =2Fv
aD
 (3) 
 
where, v2 is the current  running  speed of the following 
train. t1 is the sum of the reaction time and the traction 
cut-off time of the ATP equipment of the following 
train, during this period, the train runs with the maxi-
mum traction acceleration. arq is the maximum trac-
tion acceleration of the following train. t2 is the sum 
of the extra time for brake establishment and the 
emergency brake establishment time of the following 
train. ard is the maximum coasting  acceleration of the 
following train. arw is the emergency braking acceler-
ation of the following train under the w orst situation. 
v1 is the speed of the front train. afb is the braking ac-
celeration of the front train under best situation.  
 
3. Model -based safety analysis method  
3.1. Stochastic hybrid automata  
Considering that the time, speed and displacement 
during train operation belong to continuous behaviors, 
DCD representation belongs to discrete behaviors, 
and the transition of communication states and the 
distribution of communication delay have uncertain  
characteristics. Therefore, SHA was used to formally 
model the behavior of the system. The SHA model is an extension of the time automata, which can realize 
the clock change with different rates at different posi-
tions (David et al., 2015). The transition between 
states can be represented by discrete probabilities.  
Definition 1:  stochastic hybrid automata consist of a 
seven -tuple (Zhao et al., 2020), namely SHA= (L, l0, 
X, Σ, E, R, I). Where, L is a finite set of location. l0 
indicates the initial location . X is a finite set of clocks. 
Σ is a finite set of input and output actions. E is a finite 
set of transition edges , each of which contains a 
source location, a guard, an action, a set of clocks to 
be reset and a target location, that is, (l, g, a, Y, l') 
∈E. R(l) is a time delay function on the location. I(l) 
is an invariant declaration in location.  
Multiple concurrent SHA interact through broadcast 
channels and shared variables, consequently forming 
a network of SHA (NSHA). The SHA components re-
alize th e uncertainty of the SHA model by setting the 
time delay function and the probability distribution of 
the state transition.  
Definition 2 : the transition rules between SHA:  
(1) the transition of actions. The state of the system is 
0  ( , )Xl v L R
, where v|= I(l). If there is a transi-
tion ( l, g, a, Y, l') that makes 
'' ( , ) ( , )al v l v⎯⎯ →  
true, then v|=g, and v'=v[Y]. 
(2) the transition of delayed, for state transition 
' ( , ) ( , )dl v l v⎯⎯ →
, where the delay d∈R≥0, the 
state remains unchanged, and the clock variable is 
()'
()  ( )vd
vv v R l d
+=+
. Here, 
  is the system 
clock, and  
  ( )v represents the system time to 
enter location  l. 

--- Page 6 ---
12 
 Lin, J., Min, X.,  
Archives  of Transport , 61(1), 7-19, 2022 
 
 
3.2. Statistical model checking and UPPAAL -
SMC  
SMC is a simulation -based analysis method, which 
can be seen as a trade -off between testi ng and formal 
validation. The main principle is to monitor its run-
ning track and validate whether the model satisfies 
specific properties through multiple simulations of the 
system. Then statistical analysis methods were used 
to obtain the probability valu e that the system model 
satisfies the attribute constraints at a certain confi-
dence interval, and subsequently evaluating the safety 
of the entire system. The SMC method depends on the 
formal model of the system, which can explain the 
complex behavior char acteristics of the system based 
on the formal semantics of the system ( Lin et al., 
2021).  
This study mainly uses SMC to solve quantitative 
analysis problems. Quantitative analysis based on 
Monte Carlo simulation calculates the probability es-
timation interval 
[ , ]pp−+  generated with 
() pP=
 by running N times when the confidence is 
1-
, where 
  is the significance level, and 
  is the 
approximate parameter.  According to the results of 
the above algorithm, if the repetition interval is esti-
mated as N times, when 
N→ , there are at least ( 1-

)N random runs that satisfy the specified attributes 
in the probability confidence interval of 
p . 
In order to better describe the random  behavior of 
complex networks, researchers combined with the 
principle of SMC and proposed UPPAAL -SMC tool 
based on UPPAAL  (David et al.,  2012). UPPAAL -
SMC, as an extension of the real -time validation tool 
UPPAAL, possesses the characteristic of effectively analyzing the NSHA model under natural random se-
mantics . This tool not only supports UPPAAL stand-
ard model checking queries, but also provides many 
new query statements  related to the random semantics 
of time automata. It allows user to visualize the value 
of the expression during simulation running, and bet-
ter understand the behavior of the system through 
simulation. The simulation operation is realized by Eq. 
(4), where N is the time of simulations, and 
1,...,k EE  
are k state-based expressions to be simulated and vis-
ualized.  
 
1 [ ; ]{ ,..., }k simulate bound E E E=
 (4) 
 
The query statement  for probability calculation is 
shown in Eq. (5):  
 
()  Pr bound expr=  
 (5) 
 
where, bound  is a natural number, which represents 
the time required for simulation; expr is the expres-
sion of system state. Eq. (5) expresses the probability 
of the system finally reaching the state expr within the 
specified time limit bound . 
 
4. Simulation and analysis of train tracking op-
eration model  
4.1. The SHA model of front train  
In the safety analysis of the train tracking operation 
process, it is assumed that the front train operates in 
un-faulty condition because this study mai nly investi-
gates the failure caused by the uncertain factors in the 
following train operation process. 
 


--- Page 7 ---
Lin, J., Min, X.,  
Archives  of Transport,  61(1), 7-19, 2022 13 
 
 
Fig. 3 . The dynamic model of the front train
 
Fig. 4.   Front train controller  
 
The SHA model of the front running train includes the 
dynamics model shown in Fig. 3, and the controller 
model is shown in Fig. 4. The model includes train 
acceleration, cruise, and normal braking operation 
processes. idle is the logical starting location  of the 
front running train. The running process of the front 
train is described as follows: the cycle starts at idle 
location, then enters the Acc location immediately (by 
setting the ‘urgent’ state on the location), and the train 
accelerates before speed reaches the speed  limit value. 
The invariant ‘a1'==0&&v1'==a1&&pos1'==v1’ 
suggests that the acceleration change value is 0, the 
speed change value is a1, and the position change 
value is v1. When the speed reaches the limit value, 
the on -board equipment im mediately sends speed 
warning message toohigh1  to the controller. Then the 
controller sends the cruise  command to the on -board 
equipment to make the speed of train 1 fluctuate be-
tween [vmax -2, vmax] (where 2 is the speed limit 
margin) till the pos1 reaches  2600m. The train1 then 
decelerates and enters the next speed limit section. Af-
ter running for 100s in this section, the train1 brakes until it stops. The relevant variable declarations in Fig. 
3 and 4 are shown in Table 1.  
 
4.2. The SHA model of following tra in 
Trains track in a movement block mode, and the front 
train is used as the tracking terminal during the track-
ing process. T he following train dynamically runs ac-
cording to the position of the front train and the line 
resources. The modeling process is shown in Fig. 5 to 
9. 
Fig. 5 shows the communication model of the DCD 
center. After receiving the request begin  of the track-
ing plan sent by following train,  the DCD performs 
necessary calculations and storage, and the required 
operating time ob eys exp(0.8). The probability of the 
final tracking plan information traceplan  being suc-
cessfully sent is paravehicleland . The DCD stores 
the basic train information train2msg  sent by train 2 
at the same time. The DCD should send the warning 
message error1  when a communication failure oc-
curs between DCD and following train.  
 
 
Fig. 5.   DCD model  
 
Table 1  Variable declaration of the front train motion model  
Variable  Type  Significance  
v1 clock  speed of front train  
pos1  clock  position of the front train  
a1 clock  acceleration of the front train  
vmax、vmax1  int speed restrictive value  
toohigh1、toohigh11  channel  speed warning  
cruise1、cruise11  channel  cruise command  
dec1、dec11  channel  brake command  
Acc location  acceleration state  
Cruise、Cruise1  location  cruise state  
Dec、Dec1  location  brake state  
hit channel  clock sync message  
bounce  channel  state triggering  
DF clock  emergency braking curve  
pos1>=2600  boolean  speed restrictive position  
call channel  communication request of the following train  
fpv channel  message return  
paravtov  int communication normal weight  


--- Page 8 ---
14 
 Lin, J., Min, X.,  
Archives  of Transport , 61(1), 7-19, 2022 
 
 
paravtov1  int communication failure weight  
Fig. 6 represents the sensor model. The speed meas-
urement and positioning data is the core safety data 
for train control on the entire line.  The emergency 
braking should be triggered once it lost. The sensor 
system performs necessary calculation and storage af-
ter receiving the positioning request and speed com-
mand getsv  by on -board equipment, and the operation 
time follows exp(0.8). Lastly, return message sv was 
sent and the return value of the message loss function 
lost()  was set as true. The message loss probability 
datalost  is expressed in discrete form in SHA model, 
and the probability of complete message sending is 
represented by datalost1 , as shown by the dotted line 
in Fig. 6.  
Fig. 7 is the communication components o f following 
train. It mainly completes data transmission with 
DCD and sensors, and communicates with front train 
in real time to exchange position and speed infor-
mation. It sends the emergency braking command eb 
to on -board equipment in time when the warni ng mes-
sage error  is received.   
Fig. 6.  Sensor model  
 
 
 
Fig. 7.  Communication components  
 
 
 
Fig. 8.  The dynamic model of the following train


--- Page 9 ---
Lin, J., Min, X.,  
Archives  of Transport,  61(1), 7-19, 2022 15 
 
 
 
Fig. 9.   The controller model of the following train  
 
Fig. 8 and 9 show the dynamics model and controller 
model of following train. The operating process of 
following train includes acceleration, cruise and brak-
ing states. The train immediately enters the accelera-
tion state from the idle location , and then enters the 
cruise state after the controller makes the train speed 
reach the speed restrictive  value. A fter that, the con-
troller determines whether to enter the next speed re-
strictive section by the condition ‘pos2>=2600’, or to 
make the  deceleration of the train whether the actual 
train distance exceeds the minimum safe distance d by 
guard condition  ‘xmin>=0’. When the following train 
receives the braking request dec2  (or dec22 ), the train 
enters the braking mode with a fixed control del ay of 
1s, and the control failure rate is represented by ‘ fail-
ure’, so that the train control command is in the state 
of the previous time . In the process of train tracking, 
the minimum distance  control is implemented to en-
sure that the actual distance bet ween two trains at each 
time is larger than the minimum safe distance d. In 
addition, emergency braking transfer is set in each 
state. When receiving emergency brake signal eb, the 
train slows down with a deceleration of 1.2m/s2 till it 
stops. The emergenc y braking state can’t be relieved 
midway  until the train stops.  
 
4.3. Model validation and result analysis  
In the simulation process, some of our experimental 
parameter settings are referred to the current CBTC 
system parameter configurations in order to simulate 
the real scenario to a greater extent. For example, line 
parameters: the corresponding speed limit of the first 
speed limit section is 24 m/s; and the corresponding 
speed limit is 14 m/s after entering the second speed 
limit section at 2600 m. The configuration of train per-
formance parameters is referred to Chen et al. (2019). 
The following assumptions are made combined with 
CBTC system train parameters: service braking is 1.0 
m/s2, traction acceleration is 0.9 m/s2, emergency 
braking is 1.2 m/s2, and the acceleration fluctuates be-
tween -0.5 ~ 0.5 m/s2 during cruise. Train 2 tracks train 1, and the dynam ic characteristics of the two 
trains are the same. The initial positions of the front 
and following train are 500 m and 0 m respectively, 
the initial speed is 0 m/s, and the safety protection dis-
tance is 200 m. In addition, considering the influence 
of unc ertain factors on the train in the open environ-
ment, we set the failure rate of train -ground commu-
nication as 0.00107%, the failure rate of train -train 
communication as 0.0037% (Yao et al., 2018). The 
packet loss rate of communication as 0.01%, and the 
probability of brake failure as 0.00001% (Du et al., 
2015).  
The relevant parameters in Eq. (2) and Eq. (3) are set 
as follows: t1=1.5 s , t2=1.5 s , arq=0.9 m/s2, ard=0.05 
m/s2, arw=1.2 m/s2, afb=1.0 m/s2 (Chen et al., 2019). 
The end -to-end communication delay obeys 
exp(26.0802), the train -train communication delay 
obeys exp(15.3506), and the necessary calculation 
and storage delay obeys exp(0.8) (Lin et al., 2021). 
Considering the cumulative distribution function 
  ( ) 1-xF x e−=
, the time delay should be as large as 
possible when a very short time interval is required at 
a certain point. The other position delays are set to 
obey exp(100) to ensure the continuity of the speed 
and position curves.  
The simulation operation of the tw o trains tracking 
model was performed under normal scenario without 
setting fault migration. Eq. (6) validates whether there 
is a deadlock in NSHA, where no deadlock is the basic 
requisites for the model to work. Eq. (7) validates 
whether there is a path i n which train2 can exceed 
train1. The result does not satisfy the validation, that 
is, it is impossible for the following train to collide 
with the front train under normal scenario.  
 
 [] A not deadlock
 (6) 
 
( )  2 1 E pos pos =
 (7) 
 
The two above Eqs. qualitatively analyzed the system 
model, and ensured the correctness of the system re-
alization mechanism, that the system safety require-
ments were met. Then the statement simulate 
[<=300;1] {v1, v2, pos1, p os2, d, (pos 1-pos2)}  was 
used to query the operation of the two trains.  
Fig. 10(a) shows the speed -time curve of the two 
trains in the tracking operation under normal scenario, 
which meets the line speed limit requirements. Train1 
stops at 230.6s, and train2 stops at 247.9s. Fig. 10(b) 


--- Page 10 ---
16 
 Lin, J., Min, X.,  
Archives  of Transport , 61(1), 7-19, 2022 
 
 
shows the position changes of the two trains over 
time. The initial distance between the two trains was 
500m, and the actual distance between the two trains 
when they stopped was  261m. The figure also repre-
sented the changes of the minimum safe tracking dis-
tance  curve d and the real distance curve pos1 -pos2 of 
the two trains.  
 
 
(a)Velocity time curve  
 
 
(b)Position time curve  
Fig. 10. Train tracking operation without fault  
 
As can be seen from Fig. 10(b), the real distance of 
the two trains decreased with the increase of  time, and 
the decrease of pos1 -pos2 occurred near the junction of the two speed limit sections and the distance that 
the front train decelerated till it stopped . Because the  
front train firstly decelerated, the speed of the follow-
ing train remained unchanged for a period of time,  
leading to a gradual decrease in the actual distance be-
tween the two trains. However, it is worth noting that 
the real distance between  the two trains, pos1 -pos2, is 
always larger than the minimum safe tracking dis-
tance d.  
According to the model parameter configuration, the 
two-train tracking model was simulated after setting 
uncertain parameters such as fault probability and 
communicatio n delay. Fig. 11(a) showed the speed -
time curves of two trains when the following train 
failed to brake in time under uncertain scenario. Com-
pared with Fig. 10(a), the speed change of the follow-
ing train had a hysteresis, that the speed change was 
later th an that of the normal scenario. Because the fol-
lowing train failed to brake in time but maintained 
cruise operation for a certain time due to some  uncer-
tain factors such as movement authority calculation 
error, communication failure, communication delay 
or communication packet loss when entering the sec-
ond speed restrictive section or the guard condition 
‘xmin>=0’ was met. Fig. 11(b) showed the position -
time curves of two trains under an uncertain environ-
ment. The real distance between  the two trains, pos1 -
pos2, decreased for the first time when the front train 
entered the second speed limit section until the fol-
lowing train entered the second speed limit section. 
The real distance pos1 -pos2 between the two trains 
was close to the minim um safe interval d. At 227.2s, 
the real distanc e of two trains  was less than the mini-
mum safe distance d (satisfied the safeguard condition 
‘xmin>=0’), but the following train failed to brake in 
time due to the delay influence under uncertain sce-
nario. The  following train continued to run forward 
with the same speed, which adversely affected the 
safe operation of the train. It finally collided with the 
front train at 261.8s.  
According to the simulation results of two -train track-
ing model under uncertain env ironment, there is pos-
sibility of collision between two -train. In order to cal-
culate the probability interval of collision, the UP-
PAAl -SMC tool was used with the logic statement 
Pr[<=300](<> pos2>=pos1) to calculate the probabil-
ity that the following train  exceeds  the front train 
within 300s. The probability interval of the final result 
is [2.17222×10-6, 2.73584×10-6] with 18579 simula-
tion runs.  


--- Page 11 ---
Lin, J., Min, X.,  
Archives  of Transport,  61(1), 7-19, 2022 17 
 
 
 
(a)Velocity time curve  
 
 
(b)Position time curve  
Fig. 11.  Train tracking operation in uncertain envi-
ronment  
 
The cumulative probability with running time was 
shown in Fig. 12. It can be seen that the collision be-
tween trains unlikely happens in the first 192s. From 
192s to 300s, the trains ma y collide, and the high -in-
cidence area where the two trains  collide is within 
254s to 273s. T he final cumulative probability at 300s 
is 2.56036×10-6. It can be concluded that the probabil-
ity of train collision is very low. However, these un-
certain factors should be taken into consideration in 
the design stage, and  effective prevention and control 
measurements should be carried out to minimize their influence on the normal operation of TcCBTC sys-
tem, thus efficaciously improving the train control 
system safety.  
 
 
Fig. 12.  Cumulative probability distribution plot fo r 
collision  
 
5. Conclusion  
Due to the redistribution of core functions, TcCBTC  
system has more advantages than CBTC system, 
which makes it more promising to become the future 
development direction of urban rail transit. A consid-
erable amount of work has been done on the uncertain 
factors in the operation of train control system. 
Through modeling and quantitative analysis of the 
tracking process of train running in uncertain environ-
ment in TcCBTC  system, the following conclusions 
were obtained:  
1) The structure of TcCBTC  system was analyzed and 
compared with traditional CBTC system. T he analy-
sis showed that TcCBTC  system is more suitable for 
the development of rail transit field. According to the 
characteristics of TcCBTC  system and the principle 
of "hit soft wall", the train tracking interval control 
strategy under moving block condit ion was obtained. 
According to the functional requirements, the subsys-
tem model, information interaction requirements and 
uncertain environmental factors that participated in 
the train tracking process were obtained. In fact, there 
are more uncertain envir onmental factors and other 
factors to further explore.  
2) Based on the SHA theory, the two -train tracking 
process model was established, and the continuous 
behavior, discrete behavior and random behavior in 
TcCBTC  system are modeled. The train -train com-
munication interaction environment and the uncertain 


--- Page 12 ---
18 
 Lin, J., Min, X.,  
Archives  of Transport , 61(1), 7-19, 2022 
 
 
factors such as communication failure, communica-
tion delay and positioning error in the process of train 
operation were constructed, and the train tracking op-
eration control mechanism was formally described . 
The shortcomings of traditional analysis methods in 
uncertain environment modeling were improved.  
3) Through the quantitative safety analysis method 
based on SMC, the probability of collision between 
two trains in uncertain environment was calculated. 
The results showed that the cumulative probability of 
train-to-train collision in uncertain environment was 
approximately 2.56036×10-6 with 99.5% confidence. 
The experimental results showed that the uncertain 
environment affected the train running safety. Th us, it 
should be optimized to acceptable range in the design 
stage to reduce the operation risk. At the same time, it 
also proved the feasibility and effectiveness of SMC 
method in the safety analysis of complex hybrid sys-
tems.  
In conclusion, our work aims  to solve the lack of un-
certain environment description in the formal verifi-
cation analysis of TcCBTC  system. After accurately 
modeling the train tracking operation control mech-
anism through SHA network, the probability of train 
tail collision can be accur ately calculated by SMC 
method. In our future work, more standardized sys-
tem specifications assist us to modify our models. Our 
models will consider more factors that the system runs 
in an uncertain environment, which makes it closer to 
the real running en vironment.  
 
Acknowledgement  
This paper is jointly funded by National Natural Sci-
ence Foundation of China (No.52162050 and 
No.61763025) and Natural Science Foundation of 
Gansu Province (No. 20JR5RA375).  
 
References  
[1] Bao, Y. X., Chen , M., Zhu , Q., et al . (2017). 
Quantitative performance evaluation of uncer-
tainty -aware hybrid AADL designs using statis-
tical model checking, IEEE Transactions on 
Computer -Aided Design of Integrated Circuits 
and Systems , 36(12) , 1989 -2002.  
[2] Basile , D., Beek , M. H., Ferrari , A., et al. (2019 ). 
Modelling and analysing ERTMS L3 moving 
block railway signalling with SIMULINK and 
UPPAAL SMC, Formal Methods for Industrial 
Critical Systems - 24th International Conference 
(FMICS).  Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 1 -21. [3] Chen , T. (2019 ). Research on safety protection 
methods of train -centric  CBTC system . Beijing: 
Bejjng Jiaotong University.  
[4] Chrzan , M., (2021 ). Study of the possibility of us-
ing transmission in the LTE system on a selected 
railway line for the purpose of running railway 
traffic. Archives of Transport , 57(1) , 91-101. 
[5] David , A., Du, D., Larsen , K. G., et al. (2012 ). 
Statistical model checking for stochastic hybrid 
systems. Electronic Proceedings in Theoretical 
Computer Science , 92, 187-199.  
[6] David , A., Larsen , K. G., Legay , A., et al. (2015 ). 
UPPAAL SMC tutorial. International Journal on 
Software Tools for Technology Transfer , 17(4) , 
397-415. 
[7] Du, D. H., Cheng , B., Liu , J. (2015 ). Statistical 
model checking for rare -event in safety -critical 
system. Journal of Software , 26(2) , 305-320. 
[8] Gao, C. H. (2018 ). Communication -based Train 
Control System . China Railway Publishing 
House. Beijing, (Chapter 2).  
[9] Guo, H. N. (2019 ). Online testing safety function 
of new train control system on -board ATP . Beij-
ing: Beijing Jiaotong  University.  
[10] Guo, S. N., Wu , X. C. (2018 ). Safety assessment 
of TSR processing function in train control center 
based on evidence theory. Railway Standard De-
sign, 62(06) , 156-160. 
[11] Lin, J. T, Min , X. Q. (2021 ). Modeling and anal-
ysis of TcCBTC movement authority based on 
statistical model checking. Control Engineering 
of China , (20210119) , 1-8. 
[12] Lin, J. T., Xu, Q. (2020 ). Functional safety veri-
fication of train control procedure in train -centric 
CBTC by colored p etri net. Archives of Trans-
port, 54(2) , 43-58. 
[13] Liu, J. T., (2015 ). A safety analysis method for 
high-speed railway train control system in re-
quirements phase based on STPA . Beijing: Beij-
ing Jiaotong University.  
[14] Pan, D. , Luo, Q., Zhao , L. T., et al. (2018 ). A new 
calibration method for the real -time calculation of 
dynamic safety following distance under railway 
moving block system. Mathematical Problems in 
Engineering , 2018(PT.10): 3061034. 1 -
3061034.11 . 
[15] Qiao , S., Huang , Z. Q., Wang , J. Y., et al. (2020 ). 
DFT quantitative analysis method based on sta-
tistical model checking. Systems Engineering and 
Electronic s, 42(02), 480 -488. 

--- Page 13 ---
Lin, J., Min, X.,  
Archives  of Transport,  61(1), 7-19, 2022 19 
 
 
[16] Wang , H. F, Zhao , N., Ning , B., et al. (2018 ). 
Safety monitor for train -centric CBTC system. 
IET Intelligent Transport Systems , 12(8) , 931-
938. 
[17] Wang , X., Liu, L., Tao , T., et al . (2018 ). Enhanc-
ing communication -based train control systems 
through train -to-train communications. IEEE 
Transactions on Inte lligent Transportation Sys-
tems, 20(4) , 1-18. 
[18] Wu, D. H., Schnieder, E. (2016). Scenario -based 
modeling of the on -board of a satellite -based train 
control system with colored petri net. IEEE Tran-
saction on Intelligent Transportation System , 
17(11) , 3045 –3061.  
[19] Yang , J. F., Zhang , Y. P. (2016 ). Reliability anal-
ysis on ATP system of CTCS -3 based on D -S ev-
idence inference and Bayesian network. Interna-
tional Journal of Control and Automation , 9(7) , 
59-70. 
[20] Yao, D.  Y. (2018 ). Reliability analysis of next 
generation train control data communication system based on DSPN.  Beijing: Beijing Jiaotong 
University.  
[21] Zhang, F., Bu, B., Zhao, J.  Y. (2020 ). Risk as-
sessment method for information safety of train 
operation control system. China Safety Science 
Journal , 30(S1), 172 -178. 
[22] Zhang, Z.  H., Wang , Y. R., Dang , J. W. (2020 ). 
Reliability analysis of on -board subsystem of 
train control system based on evidence theory and 
Bayesian network method. Journal of Railway 
Science and Engineering , 17(09) , 2208 -2215.  
[23] Zhao , M. Y., Chen , X. H., Sun , H. Y., et al . 
(2020 ). Formalizing railway  interlocking domain 
specific language. Journal of Software , 31(06) , 
1638 -1653.  
[24] Zhu, L., Yao , D. Y., Zhao , H. L. (2018 ). Reliabil-
ity analysis of next generation CBTC data com-
munication systems. IEEE Transactions on Vehi-
cular Technology , 68(3), 2024 -2034.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
