--- Page 1 ---
Uniﬁcation & Sharing in Timed Automata
Veriﬁcation
Alexandre David1, Gerd Behrmann2, Kim G. Larsen2, and Wang Yi1
1Department of Information Technology, Uppsala University , Sweden
2Department of Computer Science, Aalborg University, Denma rk
Abstract. We present work on unifying the two main data structures
involved during reachability analysis of timed automata. W e also present
result on sharing common elements between states. The exper imental
evaluations show speedups of up to 60% and memory savings of u p to
80% compared to previous implementations.
1 Introduction
Timed automata (TA) is a popular formalism for modelling rea l-time aspects.
The distinctive feature of TA is the use of clocks. Clocks are non-negative real
valued variables, that can be compared and reset, and which i ncrease at identical
rates during delay transitions. A number of veriﬁcation too ls for TA exist. Like all
veriﬁcation tools, they suﬀer from the state explosion prob lem. In addition, they
must deal with the inﬁnite state-space of TA (due to the real v alued clocks). Most
tools use a pseudo-explicit state-space exploration algor ithm based on zones.
Zones describe inﬁnite sets of clock valuations, and the sta te-space is represented
by pairs ( l, Z) called symbolic states containing the current location and the
zone (more generally, the state-space of a network of TA exte nded with bounded
integer variables might be represented by triples ( l,ν, Z) containing a location
vector l, a variable vector νand a zone Z).
During state-space exploration, it is for reasons of termin ation and eﬃciency
necessary to keep track of both which symbolic states have be en explored as well
as which still need to be explored. In this paper we present re sults on unifying
these two data structures into a common structure. We also pr esent orthogonal
results on sharing common location vectors, variable vecto rs and zones between
symbolic states. We will motivate these decisions and evalu ate them through
experiments in a prototype implementation based on the real -time veriﬁcation
toolUppaal .
Related work The sharing approach presented in this paper is similar to th e one
in [1] for hierarhical coloured Petri nets. Both approaches share similarities with
BDDs in that common substructures are shared, but avoid the o verhead of the
ﬁne grained data representation of BDDs. The uniﬁcation has been applied to
Petri Nets [2] for the purpose of distributed model-checkin g. Our approach aims
at reducing look-ups in the hash table and eliminating waiti ng states earlier. To
our knowledge, there has been no work on these issues in the co ntext of TA.

--- Page 2 ---
2 Uniﬁcation and Sharing
During state-space exploration, there is a fundamental nee d to maintain two sets
of symbolic states: States that need to be explored (the wait ing list) and states
that have been explored (the passed list). States are taken f rom the waiting list,
compared to the states in the passed list, and if unexplored a dded to the passed
list while successors are added to the waiting list.
Since symbolic states are sets of concrete states, it makes s ence to deﬁne
inclusion between states having the same location and varia ble vector, i.e.,
(l,ν, Z)⊆(l,ν, Z′) iﬀZ⊆Z′. We say that ( l,ν, Z) is covered by ( l,ν, Z′).
Three observations are essential for good performance:
–When determining whether a state shas already been explored by comparing
it to the passed list, rather than searching for states ident ical to s, we might
as well look for states covering s.
–When adding a state sto the waiting list, there is no need to add sif it is
covered by an existing state.
–When adding a state sto the passed list or the waiting list, all states covered
byscan be removed.
The traditional approach to imple- WL=PL={s0}
while WL/ne}ationslash=∅do
s= select and remove state from WL
ifs|=ϕthen return true
∀s′:s⇒s′do
if∀s′′∈PL:s′/ne}ationslash⊆s′′then
PL=PL∪ {s}
WL=WL∪ {s}
endif
done
done
return false
Fig.1. Explicit state reachability algo-
rithm. States are inserted into both the
passed list and the waiting list.menting these operations is to use a hash
table and deﬁne the hash function on
the location vector and variable vector,
but not on the zone. Thus, it is easy to
ﬁnd states with the same location vector
and variable vector. This approach has
a major drawback: It is often the case
that many states in the waiting list are
covered by states in the passed list, but
this is not realized until the states are
moved from the waiting list to the passed
list. This enlarges the waiting list, wast-
ing memory and increasing the cost of
adding new states. One solution would
be to move the passed list lookup s.t. states are added to the p assed list and
the waiting list at the same time, see Fig. 1. Then the waiting list is guaranteed
to only contain unexplored states. However, this solution i s undesirable: First,
states in the waiting list are duplicated. Second, although it is not apparent from
Fig. 1, adding a state sto the passed and waiting lists still requires a partial
traversal of those data structures in order to eliminate sta tes covered by s.
Instead we propose to unify the two data structures into a sin gle data struc-
ture – for lack of a better name we call it the uniﬁed list . When adding a state
sto the uniﬁed list, it is compared to existing states: If sis covered by any of
the existing states, then sis not added. Otherwise, all states covered by sare
removed and sis added. Internally, it is still necessary to keep track of w hich
states have been explored and when retrieving a state from th e list, it is marked

--- Page 3 ---
waiting queuereference to state entry
reference to zonehash tabledouble linked (collision) list
discrete part (keys)
zone union (list of keys)
Fig.2. Implementation of a uniﬁed passed and waiting list.
as explored, but not actually removed. Figure 2 shows one pos sible implemen-
tation of the uniﬁed list data structure. A hash table provid es fast access to a
linked list of zones sharing the same location vector and var iable vector. At the
same time, a list (ordered either in FIFO or LIFO depending on the desired
exploration order) of references to unexplored states is ma intained.
Unifying the passed and waiting lists reduces the number of n eedless states,
i.e.states covered by previously explored states, stored on the waiting list. It
does not reduce the amount of memory needed to store each symb olic state. Our
second proposal is to share common location vectors, variab le vectors, and zones
among states. This is motivated by the results shown in Tab. 1 . This can be
implemented by storing location vectors, variable vectors , and zones in diﬀerent
hash tables. The uniﬁed list then only maintains references (keys) to the elements
in those hash tables.
3 Experiments
We conduct our experiments on development version 3.3.24 of Uppaal on an
Ultra Sparc II 400MHz with 4GB of memory. This version incorp orates a new ar-
chitecture and is already twice as fast as the oﬃcial 3.2 vers ion. Here we compare
results without and with the uniﬁed list structure for an aud io protocol (Audio),
a TDMA protocol (Dacapo), an engine gear controller (Engine ), a combinatorial
problem (Cups), a ﬁeld bus communication protocol (diﬀeren t parts BC, Master,
Table 1. The number of unique location vector, variable vectors and z ones, measured
in percent for four diﬀerent examples. The lower the number, the more copies of the
same data there are.
Model Unique locations Unique variables Unique zones
Audio 52.7% 25.2% 17.2%
Dacapo 4.3% 26.4% 12.7%
Fischer4 9.9% 0.6% 64.4%
Bus coupler 7.2% 8.7% 1.3%

--- Page 4 ---
Table 2. Experimental results for 8 examples without uniﬁcation, wi th uniﬁcation,
and with uniﬁcation and sharing.
Model Before Uniﬁcation Unication & Sharing
Audio ≤0.5s 2M ≤0.5s 2M ≤0.5s 2M
Engine ≤0.5s 3M ≤0.5s 4M ≤0.5s 5M
Dacapo 3s 7M 3s 5M 3s 5M
Cups 43s 116M 37s 107M 36s 26M
BC 428s 681M 359s 641M 345s 165M
Master 306s 616M 277s 558M 267s 153M
Slave 440s 735M 377s 645M 359s 151M
Plant 19688s >4G 9207s 2771M 8513s 1084M
and Slave), and a production plant with three batches. We ref er to the Uppaal
web-site for references to these examples.
Table 2 shows time and space requirements to generate the who le state-space,
except for cups where a reachability property is used becaus e the whole state
space is too large. The result >4Gmeans the veriﬁer crashed because it ran
out of memory. In all examples, zones were represented using the DBM data
structure, and active clock reduction was enabled. In the fo ur last examples, the
hash table size of the passed list and waiting list was enlarg ed to 273819 (using
the default size doubles the veriﬁcation time). The uniﬁed l ist implementation
automatically resizes the hash table and does not suﬀer from this problem.
Focusing on the experiments with uniﬁcation and without sha ring, we see
an increase in speed and a slight reduction in memory usage. T his is due to
not wasting space on storing states in the waiting list, that are not going to be
explored anyway and due to keeping a list of zones having the s ame location
and variable vector. The latter is also responsible for the s peedup. This is in
particular the case in the plant example, which has 9 clocks a nd 28 integer vari-
ables. Focusing on the experiments with sharing, we see a sig niﬁcant reduction
in memory usage of up to 80%. We also observe a slight speedup, which we
expect is due to the smaller memory footprint - this seems to c ompensate for
the computational overhead caused by maintaining extra has h tables. For small
examples, the results are identical for all versions. The re sults scale with the size
of the models, in particular the sharing property of the data holds. In total, we
observe a speedup of up to 60%.
Acknowledgments go to Ahiable Antoinette and Johan Bengtsson.
References
[1] S. Christensen and L.M. Kristensen. State space analysi s of hierarchical coloured
petri nets. In B. Farwer, D.Moldt, and M-O. Stehr, editors, Proceedings of
PNSE’97 , number 205, pages 32–43, Hamburg, Germany, 1997.
[2] Gianfranco F. Ciardo and David M. Nicol. Automated paral lelization of discrete
state-space generation. In Journal of Parallel and Distributed Computing , vol-
ume 47, pages 153–167. ACM, 1997.
