--- Page 1 ---
Software Tools for Technology Transfer manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)
Veriﬁcation and Optimization of a PLC Control Schedule
Ed Brinksma1, Angelika Mader2, Ansgar Fehnker2⋆
1Faculty of Computer Science, University of Twente, e-mail: brinksma@cs.utwente.nl
2Computer Science Department, University of Nijmegen, e-ma il:{mader,ansgar }@cs.kun.nl
Abstract. We report on the use of model checking tech-
niques for both the veriﬁcation of a process control pro-
gram and the derivation of optimal control schedules.
Most of this work has been carried out as part of a case
study for the EU VHS project (Veriﬁcation of Hybrid
Systems), in which the program for a Programmable
Logic Controller (PLC) of an experimental chemical plant
had to be designed and veriﬁed. The original intention
of our approach was to see how much could be achieved
here using the standard model checking environment of
SPIN/Promela. As the symbolic calculations of real-time
model checkers can be quite expensive it is interesting to
try and exploit the eﬃciency of established non-real-time
model checkers like SPIN in those cases where promising
work-arounds seem to exist. In our case we handled the
relevant real-time properties of the PLC controller using
a time-abstraction technique; for the scheduling we im-
plemented in Promela a so-called variable time advance
procedure . To compare and interpret the results we car-
ried out the same case study with the aid of the real-time
model checker Uppaal , enhanced with facilities for cost-
guided state space exploration. Both approaches proved
suﬃciently powerful to verify the design of the controller
and/or derive (time-)optimal schedules within reason-
able time and space requirements.
1 Introduction
Nowadays, the veriﬁcation of hybrid systems is a pop-
ular topic in the formal methods community. The pres-
ence of both discrete and continuous phenomena in such
⋆The second author is supported by a NWO postdoc grant, the
third author by an NWO PhD grant, and both are supported by
the EU LTR project VHS (project nr. 26270).systems poses an inspiring challenge for our speciﬁca-
tion and modelling techniques, as well as for our analytic
capacities. This has led to the development of new, ex-
pressive models, such as timed and hybrid automata [3,
15], and new veriﬁcation methods, most notably model
checking techniques involving a symbolic treatment of
real-time (and hybrid) aspects [10,16,6].
An important example of hybrid (embedded) systems
are process control programs, which involve the digi-
tal control of processing plants, e.g. chemical plants.
A class of process controllers that are of considerable
practical importance are those that are implemented us-
ing Programmable Logic Computers or PLCs. Unfortu-
nately, both PLCs and their associated programming
languages have no well-deﬁned formal models, c.q. se-
mantics, which complicates the design of reliable con-
trollers and their analysis.
To assess the capacity of state-of-the-art formal methods
and tools for the analysis of hybrid systems, the EU re-
search project VHS (Veriﬁcation of Hybrid Systems) has
deﬁned a number of case studies. One of these studies
concerns the design and veriﬁcation of a PLC program
for an experimental chemical plant.
In this article we report on the use of the two model
checkers for the veriﬁcation of a process control program
for the given plant and the derivation of optimal control
schedules. It is a companion paper to [12], which concen-
trates on the correct design of the process controller. The
original intention of our approach was to see how much
could be achieved here using the standard model check-
ing environment of SPIN/Promela [7]. As the symbolic
calculations of real-time model checkers can be quite ex-
pensive it is interesting to try and exploit the eﬃciency
of established non-real-time model checkers like SPIN in
those cases where promising work-arounds seem to exist.
In our case we handled the relevant real-time properties
of the PLC controller using a time-abstraction technique;
for the scheduling we implemented in Promela a so-called

--- Page 2 ---
2 Ed Brinksma et al.: Veriﬁcation and Optimization of a PLC Co ntrol Schedule
variable time advance procedure [14]. For this case study
these techniques proved suﬃcient to verify the design of
the controller and derive (time-)optimal schedules with
very reasonable time and space requirements. A ﬁrst re-
port on our experiences has been published as [5], whose
ﬁndings are further extended and elaborated in this ar-
ticle.
One of the conclusions of our initial experiments as re-
ported in [5] was that “ . . .it would be useful to be able to
inﬂuence the search strategy of the model checker more
directly and guide the search ﬁrst into those parts . . .
where counterexamples are likely to be found.” Since the
publication of [5] a new version of the real-time model
checking tool Uppaal has become available that em-
ploys a cost-guided evaluation strategy for state-space
exploration, viz cost-optimal Uppaal [4]. This tool is a
natural candidate to support the derivation of optimal
control schedules in a real-time environment. This mo-
tivated us to carry out the optimisation part of the case
study again with cost-optimal Uppaal , both as an in-
teresting exercise in its own right, and to collect data
to interpret and compare with the results obtained with
SPIN.
The rest of this paper is organised as follows: section
2 gives a description of the batch plant, the nature of
PLCs and a description of the control program that was
systematically designed in [12]. Section 3 describes the
Promela models for the plant and the control process,
and their use for its formal veriﬁcation and optimiza-
tion. Section 4 then introduces a cost-optimal Uppaal
model of the same processes, and presents the optimiza-
tion results that were obtained using it. Section 5, ﬁnally,
evaluates the work and presents our conclusions.
2 Description of the system
The system of the case study is basically an embedded
system, consisting of a batch plant and a Programmable
Logic Controller (PLC), both of which are described in-
more detail below. The original goal of the case study
was to write a control program such that the batch plant
and the PLC with its control program together behave
as intended. The intended behaviour is in the ﬁrst place
that always new batches can be produced, and, in the
second place, optimality of the control schedule.
2.1 Description of the batch plant
The batch plant (see Figure 1) of the case study is an
experimental chemical process plant, originally designed
for student exercises. We describe its main features be-
low; a more detailed account can be found in [9].
It “produces” batches of diluted salt solution from con-
centrated salt solution (in container B1) and water (in
container B2). These ingredients are mixed in containerphasei/o
program
executionphaseos
phase
Fig. 2. A PLC scan cycle
B3 to obtain the diluted solution, which is subsequently
transported to container B4 and then further on to B5.
In container B5 an evaporation process is started. The
evaporated water goes via a condenser to container B6,
where it is cooled and pumped back to B2. The remain-
ing hot, concentrated salt solution in B5 is transported
to B7, cooled down and then pumped back to B1.
The controlled batch plant is clearly a hybrid system.
The discrete element is provided by the control program
and the (abstract) states of the valves, mixer, heater
and coolers (open/closed, on/oﬀ). Continuous aspects
are tank ﬁlling levels, temperatures, and time. The lat-
ter can be dissected into real-time phenomena of the
plant on the one hand, such as tank ﬁlling, evapora-
tion, mixing, heating and cooling times times, and the
program execution and reaction times (PLC scan cycle
time), on the other. The controller of the batch plant is
a nice example of an embedded system : the controlling,
digital device is part of a larger physical system with a
particular functionality.
For the case study we decided to ﬁx the size of a batch:
the material is either 4.2 l salt solution with a concentra-
tion of 5 g/l and 2.8 l water or, if mixed, 7 l salt solution
of 3 g/l concentration. With these batch sizes containers
B1, B2, B4, B6 and B7 have a capacity of two “units” of
material, and B3 and B5 of only one “unit”. The plant
description in [9] gives durations for the transport steps
from one tank to another. In our (timed) plant model
we used these durations as our basis, although the ac-
tual durations might possibly be diﬀerent.1
2.2 Programmable Logic Controllers
PLCs are special purpose computers designed for control
tasks. Their area of application is enormous. Here, we
brieﬂy emphasize the main characteristics of PLCs in
comparison to “usual” computers.
1Note that these durations, given in Table 1, diﬀer from those
used in [5], which were chosen to be more comparable to the ﬁgu res
used in [13].

--- Page 3 ---
Ed Brinksma et al.: Veriﬁcation and Optimization of a PLC Con trol Schedule 3
LIS
101
QI
102LIS
201
QI
202
LIS
301QI
302
LIS
401FIS
801
LIS
501QIS
TI502
503LIS
601TIS
602
LIS
701
TIS
702
PIS
1001PIS
901B1 B2
B3
B4
K1
B6 B5
B7
P1 P2V2
V1V3
V8 V9V7V6 V4
V5
V13V11
V12
V29
V14
V15
V17V16
V10
V18
V19
V21 V23V27 V20
V24V25 V28 V26V22cooling
watersalt
cooling
water
cooling
waterHO2
HO2
Fig. 1. The P/I-Diagram of the Batch Plant
B1–B3 B2–B3 B3–B4 B4–B5 heat B5 B5–B7 cool B6 cool B7 B6–B2 B7–B1
320 240 600 330 1470 260 300 600 240 220
Table 1. Duration of plant processes in seconds
The most signiﬁcant diﬀerence is that a program on a
PLC runs in a permanent loop, the so called scan cy-
cle(see Figure 2). In each scan cycle the program in
the PLC is executed once, where the program execution
may depend on variable values stored in the memory.
The length of a scan cycle is in the range of milliseconds,
depending on the length of the program. Furthermore,
a part of each scan cycle is dedicated to data exchange
with the environment: a PLC has input points connected
via an interface with a dedicated input area of its mem-
ory, and the output area of the memory is connected via
an interface with the output points of the PLC. On the
input points the PLC receives data from sensors, on the
output points the PLC sends data to actuators. Finally,
there are some activities of the operating system (self
checks, watchdogs etc.) that take place in a scan cycle.
The operation system itself is small and stable, which is
prerequisite for reliable real-time control. PLC programs
are developed and compiled on PCs in special program-
ming environments and can be loaded to the PLC.There are diﬀerent domain speciﬁc programming lan-
guages collected in a standard [8]. In our application
we used Sequential Function Charts (SFC), a graphical
language that is related to Petri nets, and the program
executed in each scan cycle depends on the places that
are active at that moment. In this sense SFC provides a
meta-structure and the actual instructions of our appli-
cation are written in Instruction List (IL), an assembly-
like language. The PLC languages oﬀer timers as basic
constructs, which also diﬀers from most of the usual pro-
gramming languages.
The scan cycle mechanism makes PLCs suitable for con-
trol of continuous processes (tight loop control). How-
ever, it has to be guaranteed that the scan cycle length
is always below the minimal reaction time that is re-
quired by the plant to control the entire system. In this
case study the scan cycle time is a few orders of mag-
nitude smaller than what the reaction time has to be.
The execution time of a scan cycle is in the range of a
few milliseconds. For some applications the timing be-

--- Page 4 ---
4 Ed Brinksma et al.: Veriﬁcation and Optimization of a PLC Co ntrol Schedule
wait1
P1Θ1
result1START
true
. . .wait2
P2Θ2
result2wait12
P12Θ8
result12
Fig. 3. The control program in Sequential Function Chart
haviour in this range is relevant, e.g. for machine con-
trol. For for our chemical plant it is not relevant: it does
not really matter whether a valve closes 10 ms earlier
or later. This property is relevant when modelling the
whole system. Here, we can model the PLC as if exe-
cuting “time-continuously”, i.e. a scan cycle takes place
in zero time. In comparison to the PLC the plant is so
“slow” that it cannot distinguish a real PLC with scan
cycles form a ideal time-continuous control. For a more
detailed discussion of modelling PLCs see [11].
2.3 The control program
This section gives an informal description the control
program as we used it in our veriﬁcation and optimisa-
tion exercises. Its formal derivation and our other, re-
lated veriﬁcation activities can be found in [12].
In the plant we can identify a number of basic plant
processes, such as e.g. the transport of 4.2 l salt solu-
tion from container B1 to B3. All possible transport pro-
cesses, the evaporation process and two cooling process
lead to a number of 12 of such basic processes, which
run in parallel. The activities of each process are simply
to open some valves, switch on a mixer, pump or heater,
and when the process is ﬁnished, close and switch oﬀ
everything again. Each process starts its activities if its
activation conditions are fulﬁlled, and is in a wait state
otherwise. An active process (state) remains active until
its postconditions are fulﬁlled. Then it goes back into
its waiting state. This means that we a have so-called
closed loop control : the criterion to change state is not
that suﬃcient time has elapsed, but that a particular
event occurs.
It is not diﬃcult to recognise this structure in the SFC
representation of the program given in Figure 3. Control
starts in the state “START” and (because the transition
condition is “true”) immediately distributes to the 12
parallel wait states, waiting for the corresponding acti-
vation conditions θito become true. In a wait state a pro-
cess does nothing, i.e. it executes an empty program. If
the activation condition has become true, control reachescontrol state P i. The program associated with P iis ex-
ecuted in every scan cycle for as long as control remains
in Pi. The IL programs belong to P1, . . ., P12 are given
in Figure 4. The instructions of IL are assembler-like.
Here, we mainly load the constants true or false into the
accumulator and write the accumulator value to on of
the variables, e.g. V i, representing valve number i. The
action qualiﬁers P1 and P0 (to the left of each program)
indicate when the corresponding program blochs are ex-
ecuted. P1-labelled code is only executed in the ﬁrst scan
cycle after the control location has been reached; P0 in-
dicates that the instructions are only executed in the last
scan cycle that the control is at this location, i.e. when
the postcondition evaluates to true – one last scan cycle
is executed afterthe postcondition has become true.2
The main complexity of the program is hidden in the de-
sign of the activation conditions Θi. We can assume to
have predicates P i.X for each step P iindicating whether
control is at the corresponding step or not (these vari-
ables are available in PLC programs). The conditions to
start a process (i.e. step) can now be stated informally
as follows:
1. The ﬁlling levels of the tanks must allow for, e.g., a
transport step: the upper tank must contain enough
material, the lower tank must contain enough space,
etc. These conditions are encoded in the predicates
Φiof Figure 6.
2. We do not want a tank to be involved in two (or
more) processes at a time. E.g., when transferring
solution from B4 to B5 there should not be a concur-
rent transfer from B3 to B4. This requirement can
be formulated by conditions on valves: when solu-
tion is transferred from B4 to B5 valve V11 must
be closed for the duration of the transfer (invariant).
These requirements induce a conﬂict structure on the
processes in ﬁgure 5.
It is required that control is never at two conﬂicting
processes at the same time. This condition is split
2There exist more action qualiﬁers, e.g. to express that code
must be executed at every scan cycle.

--- Page 5 ---
Ed Brinksma et al.: Veriﬁcation and Optimization of a PLC Con trol Schedule 5
P1: P1LD true
ST V8
P0LD false
ST V8P2: P1LD true
ST V9
P0LD false
ST V9
P3: P1LD true
ST V8
ST Mixer
P0LD false
ST V8
ST MixerP4: P1LD true
ST V9
ST Mixer
P0LD false
ST V9
ST Mixer
P5: P1LD true
ST V11
P0LD false
ST V11P6: P1LD true
ST V12
P0LD false
ST V12
P7: P1LD true
ST Heater
P0LD false
ST HeaterP8: P1LD true
ST V15
P0LD false
ST V15
P9: P1LD true
ST V17
P0LD false
ST V17P10: P1LD true
ST V29
P0LD false
ST V29
P11: P1LD true
ST V18
ST V23
ST V22
ST V1
ST V3
ST Pump1
P0LD false
ST V18
ST V23
ST V22
ST V1
ST V3
ST Pump1P12: P1LD true
ST V20
ST V24
ST V25
ST V5
ST V6
ST Pump2
P0LD false
ST V20
ST V24
ST V25
ST V5
ST V6
ST Pump2
Fig. 4. Instruction List Programs for steps P1. . . ., P12
into two parts: ﬁrst, control cannot go to a process if a
conﬂicting process is already active. These conditions
are encoded in the predicates Ψiof Figure 7. Second,
when conﬂicting processes could get control at the
same moment only the one having priority gets it.
These priorities are ﬁxed, and their priority graph in
ﬁgure 5 is cycle free. They induce the predicates Θi
in ﬁgure 8.
The execution mechanism of PLCs guarantees a syn-
chronous execution of the parallel steps, in the sense that
within each scan cycle each program that is attached to
an active step is executed once. It is this mechanism that
givess the conditions Θito their intended eﬀect.P11
P10 P9
P6
P8
P7P12
P2/P4
P1/P3
P5
Fig. 5. Priority graph of the processes P1, . . ., P12. An arrow in-
dicates that there is a conﬂict between processes. An arrow p oints
to the process with priority.
Φ1:= (B1 = sol42C ∨B1 = sol82C)
∧B3 = empty
Φ2:= (B2 = water28C ∨B2 = water56C)
∧B3 = empty
Φ3:= (B1 = sol42C ∨B1 = sol82C)
∧B3 = water28C
Φ4:= (B2 = water28C ∨B2 = water56C)
∧B3 = sol42C
Φ5:= B3 = sol70C
∧(B4 = empty ∨B4 = sol70C)
Φ6:= (B4 = sol70C ∨B4 = sol140C)
∧B5 = empty
Φ7:= B5 = sol70C ∧(B6 = empty ∨
B6 = water28C ∨B6 = water28H)
Φ8:= B5 = sol42H ∧(B7 = empty ∨
B7 = sol42C ∨B7 = sol42H)
Φ9:= B7 = sol42H ∨B7 = sol84H
Φ10:= B6 = water28H ∨B6 = water56H
Φ11:= (B7 = sol42C ∨B7 = sol84C)
∧(B1 = empty ∨B1 = sol42C)
Φ12:= (B6 = water28C ∨B6 = water56C)
∧(B2 = empty ∨B2 = water28C)
Fig. 6. The tank ﬁlling conditions
Ψ1:=Φ1∧ ¬P2.X ∧ ¬P4.X ∧ ¬P5.X ∧ ¬P11.X
Ψ2:=Φ2∧ ¬P1.X ∧ ¬P3.X ∧ ¬P5. X ∧ ¬P12.X
Ψ3:=Φ3∧ ¬P2.X ∧ ¬P4.X ∧ ¬P5.X ∧ ¬P11.X
Ψ4:=Φ4∧ ¬P1.X ∧ ¬P3.X ∧ ¬P5. X ∧ ¬P12.X
Ψ5:=Φ5∧ ¬P1.X ∧ ¬P2.X ∧ ¬P3.X ∧ ¬P4.X
∧ ¬P6.X
Ψ6:=Φ6∧ ¬P5.X ∧ ¬P7.X ∧ ¬P8.X
Ψ7:=Φ7∧ ¬P6.X ∧ ¬P8.X ∧ ¬P10.X ∧ ¬P12.X
Ψ8:=Φ8∧ ¬P6.X ∧ ¬P7.X ∧ ¬P9.X ∧ ¬P11.X
Ψ9:=Φ9∧ ¬P8.X ∧ ¬P11.X
Ψ10:=Φ10∧ ¬P7.X ∧ ¬P12.X
Ψ11:=Φ11∧ ¬P1.X ∧ ¬P3.X ∧ ¬P8.X ∧ ¬P9.X
Ψ12:=Φ12∧ ¬P2.X ∧ ¬P4.X ∧ ¬P7.X ∧ ¬P10.X
Fig. 7. Activation conditions testing for active conﬂicting pro-
cesses

--- Page 6 ---
6 Ed Brinksma et al.: Veriﬁcation and Optimization of a PLC Co ntrol Schedule
Θ7:=Ψ7
Θ8:=Ψ8∧ ¬Θ7
Θ6:=Ψ6∧ ¬Θ7∧ ¬Θ8
Θ5:=Ψ5∧ ¬Θ6
Θ1:=Ψ1∧ ¬Θ5
Θ3:=Ψ3∧ ¬Θ5
Θ2:=Ψ2∧ ¬Θ1∧ ¬Θ3∧ ¬Θ5
Θ4:=Ψ4∧ ¬Θ1∧ ¬Θ3∧ ¬Θ5
Θ9:=Ψ9∧ ¬Θ8
Θ10:=Ψ10∧ ¬Θ7
Θ11:=Ψ11∧ ¬Θ1∧ ¬Θ3∧ ¬Θ8∧ ¬Θ9
Θ12:=Ψ12∧ ¬Θ2∧ ¬Θ4∧ ¬Θ7∧ ¬Θ10
Fig. 8. Predicates evaluating the priority between conﬂicting pro -
cesses; the evaluation order is relevant
3 Veriﬁcation and optimization with Spin
To verify the correctness of the PLC program of Fig-
ure 3 we made a Promela model of the plant and the
control program, and used Spin to check that all execu-
tion sequences of their composition satisfy the property
that “always eventually batches are produced”. This im-
plies that under ideal circumstances in which no mate-
rial is lost through leakage or evaporation, control is such
that new batches will always be produced. Subsequently,
we reﬁned the models to ﬁnd more sophisticated varia-
tions of the control program that are time-optimal, in
the sense that the average production time of a batch is
minimal. These optimal scheduling sequences were pro-
duced as counter-examples to properties stating subop-
timal behaviour. The details of these exercises are given
below.
3.1 Correctness of the PLC program
Both the plant as described in section 1, and the in-
formal control program description of section 3 can be
translated into Promela in a straighforward way, the cru-
cial part of the modelling exercise being the real-time
properties of the plant in combination with the PLC ex-
ecution mechanism given in section 2.2. In this case there
are two basic principles that allow us to deal with the
entire system by essentially abstracting away from time
(see also [11] for a more general account in the context
of PLCs):
1. The control program works independently of the time
that the production steps take. In the model each of
the production steps S1, . . ., S12 may take some un-
speciﬁed time: if activated (e.g. by opening a valve) it
goes into an ‘undeﬁned’ state that it will eventually
leave to reach the ﬁnal state when the postcondi-
tion holds. In this way every consistent timing be-
haviour of the plant is subsumed, including the real
one. Proving correctness for this general case implies
correctness of our special case.2. The excution speed of the control program is much
faster than the tolerance of the plant processes, as
was already mentioned above. This has two impor-
tant implications:
–we can abstract away from the scan cycle time
and assume that scan cycles are executed instan-
taneously.
–we can assume that the plant is scanned continu-
ously so that state changes are detected without
(signiﬁcant) delay.
The model of the combined behaviour of the plant and
the control program is obtained by putting the mod-
els of the control process and all the plant processes in
parallel. Doing this, we must make sure that the contin-
uous execution of the control program does not cause a
starvation of the plant processes. This is taken care of
by allowing only fair executions of our Promela model:
in each execution no active process may be ignored in-
deﬁnitely. We must be careful, however, not to lose the
other important property, viz. that each state change of
the plant is detected “immediately”. Our model takes
care of this by forcing a control program execution after
each potential state change of the plant.
The Promela model of this case study is too big to be
part of this paper. The full version can be retrieved from
[2]. Here we present two excerpts, one of the plant model
and one of the control program model, to illustrate the
main features.
Figure 9 contains the Promela process that models the
transfer of solution from container B1 to B3. It com-
bines the behaviours underlying steps P1 and P3. The
model consists of a do-loop that continuously tries to
start the transfer of a unit of salt solution from B1 to
B3. If the right conditions are fulﬁlled control will enter
the body of the loop, and will mark the beginning of
the transfer step by instantaneously (using the Promela
atomic construct) changing the contents of both con-
tainers to undeﬁned transitional states. At some later
moment it will execute the second part of the body,
instantaneously changing the transitional states to the
corresponding terminal states, marking the end of the
transfer.3Thecycle variable is a global ﬂag that forces
the excution of a scan cycle after the execution of each
atomic step in the plant (ﬂag is raised at the end of each
such atomic step). After the execution of a scan cycle
(also modelled as an atomic process, see below) the ﬂag
is lowered. Each atomic step in the plant is guarded by
the testcycle==0 .
The Promela process that models the control program is
listed in Figure 10. This is a straightforward translation
3Here, and in other parts of the Promela model we have initiall y
addedassert statements that express invariants that should hold
at the corresponding control location ( error being shorthand for
tt asser(false)). These are used to check for the correctnes s of the
model in initial simulation and veriﬁcation trials, and are removed
during the actual veriﬁcation to avoid unneccesary growth o f the
state space.

--- Page 7 ---
Ed Brinksma et al.: Veriﬁcation and Optimization of a PLC Con trol Schedule 7
proctype B1toB3()
{do
:: atomic {(cycle==0 && B1!=cempty && v8) ->
if
:: (B1==sol42C) -> B1=undef1
:: (B1==sol84C) -> B1=undef2
:: else -> error
fi ;
if
:: (B3==cempty) -> B3=undef1
:: (B3==water28C && mix) -> B3=undef2
:: else -> error
fi ;
cycle=1
};
assert(v8 && (B3!=undef2 || mix)) ;
atomic {(cycle==0 && v8) ->
if
:: (B1==undef1) -> B1=cempty
:: (B1==undef2) -> B1=sol42C
:: else -> error
fi ;
if
:: (B3==undef1) -> B3=sol42C
:: (B3==undef2 && mix) -> B3=sol70C
:: else -> error
fi ;
cycle=1
}
od
}
Fig. 9. The Promela model of transfer between B1 and B3
proctype Control()
{int i,j ;
do
:: atomic {i=1 ; j=1 ;
do
:: (i<15) ->
if
:: (theta(i,j) && !px[procnr(i)]) -> PB1(i)
:: (result(i,j) && px[procnr(i)]) -> PB0(i)
:: else -> skip
fi ;
if
:: (j==1) -> j=2
:: (j==2) -> j=1 ; i=i+1
fi
:: (i==15) -> goto endcycle
od ;
endcycle: cycle=0
}
od
}
Fig. 10. The Promela model of the control process
of the PLC program of Figure 4. The do loop of Control
repeatedly executes an atomic scan cycle, in which the
processes P1, . . .,P12 are scheduled sequentially. To deal
with the symmetric subcases of each step (i.e. the dis-
juncts between brackets in Figure 6) the range of the
main counter is extended and a second loop counter j
is introduced. Modulo these small adaptations the Θ-
predicates of Figure 8 are captured by the theta(i,j) ,
and theresult(i,j) correspond to formalisations of the
result conditions of the PLC program (the uninstanti-
ated result ilabels of Figure 3). PB1(i) andPB2(i) cor-
respond to the code of the P1 part, and the P0 part
of the PLC program, respectively. The variables px[i]
correspond to the P i.X activity predicates of the pro-gram mentioned earlier. Note that at the end of each
scan cycle the global ﬂag cycle is lowered, as required.
Whereas the assertions in the model served to check on
our own understanding the model, the main correctness
requirement that “always eventually a new batch is pro-
duced” was veriﬁed using the Spin facilities for model
checking LTL formulas. The requirement was formalized
as the following LTL property:
/square ♦(B3 == sol70C) ∧/square ♦(B3 == cempty) (1)
expressing that the contents of container B3(containing
the brine solution that is considered the “production”
of the plant) is inﬁnitely often full and inﬁnitely oftem
empty4. As these two properties must interleave in each
linear execution sequence they are equivalent to the de-
sired requirement.
Veriﬁcation results. It turned out to be feasible to run
the model checker sequentially on our model initialised
with material for 0 up to 8 batches (including the inter-
mediate diﬀerent possibilities for half batches; 30 runs
in total). In order to avoid the explosion of the more
than 8100 possible initial conﬁgurations that are in prin-
ciple possible, we considered only conﬁgurations ﬁlling
the plant “from the top”, i.e. ﬁlling tanks in the order
B1,. . .,B7. The other initializations are reachable from
these by normal operation of the plant. As satisfaction
of the property that we checked (see below) for our ini-
tial conﬁgurations implies its satisfaction for all reach-
able conﬁgurations, this is suﬃcient. Using simulations
of our model we satisﬁed ourselves that our model did
indeed include the required normal operation steps.
After initial simulations and model checking runs had
been used to remove small (mainly syntactic) mistakes
from our model, the model was systematically checked
for property (1) for the 30 initializations with diﬀer-
ent batch volumes described above. No errors were re-
ported, except for initializations with batch volumes 0,
0.5, 7.5 and 8, as should be the case. The model checking
was done using Spin version 3.3.7 on a SUN Enterprise
E3500-server (6 SPARC cpus with 3.0 GB main mem-
ory). The model checking was run in exhaustive state
space search mode with fair scheduling. The error states
reported unreachable in all runs. The shortest runs were
completed in the order of seconds and consumed in the
order of 20MB memory; the longest run required in the
order of 40 minutes and 100MB.
3.2 Deriving optimal schedules
The control schedule of Figure 3 that we have shown
to be correct by the procedure sketched in the previous
subsection, follows an essentially crude strategy. After
4the constant cempty was chosen to be diﬀerent from the
Promela reserved word empty.

--- Page 8 ---
8 Ed Brinksma et al.: Veriﬁcation and Optimization of a PLC Co ntrol Schedule
each scan cycle it enables allnon-conﬂicting processes in
the plant whose preconditions it has evaluated to hold
true. It is not a priori clear that this strategy would also
lead to a plant operation that is optimal in the sense
that the average time to produce a batch is minimal.
To determine optimal schedules for the various batch
loads of the plant we have reﬁned the models of the
previous section as follows:
1. We added a notion of time to the model. To avoid
an unnecessary blow-up of the state space due to ir-
relevant points in time, i.e. times at which nothing
interesting can happen, we have borrowed an idea
from discrete event simulation, viz. that of variable
time advance procedures [14].
2. We reﬁned the plant model using the information
from Table 1, such that each process in the plant
will take precisely the amount of time speciﬁed.
3. We reﬁned the model of the control program such
that after each scan cycle any subset of the maximal
set of allowed non-conﬂicting processes determined
by the original control program can be selected for
execution.
The search for optimal schedules was conducted by ﬁnd-
ing counterexamples to the claim:
/square(batches <N) (2)
wherebatches is a global variable that counts the num-
ber of times that a brine solution is transfer from B3to
B4. This property is checked for increasing values of Nin
the context of a given maximal clock value maxtime . The
assumption is that for maxtime large enough such coun-
terexamples will display regular scheduling patterns. Be-
low, we elaborate on each of the above points and the
search procedure.
A variable time advance procedure. In real-time discrete
event systems events have associated clocks that can be
set by the occurrence of other events. An event occurs
when its clock expires. Such systems can be simulated
by calculating at each event occurrence the point in time
at which the nextevent will occur, and then jumping
to that point in time. This is known as variable time
advance .
We wish to apply this idea to our model because it will
not litter the global state space with states whose time
component is uninteresting, in the sense that there is no
process in the plant that begins or ends. As we can only
calculate when plant processes will end once they have
started, we can only use this time advance procedure if
we assume that processes will always be started when
others end (or at time 0). It is not diﬃcult to see, how-
ever, that we will not lose schedules this way that are
strictly faster then what we can obtain using this pol-
icy. The informal arguments is as follows: assume that
a derived scheduling policy can be strictly improved byproctype Advance()
{int i ; short minstep ;
do
:: atomic {(promptcondition) ->
minstep=maxstep ; i=1 ;
do
:: (i<13) ->
if
:: (px[i] && ((ptime(i)-time)<minstep)) ->
minstep=(ptime(i)-time)
:: else -> skip
fi ;
i=i+1
:: (i==13) -> goto step
od ;
step: time=time+minstep
}
od
}
Fig. 11. The Promela model of the time advance process
postponing a given event eby some time t. Because we
are optimising w.r.t. time (and not energy or resource
utilisation or the like), the more optimal schedule must
exploit this time to start a conﬂicting process (ending a
conﬂicting process would have prevented ein the origi-
nal schedule; any event associated with a non-conﬂicting
process can be executed anyway). Because this process
is conﬂicting it must also ﬁnish before eoccurs. We may
therefore assume that in any optimal schedule eis exe-
cuted when some process ends.
The variable time advance procedure is implemented
by the Promela process Advance given in Figure 11.
The basic idea of Advance is quite simple: when it be-
comes active it will calculate the next point in time
when a plant process will terminate. To do so it uses
the global array ptime(i) containing the termination
times of the processes i, whose values are calculated
as part of the Promela processes modelling the plant,
and the global time variable time, which is controlled
byAdvance . The activation of Advance is controlled by
the predicate promptcondition . This predicate is true
if and only if all processses that have been enabled by
the control program have indeed become active and none
have yet terminated.
The reﬁned plant model The reﬁned model of the plant
diﬀers from the original model by adding some simple
timing information to the plant processes. The (atomic)
start event of each plant process is used to calculate
the termination time of that process. The termination
event of each plant process is then guarded with the
additionalcondition that the global time timemust equal
the calculated termination time.
The reﬁned control model. To allow the new model of
the control program to enable any subset of the per-
missable plant process events at any time, we split the
loop of the original model of Figure 10. The ﬁrst of the
two loops scans only for termination conditions of plant
processes and executes the corresponding control frag-
mentsPB0(i) . Subsequently, any of the conditions Ψi

--- Page 9 ---
Ed Brinksma et al.: Veriﬁcation and Optimization of a PLC Con trol Schedule 9
load simtime batches states steps period
1 3476 10 711 94253 380
2 4968 25 1715 239277 206
3 4732 25 1652 230236 206
4 4774 25 1736 241261 206
5 3947 20 1423 196627 206
6 4120 20 1459 201685 206
7 3320 10 1935 2568780 314
Table 2. Spin schedule measurements
of Table 7 can be nondeterministically overwritten with
the value false before the second loop is entered. This
loop scans the remaining valid preconditions of the plant
processes of which the corresponding control fragments
PB1(i) are then executed. All guards in both loops of
the new version contain tests to monitor the progress
of time and will stop control if time exceedsmaxtime .
This will cause the combined plant and control model to
terminate.
The reﬁnement as described above causes an exponen-
tial blow-up of the branching structure of the control
process, as maximal sets of non-conﬂicting events are re-
placed by a choice between all their subsets. This leads to
a corresponding blow-up of the exploration time for the
state space, even if no new states are reached in this way.
To control this phenomenon a global system parameter
cutsis introduced that speciﬁes the maximal number of
events per branching point that may be postponed when
enabled.
Finding optimal schedules. Looking for optimal sched-
ules we restricted ourselves to the interesting cases in-
volving initial plant loads of 1 through 7 batches. For
our initial experiments we ﬁxed maxtime to be 5000
time units (50,000 s). For each initial load we needed
two or three runs to determine the maximal number of
batches for which counterexamples could be produced in
a very short time (in the order of seconds system time). It
turned out that all counterexamples produced contained
schedules that rapidly (i.e. within 700 time units) con-
verged to a repeating pattern with a ﬁxed duration. None
of the counterexamples required a cuts value greater
than 2.
The best measurements in terms of shortest periods de-
tected, are collected in Table 2 below. The interpretation
of the columns is as follows:
load: indicates the number of batches with which the
plant initialised,
simtime: indicates the the duration (in simulated time
units) of the counterexample traces,
batches: the number of batches produced in that trace,
states: the number of states visited to produce the trace,
steps: the number of atomic steps executed,
period: period of the periodic behaviour in time units.A ﬁrst analysis of Table 2 shows the state space that
needs to be searched to produce the counterexamples is
very small, and could make one suspicious of the qual-
ity of the results that are obtained. Here, one should
realise that the state space of the model has been kept
small by the consequent use of atomic constructs for
large Promela code chunks, the use of variable time ad-
vance, and the fact that the reachable part of the plant
model state space is not so large (e.g. it does not have
complicated data structures or queues). As they column
with the atomic step counts indicates the small num-
ber of states does not make it a trivial model checking
problem. This is caused by the nondeterministic branch-
ing that permeates the model, where many alternatives
must be evaluated before a counterexample is produced.
Six of measured periods can be easily shown to be opti-
mal! For a plant with a batch load of 1 this can be read-
ily checked by hand by moving a single batch through
the plant and measuring the total duration of the critical
branches of the path. In the earlier experiments reported
in [5] (which uses slightly diﬀerent plant process dura-
tions), we thought that we had made a mistake when
we measured the same period of for most initial loads of
the plant. Closer analysis of the schedules, however, re-
vealed that this is the result of the fact that the plant has
one process that clearly dominates the time consump-
tion during the production of batches, viz. the heating
of container B5(147 time units). Since ﬁlling B5, heating
it, and emptying B5must be part of every production
cycle, the average production time of a batch must be
greater or equal then 33+147+26=206 time units. This
makes the schedules loads 2 to 6 optimal schedules as
well.
The schedule for the load of 7 batches is almost cer-
tainly optimal. It was found by imposing a very tight
maxtime upperbound for the production of 10 batches,
after a more relaxed upperbound had already produced a
period of 346 time units (cf. Uppaal results below). Fur-
ther tightening of the upperbound lead to loss of coun-
terexamples, which means that with a load of 7 batches,
10 batches cannot be produced within 3320 time units.
By itself, this does not prove that there is no shorter pe-
riod, however, as this might require an initial behaviour
that is less productive than that of the schedule that we
found.5
It must be concluded that the plant can be scheduled
in the overall optimal time of 2060 seconds for all loads,
except for the extreme loads of 1 and 7. Because of our
analysis above, these are not only time optimal sched-
ules, but also resource optimal ones, in the sense that the
(expensive) heating and distillation equipment B5is in
continuous use. From the energy perspective, probably
5The results reported in [5], which used diﬀerent process dur a-
tions, showed easily produced optimal schedules for loads 1 ,2,3,4
and 7, with optimal schedules obtained for loads 5 and 6 only a fter
substantial tightening of upperbounds.

--- Page 10 ---
10 Ed Brinksma et al.: Veriﬁcation and Optimization of a PLC C ontrol Schedule
the schedule for load 2 is optimal, as this involves the
circulation, heating and cooling of the smallest volume.
4 Optimisation with Uppaal
4.1 The Uppaal model
The translation from the plant and control to an Uppaal
model is quite straightforward, and in many points sim-
ilar to the philosophy of the Promela model. The main
diﬀerences between the models are the representation of
time, naturally, as this is a built-in feature of Uppaal ,
and the scheduling of the concurrent processes. In the
Promela model the latter is restricted by fairness condi-
tions and the use of the cycle ﬂag variable. The Uppaal
model enforces this by another, more explicit restriction
that is explained below.
TheUppaal model is a parallel composition of a plant
automaton and a control automaton. The plant automa-
ton is given as a parallel composition of 12 subautomata,
representing the basic plant processes. Each of these
plant automata is equipped with a clock that measures
the duration of the process after it has started. As an
example, the Uppaal model for the transport of concen-
trated salt solution from container B1 to container B3
is given in Figure 12. Location S0 represents the passive
control state of the process. As soon as the control pro-
cess has opened and closed the appropriate valves, etc.,
the process starts. This immediate activation is achieved
by a synchonisation on the urgent channel urgon. After
the time has passed by that corresponds to the duration
of the process, the container volumes are updated de-
pending on their previous values. After a process ﬁnishes
the control program is activated twice (by synchronisa-
tion on the channel compute ), for reasons given below.
As with Promela, the execution of the control automa-
ton is modelled based on the assumption that the ex-
ecution of the PLC control program is instantaneous.
Technically, this can be implemented using the commit-
ted location feature of Uppaal . Once they are reached,
committed locations have to be left without time delay
or interleaving with other transitions. In our model all
locations of the control automaton are modelled as com-
mitted locations, apart from the ﬁrst one that represents
the waiting state of the control process. Without restric-
tions, repeated instantaneous execution of the control
program would lead to Zeno-behaviour. In the Promela
model such behaviour is prevented by imposing a fairness
requirement. These are not available in Uppaal . In the
Uppaal model control execution is restricted to those
points of time when the conditions in the plant change,
as these are the only moments when also the control pro-
cess can change its state. More precisely, it is the case
that each change in the state of the plant requires two
control program executions: one to ﬁnish some processprocess P13{
clock x12;
state S0, S1{x12<=32}, S2, S3;
commit S2, S3;
init S0;
trans S0 -> S1 {guard Pump1==0, V8==1,
V9==0, V11==0, Mixer==1;
sync urgon?;
assign x12:=0; },
S1 -> S2 {guard x12==32, B1==1, B3==0;
assign B1:=0, B3:=2; },
S1 -> S2 {guard x12==32, B1==2, B3==0;
assign B1:=1, B3:=2; },
S1 -> S2 {guard x12==32, B1==1, B3==1;
assign B1:=0, B3:=3; },
S1 -> S2 {guard x12==32, B1==2, B3==1;
assign B1:=1, B3:=3; },
S2 -> S3 {sync compute!; },
S3 -> S0 {sync compute!; };
}
Fig. 12. TheUppaal model of transfer between B1 and B3
(close valves etc.), and one to start up new ones. In gen-
eral, starting up new processes could be delayed for some
time, but this is not needed. As was already argued for
the Promela model, no (time-)optimal schedules are lost
by assuming that new porcesses only start when some
other process ﬁnishes.
The control automaton itself consists of two sequential
parts, again similar to the Promela model. In the ﬁrst
part the activation conditions for processes are evalu-
ated, including a nondeterministic choice of a subset of
the processes that can be activated. As in the Promela
case, this nondeterministic step is prerequisite for ﬁndin g
optimal schedules. In the second part the control sets the
actuator variables for valves, pumps, heater and mixer.
4.2 Optimal schedules with Cost-Optimal Uppaal
In [4] Behrmann et al. proposed an extension of Up-
paal that includes concepts from branch and bound al-
gorithms to provide generic support for optimal search
strategies in a real-time context. This extension makes
it possible to derive optimal solutions for problems that
can be modelled in terms of so-called Uniformly Priced
Timed Automata . In this model a cost function increases
with a ﬁxed rate as time elapses or with a speciﬁed
amount if a transition is taken. This cost is treated as
a special clock with extra operations, but such that the
currently implemented data structures in Uppaal suf-
ﬁce.
Among the techniques that were adopted in cost-optimal
Uppaal are heuristic search orders. Heuristic search or-
ders are obtained by assigning priorities to symbolic state s.
The symbolic state is extended with a priority ﬁeld and
the model checker selects the next state with the high-

--- Page 11 ---
Ed Brinksma et al.: Veriﬁcation and Optimization of a PLC Con trol Schedule 11
A1 -> A2{assign bonus:=bonus+(T11==1?1:0);},
A1 -> A2{guard T11==1; assign T11:=0;},
A2 -> A3{assign bonus:=bonus+(T12==1 ?1:0);},
A2 -> A3{guard T12==1; assign T12:=0;},
Fig. 13. Rewarding the selection of enabled processes (selection
variable is not set to 0, if it was 1 before).
process P13{
clock x12;
state S0, S1{x12<=32}, S2, S3;
commit S2, S3;
init S0;
trans S0 -> S1{guard Pump1==0, V8==1,
V9==0, V11==0, Mixer==1;
sync urgon?;
assign x12:=0, depth:=depth+1; },
S1 -> S2{guard x12==32, B1==1, B3==0;
assign B1:=0, B3:=2; },
S1 -> S2{guard x12==32, B1==2, B3==0;
assign B1:=1, B3:=2; },
S1 -> S2{guard x12==32, B1==1, B3==1;
assign B1:=0, B3:=3; },
S1 -> S2{guard x12==32, B1==2, B3==1;
assign B1:=1, B3:=3; },
S2 -> S3{sync compute!; },
S3 -> S0{sync compute!; };
}
Fig. 14. The depth is increased, if a process starts. With depth
the heuristic gives preference to depth-ﬁrst search.
est priority. To change priorities one has to decorate the
transitions with an assignment to the priority ﬁeld.
In our cost-optimal Uppaal model of the case study we
have deﬁned the costto be identical to the time elapsed,
i.e. the cost rate equals 1, and added the priority vari-
ableheurthat is calculated according to the expression
1*bonus+100*depth-cost . The variable bonus is used
to reward selecting larger rather than smaller subsets of
enabled process start events, as is shown in Figure 13.
This heuristic directs the exploration such that the con-
troller tries ﬁrst to start all permissable plant processes .
The bonus is made extra rewarding for the selection of
the evaporation process, which should be in (almost)
continuous use for an optimal exploitation of the plant
resources.
The variable depth is used to reward depth-ﬁrst over
breadth-ﬁrst search. This, because a good solution for
the batch plant should show some progress, i.e. it should
start processes that are necessary to produce a batch.
Transition S0 -> S1 in ﬁgure 14 models the begin of
the process P13. We increase the priority if this transi-
tion is taken to reward the start of P13. Transitions that
start other processes and transitions of the controller
that enable processes to start are rewarded similarly.
Using this heuristic we could produce optimal schedules
for the batch plant. In contrast to Spin it was not nec-
essary to give an initial upper bound maxtime . For theheuristic depth ﬁrst
search search
load batches simtime states simtime states
1 10 3476 14063 4178 17547
2 25 4968 35952 11048 45781
3 25 4732 34584 10992 45385
4 25 4774 35344 11288 46181
5 20 3947 28808 9294 37716
6 20 4120 29568 9294 37716
7 10 3320 14377 4418 17957
Table 3. This table shows the ﬁrst solution found by cost-optimal
Uppaal , either with heuristic search or depth-ﬁrst.
experiments we asked Uppaal to produce schedules for
the same initial load and the same number of batches as
Spin did. Table 3 gives the results of these experiments.
For load 1 to 6 Uppaal found with the heuristic an
initial solution that has the same period and same sim-
time as the best solution found by Spin. The solution for
load 7 converges to a schedule with period 346. Depth-
ﬁrst search ﬁnds for the same problems worse solutions
and explores more states. Other experiments show that
depth-ﬁrst search cannot ﬁnd a solution at all if set a
reasonable bound maxtime on the time as we did for
Spin.
Cost-optimal Uppaal oﬀers the option to start back-
tracking as soon as it ﬁnds an initial solution. It uses
the cost of this solution to prune states that are more
expensive. The bound on the cost is lowered each time it
ﬁnds a better solution. Uppaal was not able to ﬁnd bet-
ter schedules within reasonable cputime and memory for
initial loads 1 to 6. For load 7 it was able to ﬁnd a sched-
ule with simtime 3288. Backtracking yielded a schedule
that produces the last batch within 314 time units; this
is the period Spin found for its best schedules. To do so
Uppaal explores 74240 states, which takes 16.5 seconds
on a Pentium III 500MHz.
5 Conclusion
In this paper we have shown how the Promela/Spin en-
vironment can be used to verify and optimize control
schedules for a small-size PLC controlled batch plant.
The approach in this paper relies quite heavily on the
structured design of an initial control program that can
be found in [12], and on the analysis of formal approaches
to PLCs in [11].
It is interesting to see that we succeeded in dealing with
this real-time embedded system using standard Promela
and Spin. For the veriﬁcation of the initial control pro-
gram this was due to a property of the plant, viz. that
we could assume instantaneous and immediate scanning
of all state changes of the plant. This as a consequence
of the tolerance of the plant processes for much slower
reaction times than those realised by the PLC control.

--- Page 12 ---
12 Ed Brinksma et al.: Veriﬁcation and Optimization of a PLC C ontrol Schedule
This makes us conclude that this abstraction can be used
for checking non-timed correctness criteria in all process
control problems that have this property.
The original task we set ourselves was just to check the
correctness of the plant control in the sense that the de-
signed program would in principle always be capable of
producing more batches for any reasonable initial load.
Having achieved that task we wondered how the model
might be used to also look at the optimality of the sched-
ules. As we wanted to treat this in terms of small modi-
ﬁcations of the model only, we added time in the form of
an explicit time advancing process. This is very close in
spirit to the real-time Promela/Spin extension DTSpin
[1]. Given the particular properties of the plant, how-
ever, viz. that without loss of optimality plant processes
can be assumed to start when others terminate, we could
do this by only generating those points in time in which
plant events could take place. From the schedules that
we obtained we can conclude that in this case study this
variable time advance procedure reduced the generated
state space by approximately a factor of 20.
Although more experiments are certainly needed, we be-
lieve that variable time advance procedures can be useful
for this kind of application. One way to think of them is
as an explicitly programmed analogon of the notion of
time regions as in timed automata [3]. Taking advantage
of speciﬁc properties of systems such as ours an explicit
approach can sometimes yield better results. On the ba-
sis of our modiﬁed model we could ﬁnd optimal schedules
within in interactive modes: up to 5 runs with diﬀerent
parameter values, each taking between seconds and a few
minutes of user time on a SUN Enterprise E3500-server
(most in the seconds range). This is certainly due to
the particular characteristics of the given plant, with its
very critical heating process. Also, we have been lucky
in the sense that the optimal schedules often were found
in those parts of the search tree that were explored ear-
lier. Given the small numbers of explored states it might
seem that the gain by using variable time advance over
the explicit addition of a clock variable to the model
(as in DTSpin) is immaterial (going from O(103) states
to O(104−5). One should keep in mind, however, that
the number of atomic steps required to produce a coun-
terexample would also grow by a factor 20, taking it to
O(106−7), which most likely would interfere with the use
of the model-checker in an interactive mode to ﬁnd (al-
most) optimal schedules quickly.
Since our initial experiments with Promela and Spin
an implementation of cost-optimal Uppaal has become
available. We have used this tool to redo the optimisa-
tion part of the case study and compared it to our Spin
results. The results obtained with this variant of Uppaal
did conﬁrm correctness of our results. Compared to Spin,
cost-optimal Uppaal certainly oﬀers a more convenient
interface for handling guided state-space explorations.
For Spin the latter can only be done indirectly by re-
peated veriﬁcation runs with diﬀerent parameter settingsunder control of the user. In cost-optimal Uppaal the
user can control everything directly by deﬁning heuris-
tic cost functions, so that multiple runs are less needed,
although some additional experimentation is required to
ﬁne-tune the heuristic used.
On the basis of the limited experience gained by this
case study, the situation is best characterised as fol-
lows. Given the current situation, cost-optimal Uppaal
is probably the more convenient tool to search for op-
timal schedules for this knd of application if an Up-
paal model is available or can be developed. In view
of the very reasonable performance of Spin using the
techniques described in this paper, however, developing
aUppaal model may not pay oﬀ if a good Promela
model is available, as for this case study. In our case
such a model was in fact produced because it proved
much easier to develop a Promela model for the (time-
abstracted) veriﬁcation of the plant, then to do so with
Uppaal . Given this situation it can be concluded that
it would be very interesting to look also into the pos-
sible extension of Spin with cost-guided state space ex-
ploration features. This could prove to be a powerful
combination for the application of Spin to optimisation
problems.
Regarding the case study itself: another approach to
the optimal scheduling for the VHS case study 1 is re-
ported in [13]. Here the problem is analysed using the
tools OpenKronos and SMI. It is diﬃcult to compare
the results of this approach directly with ours, as they
include also the production of the initial loads into their
schedules, which we just assume to be present. The more
general ﬁndings seem to be consistent with ours, how-
ever. OpenKronos could be used succesfully to produce
optimal schedules for loads of up to 3 batches before
falling victim to the state explosion problem. The sym-
bolic model checker SMI produced results 6 batches and
more, with a computation time of approximately 17 min-
utes per batch.
References
1. DTSpin homepage.
http://www.win.tue.nl/~dragan/DTSpin.html .
2. VHS: Case study 1 sources.
http://www.cs.kun.nl/~mader/vhs/cs1.html .
3. R. Alur and D.L. Dill. A theory of timed automata.
Theoretical Computer Science , (138):183–335, 1994.
4. Gerd Behrmann, Ansgar Fehnker, Thomas S. Hune,
Kim G. Larsen, Paul Petterson, and Judi Romijn. Ef-
ﬁcient Guiding Towards Cost-Optimality in Uppaal .
In7th International Conference on Tools and Algo-
rithms for the Construction and Analysis of Systems
(TACAS’2001) , 2001.
5. E. Brinksma and A. Mader. Veriﬁcation and opti-
mization of a PLC control schedule. In Proceedings of
SPIN2000 , volume 1885 of Lecture Notes in Computer
Science . Springer, 2000.

--- Page 13 ---
Ed Brinksma et al.: Veriﬁcation and Optimization of a PLC Con trol Schedule 13
6. T.A. Henzinger, P.-H. Ho, and H. Wong-Toi. Hytech:
a model checker for hybrid systems. Software Tools for
Technology Transfer , (1):110–123, 1997.
7. G.J. Holzmann. The model cheker spin.IEEE Transac-
tions on Software Engineering , 23(5):279–295, May 1997.
8. International Electrotechnical Commission. IEC In-
ternational Standard 1131-3, Programmable Controllers,
Part 3, Programming Languages , 1993.
9. S. Kowalewski. Description of case study CS1 “experi-
mental batch plant”.
http://www-verimag.imag.fr/VHS/main.html , July
1998.
10. K.G. Larsen, P. Petterson, and W. Yi. Uppaal in a nut-
shell. Software Tools for Technology Transfer , (1):134–
153, 1997.
11. A. Mader. A classiﬁcation of PLC models and appli-
cations. In R. Boel and G. Stremersch, editors, Discrete
Event Systems - Analysis and Control . Kluwer Academic
Publishers, 2000. Proceedings of WODES2000.
12. A. Mader, E. Brinksma, H. Wupper, and N. Bauer.
Design of a PLC control program for a batch plant -
VHS case study 1. Technical Report CSI-R0113, Univer-
sity of Nijmegen, 2001. accepted for publication in the
European Journal of Control, http://www.cs.kun.nl/~
mader/papers.html .
13. Peter Niebert and Sergio Yovine. Computing op-
timal operation schemes for multi batch operation
of chemical plants. VHS deliverable, May 1999.
http://www-verimag.imag.fr/VHS/main.html .
14. G.S. Shedler. Regenerative Stochastic Simulation . Aca-
demic Press, 1993.
15. F.W. Vaandrager and J.H. van Schuppen. Hybrid Sys-
tems: Computation and Control , volume 1569 of Lecture
Notes in Computer Science . Springer-Verlag, 1999.
16. S. Yovine. Kronos: a veriﬁcation tool for real-time sys-
tems. Software Tools for Technology Transfer , (1):123–
134, 1997.
