--- Page 1 ---
 Current Directions in Biomedical Engineering  2017; 3(2): 445–448 
Max Dingler *, Christian Dietz and  Tim Lüth  
Verification of on-demand medical device 
networks  
Abstract:  We propose a novel method for the automa ted formal 
analysis of on -demand medical device networks communicating 
via an open communication protocol. The resulting toolbox aims 
at assisting operators of cross -vendor medical device networks in 
the complex process of conformity assessment. The method  is 
based on the notion of timed, extended finite automata and 
employs existent TCTL model checking techniques by use of 
MATLAB and UPPAAL. We evaluate our methodology in a 
real-life application similar to a user experience published by the 
U.S. Food and D rug Admninistration. The method revealed a 
flaw in the connector design for the Surgical Real Time Bus of 
the OR.Net project.  
Keywords:  Medical devices, admission process, networks, 
automata, verification.  
https:/ /doi.org/10.1515/cdbme -2017 -0093  
1 Medical device i ntegration  
With an ever increasing importance of digital data in the 
operating room [1], a trend towards manufacturer -independent 
medical device integration is in the rise [2]. The overall goals 
behind open medical device communication are [3, 4]  
 efficient information aggregation  
 increased procedure efficiency  
 time and cost reduction and  
 increased operation  quality.  
Typical applications for integrated medical devices 
include retrieval and archival of patient data in clinicalinformation  systems, mirroring sensor data (e.g. patient 
pulse, oxygen saturation etc.) into medical live -images, 
automated control of devices (e.g. based on navigation 
data) and many more.  
However, although technical requirements 
(bandwidth, latency, jitter) are met  by various industrial 
communication standards, European regulatory guidelines 
present novel obstacles. In Germany, operators of 
interconnected medical devices must prove conformity of 
the network in question with the General Requirements 
[5,6], which in t urn requires in -depth knowledge of every 
single network component. Hence, the mere technical 
possibility of cross -manufacturer data exchange does not 
imply its legal admissibility. 
Our aim is to introduce a novel method for the automated 
verification, whe ther a set of formalized requirements can be met 
by a given medical device network. The resulting toolbox aims 
at shifting the complexity of conformity assessment from lay 
operators back to component manufacturers.  
The rest of the article is organized as f ollows: In 
Section 2, we briefly depict the current situation regarding 
conformity assessment and point out the drawbacks of the 
state of the art. We then briefly sketch the description 
methodology in Section 3 – a detailled description with 
mathematical r igor is outside the scope of this paper. 
Section 4 presents a prototype implementation. In the end, 
we describe a first application in a real -life scenario and 
give an outlook for future developments.  
2 State of r esearch  
A noticeable amount of international research projects adresses  
the issues of medical device interconnection. In the German 
flagship project OR.Net, a hybrid network architecture 
consisting of a webservice -based framework for non -time-
critical data and a realtime framework for time -critical data was 
developed. The rea ltime framework Surgical Real Time Bus 
(SRTB), developed by the authors in [7, 8]  makes use of the 
Ethernet Powerlink (EPL) communication______  
*Corresponding author:  Max Dingler:  Insititute of Micro 
Technology and Medical Device Technology , Technical University 
of Munich, Boltzmannstraße 15, 85748 Garching , Germany,  
e-mail: max.dingler@tum.de  
Christian Dietz, Tim Lüth : Insititute of Micro Technology and 
Medical Device Tec hnology , Technical University of Munich, 
Boltzmannstraße 15, 85748 Garching , Germany,  
e-mail: christian. dietz@tum. de, tim.lueth@tum.de  

--- Page 2 ---
446
   
Figure 2: Minimal requirements regarding the e xpressiveness of 
the description methodology. It must comprise states and state 
transitions, data and data dependencies as well as control signals.  
Figure 3: Image of a simplified timed, extended finite automaton  
representation of the suction/irrigation pump.   standard that guarantees realtime  data transmission by use of the 
Time Division Multiple Access bus access scheme. It consists of 
one unique managing node  and an arbitrary number of 
controlled nodes (max. 100). Medical devices communicate over 
the network via so -called connectors that act as translators 
between the proprietary m edical device interfaces and the SRTB. 
Each connector is an EPL controlled node. The managing node 
synchronizes all controlled nodes and is responsible for the 
matching of data sources and sinks.  
While much attention is payed to technical 
interoperability  [9, 10],  little is known about admissibility of 
cross -manufacturer device networks.  
3 Approach  
The task of this work is the conception and implementation 
of a software toolbox for the efficient, automated 
requirements verification of the SRTB. Once implemented, 
we expect the toolbox to aid lay users in the correct (less 
errors) and fast (shorter tim e) requirements verification of a 
given network. The core idea behind the novel methodology 
is to model every single network component as a system of 
communicating automata. More precisely, each controlled 
node is modelled as two concurrently executed auto mata – 
one representing the EPL -Process and one representing the 
actual device behavior. Moreover, the managing node will be 
described as a single automaton executed concurrently with 
all controlled nodes.  Given a fixed data routing, the entire network is again 
described as a system of communicating automata that  can be 
analyzed with model checking techniques. Before 
introducing the description method, it is worth determining 
the required expressiveness of the description methodology. 
Fig. 1 shows a suction/irrigation pump used in every 
endoscopic intervention (>1  Mio. occurrences p.a. in 
Germany). It has an On/Off button, various buttons for 
control signals and a display to show the current flowrate. 
Before operation, the pump must be initialized via a 
dedicated button. Once initialized, a simple on/off footswitch  
activates the pump, which in turn extracts liquid with the 
desired flowrate. This description reveals that the minimum 
set of elements needed to describe consists of  
 States (e.g. on/off)  
 State Transitions (e.g. off ->on->initialized ->active)  
 Data (e.g. de sired flowrate)  
 Functional data dependencies (e.g. actual flowrate is a 
function of input signal and desired flowrate)  
 Control Signals  
In addition, the EPL communication technology requires  
 Synchronization signals (start of cycle, poll request, poll 
response)  
 Timing (cycle length, response times)  
Figure 1: Simp lified version of the SRTB. Medical devices and 
equipment are connected to the open communication bus via 
connectors. The Managing Node is responsible for the 
synchronization and data routing.  


--- Page 3 ---
Hence, the description methodology we chose are Timed, 
Extended Finite Automata (TEFA). While the formal 
introduction is out of the scope of this paper (cf  [11]), a 
typical automaton of this class is depicted in Fig. 2. The 
figure shows a simplified version of a suction/irrigation 
pump. The semantics is as follows: The pump starts in the 
OFF state. Upon receipt of the ON! and INIT! signal, it 
changes to the INITIALIZED state. Once the input variable 
“incoming_pedal_val” is parsed and evaluated as valid 
(pedal_val[1] -bit), the pump realizes the desired flowrate.  
Once each system component is described as above (by 
the manufacturer), the entire system can be a nalyzed by use 
of  model -checking techniques.  
Among all requirements specification languages, Timed 
Computation Tree Logic  (TCTL) appears most apt for our 
applications.  
4 Implementation  
Exemplarily, we implemented the novel methodology with 
Matlab and UPPA AL [12]. The devices descriptions (edited 
by the respective device manufacturer) are simple ASCII text 
files, containing comma -separated arrays that represent the 
upper elements in a standardized fashion.  
The device description files are read by Matlab and  
parsed into device structs (one per device). Once finished, the 
Stateflow Generator generates a Stateflow -Chart for each 
device. The user can then edit the signal routing (as in [13]). 
Once finished, the system specification is computed and 
written into a  UPPAAL -readable XML -File.  
The requirements specification is edited by both the 
manufacturers of a given device (technical requirements such 
as max. latency – part of the description file), as well as the system operator (intervention -specific, clinical r equirements 
– separate specification file) formulated as TCTL -formulae.  
5 Example use -case 
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) publishes  
user experiences with faulty devices in their publically 
accessible MAUDE (Manufacturer and User Facility Device 
Experience) database. On the 6th of march, a professional 
user issued the following occurrence: A footswitch  was  used 
to activate a device  delivering rf energy.  After  the surgeon 
released the footswitch pedal , the device continued to deliver 
rf energy for more than 3 seconds.  Fortunately, no 
unintended tissue damage was experienced [14].  
This type of issue is representative for a greater class  of 
issues known as “real time requirements” that led to the 
development of a hybrid network architecture in the OR.Net 
project. Guarantees that safety -critical control signals arrive 
within predefined time boundaries are of vital importance in 
medical app lications. We evaluated our approach in a similar 
usecase with a surgical suction/irrigation pump.  
The requirement we layed down was: “Whenever the 
surgeon releases the footswitch, the pump will turn off within 
50 ms”. Depending on the nomenclature, this may reduce to 
the formula  
 
                                            
 
As it turned out, the very first implementation of the 
SRTB did not satisfy the upper TCTL -formula, because it 
relied on the EPL connection to never fail. Hence, the pump 
connector wa s programmed to always use the last incoming 
pedal value transmitted via EPL to control the device. 
However, should the SRTB fail (e.g. due to a pulled out wire) 
while the pump was active, the pump would continue 
operation even if the surgeon stepped down from the pedal.  
The sequence of steps to induce a requirement violation 
hence is:  
1. step on the footswitch  
2. the pump is activated  
3. interrupt the connection  
4. step down from the pedal and leave connection 
interrupted  
A simple re -design of the pump connector solved the 
issue: A timer now watches over the EPL stack. Should the 
time span between two incoming control values exceed 15 
ms, the pump will automatically turn off. Re -verification of 
the novel connector design now proves that the requirement 
can be met even in the event of network failure.  Figure 4: Overview over all components of the automated 
verification methodology.  


--- Page 4 ---
448
   
6 Conclusion and o utlook  
We introduced a toolbox that allows fast verification of on -
demand medical device networks. The system aims at 
allowing a faster and more correct risk assessment of medical 
device networks by lay users. By using our method, part of 
the Know -How required to  assess hazardous situations is 
transferred back from the operator to the manufacturer. The 
required description method is based on timed, extended 
finite automata. Compliant description files are simple ASCI 
text files and by parsing the files, a model of  the entire 
system and its interactions can be generated automatically. 
The user can simulate the resulting system and formally 
verify a given set of requirements that are formulated as 
TCTL formulae. However, while the toolbox may be helpful 
in detecting hazardous situations, the overall risk assessment 
remains a challenging task. First, because not all 
requirements can be formulated as TCTL formulae ([15]) and 
second, because even if the toolbox directly pointed at 
possibly mitigating measures, the lay us er will not be able to 
implement any of them himself. Hence, further risk 
management methods are required.   
 
Author’s Statement  
Research funding: This work was funded by the German 
Federal Ministry of Education and Research in the context of 
the OR.Net pro ject. Conflict of interest: Authors state no 
conflict of interest. Informed consent: Informed consent is 
not applicable.  Ethical approval: The conducted research is 
not related to either human or animals use.  
References  
[1] Langkafel P. Informationstechnologie und 
Risikomanagement. In: Euteneier A, editor. Handbuch 
Klinisches Risikomanagement. Grundlagen, Konzepte, 
Lösungen – medizinisch, ökonomisch, juristisch. 1st ed. 
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer 2015.  
[2] Ahlbrandt J, Röhrig R , Dehm J, Wrede C, Imhoff M. 
Risikomanagement für medizinische Netzwerke in der 
Intensiv - und Notfallmedizin. Gemeinsames Positionspapier 
zur Norm IEC 80001 -1. GMS Medizinische Informatik 2013;  
[3] Wallwiener D, Wallwiener M, Krämer, B, Abele H, Rothmund 
R, Be cker, S, Zubke W, Brucker S. Integrierte OP -Systeme 
(IOPS) als Basis für innovative Operationsverfahren in der 
Gynäkologie. Der Gynäkologe, 2011; 44(3):187 -195. [4] Irion K, Leonhard, M. Endoskopie. In: Kramme, R, editor. 
Medizintechnik. Verfahren – Systeme  – 
Informationsverarbeitung. 5th ed. Berlin: Springer 2017.  
[5] Council of the European Communities. Council Directive 
93/42/EEC of 14 June 1993 Concerning Medical Devices, 
1993.  
[6] Medizinprodukte -Verordnung vom 20. Dezember 2001, die 
zuletzt durch Artikel 2 der Verordnung vom 10. Mail 2010 
(BGBI, I, S .542) geändert worden ist, 2001.  
[7] Pfeiffer JH, Dingler ME, Dietz C, Lueth TC. Requirements 
and Architecture Design for Open Real -Time C ommunication 
in the Operating Room. In: Proc. of the IEEE International 
Conference on Robotics and Biomimetics (ROBIO), IEEE, 
2015: 458 -463. 
[8] Lueddemann T, Pfeiffer JH, Dingler ME, Dietz C, Lueth TC. 
Verbundabschlussbericht OR.NET - Sichere Dynamische 
Vernetzung in Operationsaal Und Klinik ., Munich; 2016.  
[9] Kasparick M, Schlichting S, Golatowski F, Timmermann D. 
New IEEE 11073 Standards for Safe and Interoperable 
Medical Device Communication. In: Proc. Of the IEEE 
International Conference on Standards for  Communications 
and Networking (CSCN’15), 2015: 223 -228. 
[10] Andersen B, Kasparick M, Golatowski F, Ingenerf J. 
Extending the IEEE 11073 -1010X Nomenclature for the 
Modelling of Surgical Devices. In: Proc. Of the IEEE 
International Conference on Biomedical and Health 
Informatics (BHI), 2016: 244 -247. 
[11] Pajic M, Jiang Z, Lee I, Sokolsk O, Mangharam  R. Safety -
Critical Medical Device Development Using the UPP2SF 
Model Translation Tool. In: Special Issue on Real -Time and 
Embedded Technology and Applications, Domain -Specific 
Multicore Computing, Cross -Layer Dependable Embedded 
Systems and Application of Concurrency to System Design 
(ACSD’13), 2013.  
[12] Behrmann G, David A, Larsen KG. A Tutorial on UPPAAL. In: 
Formal Methods for the Design of Real -Time Systems. 
Springer 2004 : 200 -236 
[13] Dingler ME, Dietz C, Pfeiffer JH, Lueddemann T, Lueth TC. A 
Framework for Automatic Testing of Medical Device 
Compatibility. In: Proc. Of the 13th IEEE International 
Conference on Telecomunications (ConTel), 2015: 1 -8.  
[14] FDA. MAUDE Report Number 1226420 -2016 -00087. online, 
August 2016b.Ge Q, Filip L, Bai A, Nguyen T, Eisen HN, 
Chen J. Inhibition of influenza virus production in virus -
infected mice by RNA interference. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 
2004;101:8676 –8681.  
 Lee I, Sokol sky O, Chen S, Hatcliff J, Jee E, Kim B, King A, 
Mullen M, Park S, Roederer A, Venkatasubramanian KK. 
Challenges and Research Directions in Medical Cyber -
Physical Systems. In: Proc. Of the IEEE, 2012: 100:75 -90
