--- Page 1 ---
Qianqian Lin, Shuling Wang, Bohua Zhan, Bin Gu. Modelling and Verication of the RTPS Protocol Using UPPAAL
and Simulink/Stateow. JOURNAL OF COMPUTER SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 33(1): 1{27 July 2020. DOI
10.1007/s11390-015-0000-0
Modelling and Verication of the Real-Time Publish and Subscribe
Protocol using UPPAAL and Simulink/Stateow
Qianqian Lin1, Shuling Wang1;, Member, CCF, Bohua Zhan1;, Member, CCF, and Bin Gu2;
, Member, CCF
1State Key Laboratory of Computer Science, Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China
2Beijing Institute of Control Engineering, Beijing 100081, China
E-mail: linqq@ios.ac.cn; wangsl@ios.ac.cn; bzhan@ios.ac.cn; gubinbj@sina.com
Received April 11, 2020; revised September 10, 2020.
Abstract Real-Time Publish and Subscribe (RTPS) protocol is a protocol for implementing message exchange over an
unreliable transport in the Data Distribution Service (DDS). Formal modelling and verication of the protocol provide
stronger guarantees of its correctness and eciency than testing alone. In this paper, we build formal models for the RTPS
protocol using Uppaal and Simulink/Stateow. Modelling using Simulink/Stateow allows analyzing the protocol through
simulation, as well as generating executable code. Modelling using Uppaal allows us to verify properties of the model stated
in TCTL (Timed Computation Tree Logic), as well as estimating its performance using statistical model checking. We
further describe a procedure for translation from Stateow to timed automata, where a subset of major features in Stateow
is supported, and prove the soundness statement that the Stateow model is a renement of the translated timed automata
model. As a consequence, any property in a certain fragment of TCTL that we have veried for the timed automata model
inUppaal is preserved for the original Stateow model.
Keywords Real-Time Publish and Subscribe (RTPS), modelling, verication, UPPAAL, Simulink/Stateow
1 Introduction
Data Distribution Service (DDS) [1] is a portable
middleware technology which provides an interface of
information transmission among applications and op-
erating systems. Adopting the Publish/Subscribe ar-
chitecture, DDS takes data as the center, and provides
rich QoS (quality of service) strategy to realize data
management and data sharing in the whole network
[2]. It is widely used in aerospace and national defense
elds requiring high performance, predictability and ef-
fective use of resources. The Real-Time Publish andSubscribe (RTPS) protocol [3, 4] has been standard-
ized by the OMG (Object Management Group) as an
interoperability protocol implemented using DDS. The
protocol species requirements that any implementa-
tion must satisfy in order to be interoperable with each
other. These include the structure of entities involved
in the conversation network, format for messages and
how they are exchanged, and a mechanism for discover-
ing other participants. The protocol allows exibility in
the implementation, including the choice of best-eort
or reliable communication, and how much state to keep
at the endpoints.
Regular Paper
This work was partially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant Nos. 61625206, 61972385 and
61732001, and by Chinese Academy of Sciences Pioneer Hundred Talents Program under grant No. Y9RC585036.
Corresponding Author
©Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences & Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2020

--- Page 2 ---
2 J. Comput. Sci. & Technol., January 2018, Vol., No.
In this paper, we build formal models for the RTP-
S protocol using Simulink/Stateow and Uppaal . The
models describe detailed behaviors specied by the pro-
tocol, including its real-time and probabilistic aspects.
To avoid making the model overly complex, some as-
pects of the protocol are not considered, as described
in detail in the body of the paper. Such modelling al-
lows the protocol to be analyzed by simulation, as well
as rigorous verication using model checking. It also al-
lows automatic code generation to implementations of
the protocol. This provides stronger guarantees for the
correctness and eciency of the protocol than testing
alone.
Simulink/Stateow1is a de-facto standard in mod-
elling, analysis, and design of embedded systems. It
provides a strong numerical simulation engine. Mean-
while, the built-in Simulink Coder supports C/C++
code generation from Simulink/Stateow models. How-
ever, due to the incomplete coverage of numerical sim-
ulation, the correctness of the models cannot be fully
guaranteed. Uppaal [5, 6] is an integrated tool en-
vironment for modelling, validation and verication of
real-time systems modelled as networks of timed au-
tomata (TA). It allows model checking of specications
written in Timed Computation Tree Logic (TCTL), as
well as statistical model checking of specications in
Metric Interval Temporal Logic (MITL).
We will take full advantage of both Simulink/State-
ow and Uppaal . First, we model the RTPS protocol
as Stateow charts and analyze its behavior using simu-
lation. Second, we provide a translation from Stateow
models to Uppaal timed automata, and prove formally
that the original Stateow model is a renement of the
translated TA model. Thus, any property in a certain
fragment of TCTL that holds for the TA model must
also hold for the original Stateow model. Third, weverify using Uppaal the correctness of the TA model
according to the RTPS specication. As a consequence,
the original Stateow model is also veried. We also
estimate the performance of the TA model using statis-
tical model checking. Finally, we generate C code from
the Stateow model using Simulink Coder. The execu-
tion of the generated code agrees with the simulation
and the description of the protocol.
Using the above approach, we verify several impor-
tant properties of the RTPS protocol. They include:
the writers and readers send and receive data in a con-
sistent and sequential way; and the heartbeat and ac-
knowledgement mechanisms work correctly to ensure
reliable communication. Moreover, using statistical
model checking, we determine the quantitative prop-
erties of the protocol. In particular, we estimate the
probability of nishing the transmission of some xed
input data within a certain time limit, as a function
of the communication failure rate, as well as various
delay times in the model. This shows the potential of
the formal model to provide guidance on the tuning of
parameters when deploying an implementation.
After presenting the related work in Section 2, the
rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 3 we
review some preliminaries, including the RTPS proto-
col, Simulink/Stateow, and Uppaal . In Section 4 we
describe the model of the RTPS protocol as Stateow
charts. In Section 5, we present the procedure to trans-
late Stateow charts to timed automata and formally
prove the soundness of the translation. In Section 6 we
verify various properties of the protocol using (statisti-
cal) model checking. Finally, we conclude the paper in
Section 7 with a discussion of future work.
1https://ww2.mathworks.cn/products/simulink.html.

--- Page 3 ---
Qianqian Lin et al. : Modelling and Verication of RTPS Protocol 3
2 Related Work
Analysis and verication of many aspects of DDS
have been explored in [7, 8, 9], including real-time per-
formance, security of DDS-based middleware, and so
on. Alaerjan et al. [10] dened the missing functional
behavior in the DDS dynamic model and the semantics
of the new behavior using Object Constraint Language
(OCL) [11]. The work by Liu et al. [12] mainly focused
on DDS in ROS2 to verify its security, activity and
priority. Yin et al. [13] modelled and veried the com-
munication dependability of the reliable StatefulWriter
module in RTPS using Communicating Sequential Pro-
cesses (CSP) [14, 15] and the model checker Process
Analysis Toolkit (PAT). It is based on a description of
data transmission to a single reader without data loss.
In contrast, our work considers the reliability of trans-
mission when data loss is allowed, as well as sending
data to multiple readers. We also model the history
cache in the writer and the reader separately. Finally,
our approach supports the automatic generation of C
code, and through statistical model checking, the deter-
mination of the inuence of timing parameters on the
model performance.
Translations from Stateow (subsets) to Uppaal
have been addressed previously [16, 17]. Compared
with our work, they consider more advanced features
of Stateow, such as supertransition, event stack and
execution interruption mechanism. The resulting TAs
are quite complex, making them expensive to verify in
Uppaal . For example, each Stateow state is translat-
ed to four cooperative parallel automata in [16]. More-
over, no formal guarantee is provided for the correctness
of the translation. As a result, whether the properties
proved for the TA is preserved for the Stateow model is
not ensured. In this paper, we consider a more limited
subset of Stateow that is sucient for modelling andanalyzing real-time systems such as the RTPS proto-
col. This results in simpler translated TA models that
can be veried easily in Uppaal . We further prove for-
mally the correctness of the translation based on the
simulation of transition semantics. The semantics of
Stateow or its translation to other formal languages
have also been studied in [18, 19, 20, 21].
3 Preliminaries
3.1 RTPS Protocol
The RTPS (Real-Time Publish and Subscribe) pro-
tocol species a mechanism for transmitting data be-
tween endpoints on top of the DDS wire protocol. Its
real-time aspect comes from allowing delays at various
stages of data transmission, with tunable constraints on
those delays. It also has a probabilistic aspect as it al-
lows unreliable communication channels, with a mech-
anism for maintaining reliable data transmission over
such channels. We will take all these behaviors into
consideration in the modelling and verication.
The protocol consists of two parts: the Platform
Independent Model (PIM) and the Platform Specif-
ic Models. The PIM species requirements that are
unrelated to the platform used for transmitting data.
It consists of four modules describing dierent aspect-
s of the protocol. The structure module describes the
structure of RTPS entities and the relationships among
them. The entities include domain, participants, end-
points (readers and writers), and the history cache. The
message module describes the format of messages and
their logical interpretation. The behavior module spec-
ies valid sequences of message exchanges between en-
tities. This is the part that we will mainly focus on in
this paper. The discovery module species how RTPS
endpoints are congured and paired with each other.
The behavior module includes several reference im-
plementations, allowing choices along two main dimen-

--- Page 4 ---
4 J. Comput. Sci. & Technol., January 2018, Vol., No.
sions: whether the communication is best-eort or reli-
able, and what states the readers and writers maintain
about the available messages. We focus on the most
complex (and interesting) combination: reliable com-
munication while maintaining state about all available
messages. Following the protocol document, we call the
modelled entities Reliable StatefulWriter and Reliable
StatefulReader.
Fig.1. High-level overview of the message exchange according to
the RTPS protocol.
Fig. 1 gives a high-level overview of how messages
are exchanged according to the RTPS protocol. Each
DDS Writer and each DDS Reader are paired with an
RTPS Writer and RTPS Reader, respectively. Each
RTPS Writer and each RTPS Reader contain a Histo-
ryCache, which maintains a number of CacheChange
objects. The RTPS Writer and the RTPS Reader al-
so maintain state recording the status of each available
message (sent, received, acknowledged, etc.). The aim
is to transfer data from the DDS Writer (publisher) to
the DDS Reader (subscriber). The transfer consists of
several steps.
1. For each new message, the DDS Writer adds the
message as a CacheChange to the HistoryCache
of its associated RTPS Writer.
2. When there are unsent CacheChanges in the His-toryCache, the RTPS Writer attempts to send
them to each of the matched readers. Note the
messages may be lost as we do not assume the
communication channel is completely reliable.
3. The RTPS Writer expects each reader to acknowl-
edge receipt of the messages. As long as there
are messages that are unacknowledged, it sends
heartbeat messages at regular intervals to each of
the readers.
4. The RTPS Reader, on receiving a data message,
updates its HistoryCache. On receiving a heart-
beat message, it may respond by acknowledging
receipt of messages or signal that some of the mes-
sages are not received, using an acknack message.
5. The RTPS Writer, on receiving a response from
the reader signalling that some messages are not
received, re-sends the relevant messages. This
continues until all messages are acknowledged.
6. Finally, the DDS Reader requests messages from
its associated RTPS Reader, reading from its His-
toryCache.
The RTPS protocol species a period for heartbeat-
s and allows delayed responses to heartbeats and ac-
knowledgements. In the implementation, the end-user
can tune these timing characteristics according to ap-
plication requirements, deployment conguration and
underlying transports. Some of the tunable parameters
are listed in Table 1.
The above behaviors will be modelled in Section 4,
including the timing properties and the possible failures
of the communication channel. On the other hand, to
avoid making the model overly complex, the following
aspects of the RTPS protocol are not considered in this
paper: sending data by dividing into several fragments,

--- Page 5 ---
Qianqian Lin et al. : Modelling and Verication of RTPS Protocol 5
Table 1 . Tuning parameters in the RTPS protocol
Parameter Scope Meaning
heartbeatPeriod RTPS Writer The period for the RTPS Writer to repeatedly announce the availability of
data by sending a heartbeat message.
nackResponseDelay RTPS Writer The delay for the RTPS Writer to respond to a request for data from a
negative acknowledgment.
heartbeatResponseDelay RTPS Reader The delay for the RTPS Reader to send a positive or negative acknowledgment.
and heartbeat/acknowledgement protocol for data frag-
ments; relaying of messages, and the associated pro-
tocol for specifying source, destination, and reply ad-
dresses in a message; protocol for discovering new par-
ticipants, as specied in the discovery module; behavior
specic to the platform used, as given in Platform Spe-
cic Models.
3.2 Simulink/Stateow
Simulink is an environment for model-based devel-
opment of embedded systems. It provides a rich set
of xed-step and variable-step solvers for simulating
system models. Moreover, Simulink supports the gen-
eration of executable C/C++ code using the built-in
Simulink Coder. Therefore, after a Simulink model is
built, we can analyze its behavior by simulation rst,
and then use Simulink Coder to produce C/C++ code,
whose execution should have the same behavior as sim-
ulations of the model.
Stateow is a toolbox of Simulink, adding facilities
for modelling and simulating reactive systems in the for-
m of statecharts. It can be dened as Simulink blocks,
fed with Simulink inputs and producing Simulink out-
puts. A Stateow chart is composed of transitions, s-
tates and junctions. Each transition is labelled with
E[C]fcActg=tAct, whereEis an event, Cis the con-
dition, cAct the condition action, and tAct the transi-
tion action. The event Etriggers the transition to take
place, provided that the condition Cis true, the action
cAct will be executed immediately, while tAct will be
executed when a valid transition path reaching a targetstate is completed. A state is labelled by three optional
types of actions: entry action, during action, and ex-
it action. Directed event broadcasting is supported by
Stateow, which has the form send( e;S), where event
eis broadcast to state Sand its substates. Stateow
supports construction of ow charts using connective
junctions and transitions, which can be used between
states to specify decision logics in transition networks.
Stateow charts are organized as hierarchical dia-
grams: Or diagram, for which the states are mutually
exclusive and only one state becomes active at a time,
and And diagram, for which the states are parallel and
all of them become active simultaneously. Although
Stateow allows multiple transitions originating from
a state, as well as multiple parallel states in an And
diagram, its behavior is deterministic, by assigning d-
ierent priorities to transitions and states. The State-
ow charts are activated by triggering events from the
outside Simulink diagram, or at specied rates corre-
sponding to the sample times. We make use of the
second case in the modelling in this paper.
3.3 UPPAAL
Uppaal is a toolbox for modelling and analysis of
real-time systems, modelled as networks of timed au-
tomata (TA) [22].
Formally, a timed automaton is a tuple
(L;l0;C;A;E;I ), whereLis a set of locations, l02L
the initial location, Cthe set of clocks, Athe
set of actions, co-actions and the internal -action,
ELAB(C)2CLthe set of edges between

--- Page 6 ---
6 J. Comput. Sci. & Technol., January 2018, Vol., No.
locations with an action, a guard and a set of clocks
to be reset, and I:L!B(C) assigns invariants to
locations. The semantics can be dened as a labelled
transition system hS;s0;!i, whereSLRCis
the set of states, s0= (l0;u0) is the initial state, and
!S(R0[A)Sis the transition relation such
that
•(l;u)d !(l;u+d) if8d0: 0d0d)u+d02
I(l);
•(l;u)a !(l0;u0) if there exists e= (l;a;g;r;l0)2E
such thatu2g;u0= [r7!0]uandu02I(l0),
which correspond to time progress and action execu-
tion, respectively.
InUppaal , the TAs synchronise with each other us-
ing channels which carry no data values. Asynchronous
communication is provided by broadcast channels. The
sender of a broadcast channel is never blocked, and the
message can be received by 0, 1, or multiple receivers.
Committed and urgent locations are supported, which
must be exited without passage of time. Finally, more
general predicates involving shared variables are per-
mitted as guards of transitions.
Uppaal uses a simplied version of TCTL [23] to
express requirement specications. It also supports s-
tatistical model checking (SMC) [9, 24] in the Uppaal
SMC extension. Uppaal SMC avoids the construction
of the full state space, thus avoiding the state explo-
sion problem. It checks properties by performing a cer-
tain number of simulation runs and then uses statistical
techniques to estimate the probability that each prop-
erty is satised. The use of SMC introduces certain re-
strictions on the timed automata, for example allowing
only broadcast synchronisations. The language used to
express properties to be checked by SMC is an extension
of metric interval temporal logic (MITL) [9, 25]. Gener-
al queries are in the form Pr[(clock|step num|void)<= bound] , representing the probability that  is sat-
ised before the clock or step number reaches the given
bound.
4 Modelling and Simulation Using Stateow
In this section, we describe the modelling and sim-
ulation of the RTPS protocol using Stateow. We con-
sider the case with one RTPS Writer and two matched
RTPS Readers. The model consists of three kinds of
charts: Channel models a communication channel with
possible message loss; RTPS Writer models a Reliable
StatefulWriter; and RTPS Reader models a Reliable
StatefulReader.
4.1 Messages
There are three kinds of messages in our model:
MSG data,MSG heartbeat and MSG acknack . For each
kind of messages, we dene in Stateow a multi-
dimensional array storing the transmitted messages.
The arrays corresponding to the three kinds of messages
arebuer data,buer heartbeat , and buer acknack ,
respectively. When a message needs to be sent, the S-
tateow model triggers a corresponding event, and at
the same time modies the buer associated to that
kind of message.
Data message MSG datarepresents data-change sen-
t from writers to readers, as well as gap information
to notify that certain sequence numbers of data are no
longer relevant. The structure of MSG datais as follows:
MSG data= (WriterId;ReaderId;WriterSN;Data )
The elds WriterId and ReaderId identify the sender
and the receiver of the data-change respectively.
WriterSN is a sequence number that uniquely identies
the change. Data represents the data to be transmitted.
We choose to represent data and gap messages u-
niformly as MSG data, with gap messages indicated by

--- Page 7 ---
Qianqian Lin et al. : Modelling and Verication of RTPS Protocol 7
setting1 to eld Data , and data messages assumed
to be non-negative numbers. This is a simplication
compared with the original protocol, where gaps form
a separate kind of messages and may indicate a whole
range of sequence numbers to be no longer relevant.
Heartbeat message The heartbeat and liveliness
mechanisms are implemented using MSG heartbeat mes-
sages. The structure of MSG heartbeat is as follows:
MSG heartbeat = (WriterId;ReaderId;FinalFlag;
LivelinessFlag ;FirstSN;LastSN )
The eld FinalFlag indicates whether the reader is re-
quired to respond to the heartbeat message. The eld
LivelinessFlag indicates whether the DDS DataWriter
associated with the RTPS Writer has manually asserted
its liveliness. The FirstSN and LastSN elds identify
the rst (lowest) sequence number and the last (high-
est) sequence number that are available in the writer.
The functions setFinal Flag(),setLiveliness Flag()
and setheartbeatSN () are used to update information
according to the current status of the RTPS Writer
while the function getheartbeat () reads the relevant in-
formation from the array buer heartbeat on behalf of
the RTPS Reader.
Acknack message To implement the acknowledge-
ment mechanism, MSG acknack is used to communicate
the state of an RTPS Reader to an RTPS Writer, in-
forming both positive and negative acknowledgments.
The structure of the message is as follows:
MSG acknack = (WriterId;ReaderId;
AckNum;NackNum )
AckNum is the last sequence number the reader has re-
ceived continuously and NackNum is the last sequence
number that is available (as indicated through heart-
beat messages) but still missing in the reader. Here
we make some simplications to the original acknackmechanism, where the set of missing sequence num-
bers is described by a sequence of bits. On the RTP-
S Writer side, every time the writer receives the mes-
sage, getacknack () is used to get information includ-
ingAckNum and NackNum from the message. On the
RTPS Reader side, the message is built using the func-
tion setacknack ().
4.2 Channels
The Stateow chart Channel models the possibili-
ty of losing a message in the communication channel,
as well as a time delay when (successfully) sending a
message. Fig. 2 shows the chart for the case of send-
ing data messages from the writer to two readers. The
locations tryand next represent the waiting state and
the state after attempting to send to the rst reader,
respectively. On receiving the event TRY indicating
an attempt to send a message, the function channel ()
is used to determine whether the message is lost. It
returns 1 with probability PassingRate , and 0 other-
wise. If the message is not lost, the SUCCESS event is
sent to the corresponding RTPS Reader after delaying
a random amount of time, as computed by the func-
tion delay (), which returns a value uniformly between
0 and MaximumTransmissionDelay . The delay behav-
ior is modelled in Stateow using the after operator.
There is one Channel ichart for each sequence num-
beriin order to achieve concurrency when sending mes-
sages.

--- Page 8 ---
8 J. Comput. Sci. & Technol., January 2018, Vol., No.
Fig.2. Stateow model of channel for sending data.
Similarly, we can model the possibility of losing
heartbeat or acknack messages using a channel mod-
el. Fig. 3 shows the case for heartbeat. It rst re-
ceives the HEARTBEAT message from the writer, but
only with probability computed by channel (), the mes-
sage HEARTBEAT2 is successfully sent to the reader,
after delaying a random amount of time as computed
bydelay ().
Fig.3. Stateow model of channel for sending heartbeat.
4.3 RTPS Writer
As shown in Fig. 4, the behavior of the reliable S-
tatefulWriter is described by an AND diagram consist-
ing of two charts: Writer send and Writer repair .
The Writer send chart handles sending data for the
rst time. It consists of three states: announcing ,idle
and pushing . Here pushing indicates the writer is in
the process of sending data, announcing indicates the
writer has nished sending the available data, and isperiodically sending HEARTBEAT events, idleindicates
that positive acknowledgements for all messages are re-
ceived, hence the writer is idle. From the announcing
state, the transition to pushing is triggered by the guard
condition [ acked all() == false && empty () == false],
indicating that there are some changes, represented by
the array unsent , in the RTPS Writer HistoryCache
that have not been sent to the RTPS Reader. The
transition from announcing toidleis triggered by the
guard condition [ acked all() == true], indicating that
all changes are received and acknowledged by the read-
er and there are no new available changes in the RTPS
Writer HistoryCache. Once [ acked all() == false] hold-
s, the writer will return to the announcing state. On the
pushing state, every time the condition [ cansend ==
true] is satised, the unsent CacheChanges are sen-
t by the TRY event in the order of sequence num-
ber and the values of buer data are updated by the
function setmessage (). The function select channel ()
is used to choose the channel used to send messages
by their sequence numbers. The transition from push-
ingtoannouncing is triggered by the guard condition
[empty () == true] indicating that all changes in the
RTPS Writer HistoryCache have been sent to the RTP-
S Reader. Note that this does not mean all changes
have been received, only that there has been an attempt
made to send all of them.
The Writer repair chart handles re-sending data af-
ter negative acknowledgements. It consists of three s-
tates: waiting ,must repair and repairing . Here waiting
is the default state, must repair indicates that a neg-
ative acknowledgement is received, and data must be
re-sent after some delay, repairing indicates the writ-
er is in the process of re-sending data. The state
enis an internal state of must repair for correct mod-
elling of timing constraints. On both the waiting and
enstate, there is a self-loop transition, triggered by

--- Page 9 ---
Qianqian Lin et al. : Modelling and Verication of RTPS Protocol 9
Fig.4. Stateow model of RTPS writer.
the reception of ACKNACK2 from the RTPS Reader,
and as a consequence, the Writer will update the lo-
cal variables acked num and request num by the infor-
mation in buer acknack . Once the guard condition
[request num>acked num] is satised indicating that
there are changes that have been requested by the RTP-
S Reader, it enters the must repair state from the wait-
ingstate. The transition from must repair torepairing
is triggered by the ring of a timer indicating that a
duration of nackResponseDelay has elapsed since the
state must repair was entered. On the repairing state,
the writer will send the requested changes in the Writ-
er's HistoryCache and update the values in buer data
in the order of sequence number from the next of the
acked num torequest num as long as [ cansend ==
true] is satised. If the repair action is completed, the
guard condition [ repair num>request num] is satis-
ed and it returns to the waiting state.4.4 RTPS Reader
As shown in Fig. 5, the behavior of the Reliable S-
tatefulReader is described by an AND diagram consist-
ing of two charts: Reader receive andReader response .
The Reader receive chart has only one state ready
for receiving messages from the RTPS Writer. Once
the event SUCCESS arrives, the sequence number of the
data/gap message is read by the Reader's HistoryCache
from buer data, and received num and missing num
are recomputed. If the event HEARTBEAT2 arrives, the
variable missing num is updated.
The Reader response chart handles sending of ack-
nack messages. It consists of three states: waiting ,
must send ackand may send ack. The waiting state is
the initial state and the transition to other states is
triggered by the reception of a HEARTBEAT2 event.
The middle junction determines whether must send ack
(indicating that acknack message should be sent in all

--- Page 10 ---
10 J. Comput. Sci. & Technol., January 2018, Vol., No.
Fig.5. Stateow model of RTPS reader.
cases) or may send ack(indicating that acknack mes-
sage should be sent only if some messages are missing)
should be entered. There are three dierent cases orig-
inating from the middle junction. If the FinalFlag in
buer heartbeat is not set, then it enters must send ack.
Otherwise, if the FinalFlag is set, and if the Liveliness-
Flag in the buer heartbeat is also set (indicating that
the DDS DataWriter associated with the RTPS Writer
of the message has manually asserted its liveliness using
the appropriate DDS operation), it returns to the wait-
ingstate. The state may send ackis entered when the
FinalFlag is set and the LivelinessFlag is not set. On
the state must send ack, the Reader must send ACK-
NACK to the Writer after a delay dened by nackRe-
sponseDelay . When the transition executes, the ack-
nack message is updated by setting received num and
missing num in the setacknack function, and the state
waiting is entered. On the state may send ack, the tran-
sition to must send ackstate is triggered by the guard
condition [ missing num>received num], and the tran-
sition to waiting state is triggered by the guard condi-tion [ missing numreceived num] indicating that all
available changes in the RTPS Writer are already re-
ceived.
4.5 Implementation and Simulation
The entire Stateow model for the RTPS protocol is
composed of the above components. Note there is one
copy of the RTPS Writer diagram and RTPS Reader
diagram presented in Fig. 4 and Fig. 5 for each writer
and reader, respectively, and one copy of channel di-
agram for each sequence number of data messages, as
well as for the heartbeat and acknack messages.
For simulation, we consider the model including
one RTPS Writer and two RTPS Readers. The
list of data changes to be transmitted is stored in
the array cachechanges , APublisher sends data from
cachechanges to the RTPS Writer at random time in-
tervals by writing to the Writer's HistoryCache (WHC).
Once the RTPS Writer receives the data, it sends the
data to the matched RTPS Readers through the dier-
ent channels. The RTPS Readers write received data

--- Page 11 ---
Qianqian Lin et al. : Modelling and Verication of RTPS Protocol 11
to their respective Reader's HistoryCache (RHC). If a
data is initially available but becomes irrelevant later,
a gap message represented by 1 in the Data eld will
be re-transmitted.
Table 2. Parameter setting
Parameter Value
heartbeatPeriod 10 (s)
nackResponseDelay 10 (s)
heartbeatResponseDelay 5 (s)
PassingRate 0.5
MaximumTransmissionDelay 3 (s)
One simulation result is shown in Fig. 6. The
simulation duration is set to 200 sec and the array
cachechanges representing data to be transmitted is
set to [100;200;300;400;500]. Other parameters of the
model are set as in Table 2. From the simulation result-
s, it can be seen that the two readers received data at
dierent times, meaning that data is re-transmitted in
case of loss. Finally, the RTPS Writer has received the
Acked complete signal indicating that the transmission
of all available data has completed.
Finally, we use Simulink Coder to export C code
from the Stateow model. The result of execution of
the exported program is in agreement with that of the
above simulation.
Fig.6. Results of simulation. (a) WHC; (b) RHC 1; (c) RHC 2;
(d) Acked complete signal. The lines in WHC indicate when
each message is rst sent to the Readers. The lines in RHC 1
and RHC 2 indicate when each message is rst received by each
Reader. The line in Acked complete signal indicates the time
when all messages are acknowledged by all readers.
5 Translation: From Stateow Subset to TA in
UPPAAL
In Section 4, we built the Stateow model for the
RTPS protocol and analyzed its behavior by simula-
tion. In order to verify its correctness according to the
RTPS specication, we will rst translate the Stateow
model to an Uppaal TA model, and then verify the
translated TA model by model checking. We will prove
the soundness of the translation that the original State-
ow model is a renement of the translated TA model.
As stated in Proposition 2 later, this implies that all
properties in the universal fragment of untimed TCTL
that hold for the TA model also hold for the Stateow
model.
Stateow provides many complex features for mod-
elling systems, some of which do not have correspon-
dences in Uppaal . In this work, we consider the trans-
lation of a limited subset of features, that is adequate
for modelling real-time reactive systems such as the

--- Page 12 ---
12 J. Comput. Sci. & Technol., January 2018, Vol., No.
RTPS protocol. Supported features include hierarchical
states, junctions, transitions, actions including direct-
ed event broadcasting, and conditions including those
expressed in temporal logic. More advanced features
of Stateow, such as supertransitions (transitions that
cross multiple layers between states), early return logic
and the event interrupt, are not considered. Especially,
the execution of non-supertransitions will not cause the
change of context. This makes both the translation and
the translated TA much simpler, compared with [22], in
which a Stateow state with attached actions is trans-
lated to four cooperative parallel TAs.
Before presenting the translation rules, we introduce
some auxiliary functions. Given a state S, we dene
enS;durS;exSto represent the entry, during and exit
actions attached to Srespectively. Given a junction J,
we dene isTer (J) to indicate whether Jis a terminal
junction. Given a state or junction Sand transition
with priority k, we dene cond(S;k) and target (S;k)
to be the condition and target of the transition respec-
tively. During the execution, we maintain the following
variables for a state or junction S:source (S) is the
source of the previous executed transition that lead-
s to junction S,sourceSta (S) is the nearest source s-
tate (not junction) in the previous transition path that
leads to junction S,entry (S) with default value 0 rep-
resents whether the entry action of state Sis executed,
andclock (S) with default value 0 records the activation
time of state S. We also introduce ACT to record the
transition actions accumulated during the execution of
a transition path, with initial value skip.
5.1 Translating Stateow Charts
Both states and junctions exist in a Stateow chart,
so there are four cases for a transition: state to state, s-
tate to junction, junction to state, and junction to junc-
tion. We give the translation to TA for each case below.We rst assume that the conditions of all outgoing tran-
sitions from a state or junction are disjoint, then this
assumption is loosened at Section 5.1.4.
5.1.1 Translating a State
For a state S, assume there is an outgoing transi-
tion to a state S0, labelled by ( ev;c;ca;ta ), whereev
is the triggering event, cthe condition, cathe condi-
tion action, and tathe transition action. In the trans-
lation, we map Sto location UandS0to location
U0. The TA transition from UtoU0is dened with
eventev(the event translation is explained in detail
in the next part), guard c^entry (S), and an action
listca;exS; (ACT ;ta);clock (S0) = 0;enS0;entry (S0) =
1;ACT =skip. Here entry (S0) becomes true after the
entry action of S0executes. The action list means that,
when a state-to-state transition is enabled, the condi-
tion action will execute immediately, then the exit ac-
tion ofSexecutes, followed by the accumulated tran-
sition actions, and nally the target state is activated
and the entry action of the target state executes. When
entering a new state, the transition action ACT is reset
toskip.
FromUtoUitself, we rst add a transition to
execute the entry action, with guard :entry (S) and
action enS;entry (S) = 1, and then we add another
transition to execute the during action, with guard
entry (S)^:(cond(S;1)_:::_cond(S;n)) and action
durS;clock (S) =clock (S) + 1. It means that all of the
outgoing transitions of Sfailed to execute, and the dur-
ing action executes, the activation time of Sincreases
by 1. The substates of S(if there is any) will be exe-
cuted, which will be handled below.
If the transition is to a junction J, the translation
is very similar to the rst case, except that, the ac-
tion list from UtoU0will be changed to ca;ACT =
(ACT ;ta);source (U0) =U;sourceSta (U0) =U, i.e, the

--- Page 13 ---
Qianqian Lin et al. : Modelling and Verication of RTPS Protocol 13
transition path is still not complete, the source state is
not exiting, and the transition actions will continue to
be accumulated. The source of the transition and the
source state leading to this junction are updated.
If there is no decomposition inside S, by applying
the above translation process for each outgoing transi-
tion ofS, a TA is obtained for state S. If there is decom-
positionCinsideS, we rst introduce a boolean vari-
able during (S) with default value 0 to indicate whether
the during action is executed or not, and add guard
:during (S) and action during (S) = 1 to the during
transition from UtoU, and then we perform the fol-
lowing translation process:
1. Build the TA for the decomposition C, denoted
byUC; meanwhile, denote the TA for the parent
stateSbyUS.
2. Add a location ItoUS, and add a transition from
UtoI, with event in!, condition:(cond(S;1)_
_ cond(S;n))^during (S) indicating that the
execution will go to the inside chart Cafter the
during action executes; meanwhile, add a back
transition from ItoU. This means, the execu-
tion can always go back to the parent state, but it
only makes sense when there is enabled outgoing
transition for it;
3. For the outgoing transitions of Ucorresponding
to the original ones of Stateow, add event out!
to each of them. As a result, when some outgoing
transition is enabled, the event out! will broadcast
to the inside chart Cto transfer the execution
back toS;
4. Add a location OtoUC, and add a transition to
each initial location of UC, with event in? and
action during (S) = 0. The reception of in? will
transfer the execution from outside to inside. Foreach location ofUC, add a transition to Owith
eventout?, whose reception will transfer the ex-
ecution from inside to outside. Notice that the
occurrence of out! guarantees that some outgoing
transition of Sis enabled.
IfShas decomposition, then the entry and exit ac-
tions need to be extended to include the decomposition,
we omit the details here. In the following, for any s-
tateS,SdedenotesSand its decomposition, and exSde
andenSdethe sequence of exit actions of Sdein the re-
verse order of entering the decomposition and the entry
actions in the order of entering the decomposition.
By following the above translation process, we can
obtain the TA for a state with decomposition inside.
5.1.2 Translating a Junction
For a junction J, assume there is an outgoing
transition to a state S0. Similar to the previous
case, assume the transition is labelled by ( ev;c;ca;ta ),
and there are noutgoing transitions from J. In
the translation, we map Jto location UandS0to
locationU0. The TA transitions are dened sim-
ilarly to the rst case, except that: from Uto
U0, the guard is simply c, and the action list is
changed to be ca;exsourceSta(J) ; (ACT ;ta);clock (S0) =
0;enS0;entry (S0) = 1; ACT =skip, meaning that the
source state of current complete transition path will ex-
it. Moreover, we add a back transition from Uto its
previous location source(U) , with guard:(cond(J;1)_
_ cond(J;n))^:isTer (J). It means that if Jis not
terminal, and all of the outgoing transitions of Jfail to
execute, the execution backtracks to the previous state
(or junction). If Jis a terminal junction, then the ex-
ecution will terminate at J. The two transitions from
UtoUare not needed anymore for the junction case.
If the transition is to a junction J0, the trans-
lated TA is dened similarly to the third case,

--- Page 14 ---
14 J. Comput. Sci. & Technol., January 2018, Vol., No.
except that from UtoU0, the action list is
changed to be ca;ACT = (ACT ;ta);source (U0) =
U;sourceSta (U0) =sourceSta (U).
5.1.3 Translating Conditions, Actions and Events
Above we dene the translation of states and tran-
sitions for the four cases respectively. In most cases,
the conditions and actions of Stateow can be translat-
ed to Uppaal TA conditions and actions directly. In
particular, for the temporal logic conditions of State-
ow, there are two types: event-based and absolute-
time based. We can express them in TA by introducing
an extra counter to record the times that an event has
taken, or a clock to record the time that has passed.
For example, after (T;sec ) can be dened in TA by in-
troducing a new clock variable as follows: for the source
state, we introduce a new clock tand initialize it to be
0, then the transition with the condition after (T;sec ) is
guarded by tT, and meanwhile, we add the invariant
tTfor the source location.
For the directed event broadcast send( e;S), we rep-
resent it by a channel array e[id1::idk]! in TA, where idj
for 1jkare related indexes; in correspondence,
for the receiving event eof Stateow, it is represented
bye[id1::idk]? in TA.
Stateow allows probabilistic behavior in actions,
e.g, through function channel () in the chart Channel
(see Section 4.2). These can be expressed by probabilis-
tic transitions in TA. As an example, Fig. 7 gives the
TA model of Channel , in which both the event broad-
cast and the probabilistic behavior are involved.
Fig.7. The timed automata translated from channel.
5.1.4 Translating States with Non-disjoint Transitions
The above translation preserves the priority order
of the outgoing transitions of Stateow states, but un-
der the assumption that the transitions have disjoint
conditions. We loosen this restriction here. Instead
of representing events of Stateow by event broadcast-
ing in TA, we represent them by predicates. First of
all, for each event e, a boolean global variable gveis
introduced to represent whether it is available. Then
the transitions are modied as follows. Take the rst
transition case as an example, assume it has priority
numberk, and there are noutgoing transitions from
stateS, then obviously kn.
•If the transition from StoS0has no triggering
event (evis empty), then the guard from Uto
U0is changed to c^entry (S)^:((cond(S;1)^
eventP (S;1))__ (cond(S;k1)^eventP (S;k
1))), where eventP (S;i) denotes the boolean vari-
able corresponding to the event of transition i(if
it exists, otherwise true by default). For each
transition with priority iless thank,cond(S;i)^
eventP (S;i) denes the overall premise for it to
occur. The guard indicates that all transitions
with higher priority are not enabled. The action
list is same as before, if Sis not sending an event.

--- Page 15 ---
Qianqian Lin et al. : Modelling and Verication of RTPS Protocol 15
•IfSis sending an event e, then dene the tran-
sition from UtoU0with the same condition as
above, but the action list of the previous one
added bygve= 1 to make eavailable, and add
another transition from U0toU0with guard gve
and action gve= 0 to make event eunavailable.
•IfSis receiving event, i.e. evis not empty, change
the guard from UtoU0to bec^entry (S)^gvev^
:((cond(S;1)^eventP (S;1))__ (cond(S;k
1)^eventP (S;k1))), and the action list is the
same as before.
•FromUtoUitself, change the guard of the
transition for executing the during action to be
:((cond(S;1)^eventP (S;1))__ (cond(S;n)^
eventP (S;n))).
•From a non-terminal junction to its source, the
condition is strengthened in the same way.
Through this way of strengthening the guard for each
outgoing transition, all transitions from locations of TA
become disjoint, thus the priority order of transitions
in the original Stateow chart is preserved.
Example 1 In order to understand the translation
process, we select the module Writer repair in Fig. 4
for an illustration. It should be noticed that the outgo-
ing transitions for the states are disjoint. Fig. 8 gives
the translated TA for Writer repair . First, we repre-
sent the four states waiting ,must repair ,repairing and
enby four corresponding locations. As state enis an
internal state of state must repair , it is translated to
a separate TA. Locations inside and iniare added re-
spectively to coordinate the execution between the two
TAs.
The location must repair broadcast events in! and
out! in the transitions to locations inside and repairingrespectively. On the other hand, in the TA of state en,
there is a transition from location initoen, with trig-
gering event in?, and from enback to ini, there is a back
transition with triggering event out?. For both waiting
andenstates, the self-loop transitions are triggered by
event ACKNACK2 . It is represented by the broadcast
channel ACKNACK2 [wid][ackid]? in the TA model,
indicating the writer denoted by widis waiting for re-
ceiving event from the reader denoted by ackid. Sim-
ilarly, at the repairing state, select channel () plays the
role of selecting the transmission channel and sending
TRY event, which is represented by the broadcast chan-
nelTRY [wid][repairnum[id]]! in the TA model.
5.2 Soundness of the Translation
Now we consider the soundness of the translation
in the sense that the original Stateow model is a re-
nement of the translated TA model. We rst give
the semantics of the Stateow subset that is considered
in the translation. Then we present the statement of
the soundness theorem. The theorem is proved using
a simulation-based argument. The semantics of State-
ow dened below is a formalization of a subset of the
informal specication given in the document2.
Semantics of a Stateow subset First of all, we
dene the semantics of Stateow states, which is a set
of transition rules. Each conguration is ( S;v), whereS
is a state or a junction, and vis a valuation which maps
variables to their respective values. We use the same
functions and symbols for states or junctions dened at
the beginning of this section. The variables we record in
vinclude the variables occurring in the Stateow mod-
el, and the following auxiliary variables or arrays: gve,
during (S),source (S),sourceSta (S),ACT , and clock (S)
(same meaning as above). Given a state S, we dene
2Stateow User's Guide, 2016. http://www.mathworks.com/help/pdf doc/stateow.

--- Page 16 ---
16 J. Comput. Sci. & Technol., January 2018, Vol., No.
Fig.8. The TA Translated from Writer repair
trans (S;i) to represent the ith outgoing transition of S.
Given a valuation vand an action a, we use exec(a;v)
to represent the resulting valuation after executing a
from v. In particular, when ais a sending event, vsets
gveto 1.
In the following, Sdenotes a state or junction, and
it hasn0 outgoing transitions.
(1) (S;v)e !(t;v0), if there exists h > 0 such
that trans (S;h) = (e;c;ca;ta ) with target t,
v2c,:(v2(cond(S;1)^eventP (S;1))__
(cond(S;h1)^eventP (S;h1))) (the transitions
with higher priority than hare disabled), gveis
1,tis a junction, and v0=exec(ca;v)[ACT7!
(v(ACT );tc);source (t)7!S;sourceSta (t)7!A],
whereAisSifSis a state, otherwise sourceSta (S)
if it is a junction. Notice that ecan be empty.
This rule denes the case when the transition is
enabled and executed, leading to a junction. As
a result, the condition action executes, the tran-
sition action is put into the tail of ACT .
(2) (S;v) !(S;v0), if there exists event esuch that
v(gve) = 1, and v0=v[gve7!0]. The event is
disabled after it broadcasts to the chart.
(3) (S;v)e ! (t;v0), if there exists h > 0such that the conditions same to (1) case
hold, except for that, tis a state, and
v0=exec(ca;exAde;ACT ;ta;entde;v)[ACT7!
skip; clock (Ade)7!0], whereAisSifSis a s-
tate, otherwise sourceSta (S) if it is a junction.
The clocks recording the activation times of the
source state Aand its decomposition are reset to
0.
This rule denes the case that a valid transition
to a target state is performed, with the exit of the
source state and all its active substates and the
entry of the target state and its substates. The
transition actions accumulated will be executed.
For the new active state t, the transition action
list is initialized to empty. The source state Ade
and all the decomposition, and the junctions a-
long the path become inactive, and in correspon-
dence,tand its decomposition become active.
(4) (S;v)1 ! (S;v0), if:(v2(cond(S;1)^
eventP (S;1))__ (cond(S;n)^eventP (S;n))),
v(during (S)) is 0,Sis a state, and v0=
exec(dur; v)[during (S)7! 1;clock (S)7!
clock (S) + 1].
This rule indicates that, when there is no enabled

--- Page 17 ---
Qianqian Lin et al. : Modelling and Verication of RTPS Protocol 17
transition for a state S, then the during action
ofSwill execute instead. Every time the dur-
ing action is executed, the clock for recording the
activation time of Swill be increased by 1.
(5) (S;v) !(C;v[during (S)7!0]), if:(v2
(cond(S;1)^eventP (S;1))__ (cond(S;n)^
eventP (S;n))) and v(during (S)) is 1, and Cis the
outmost decomposition of S.
This rule indicates that, after the during action
ofSexecutes, the inside chart of Scontinues to
execute. Notice that Cmay be an And diagram,
whose transition rules are dened recursively be-
low.
(6) (S;v) !(source (S);v), if:(v2(cond(S;1)^
eventP (S;1))__ (cond(S;n)^eventP (S;n))),
andSis a non-terminal junction.
This rule indicates that, when there is no enabled
transition for a non-terminal junction, then it will
trace back to the previous state or junction. The
un-tested transitions of the previous one will be
executed. This can be guaranteed by introducing
a boolean variable for each transition leading to
a junction to indicate whether it is tested or not.
We omit this detail for simplicity.
(7) (S1;S2;v) !(S0
1;S0
2;v0), if there exist ( S1;v)e !
(S0
1;v1) and (S2;v) !(S0
2;v2) !(S0
2;v3) such
that v0=v1]v3,v2(gve) = 1 and v3=v2[gve7!
0].
This rule denes the synchronization behavior
based on directed event broadcasting. When a
state (i.e,S2) issues an event, it will broadcast to
a state which is ready to receive this event. Nor-
mally the two states are parallel, and the variables
are disjoint. The nal state v0is the disjoint union
ofv1and v3.Based on the above transition rules for executing s-
tates, the semantics of a given Stateow chart Dcan be
dened. If it is an And diagram, written as [ S1;;Sn],
the conguration denes parallel states ( S1;;Sn).
The rst rule denes the initialization, where all the
parallel states and their decompositions are entered:
(S1;;Sn;v0) !(S1;;Sn;v0
0)
where v0
0=exec(enS1de;;enSnde;v0). The second
rule denes the execution of states within one sample
time:
(S1;;Sn;v) !(p0
1;;p0
n;vn)
if there exist the transition paths for all Si's:
(S1;v) !(p1;v1);;(Sn;vn1) !(pn;vn)
wherepihas three cases: a state as a consequence of
the rst execution of the transition rule (3), or a ter-
minal junction, or still Siwhich has no other available
transitions to take except for time progress. For the
second case, p0
iispi(staying at the terminal junction),
while for other cases, p0
iis the corresponding outmost
active ancestor state. Notice that the entry actions of
allSi's are executed in a priority order. The same is
true for the execution of these states.
The case for an Or diagram is similar to executing
a state, we omit the detail here.
Until now, the semantics of a Stateow chart D
can be dened as a transition system ( Q; !;Q0;V),
whereQ= (S1S n)V is the set of cong-
urations for executing D,Sithe set of states of Si,
Q0=f(S1;;Sn;v0)gis the initial conguration. V
is the set of variables of D, andVthe set of valuations
that map variables in Vto their values. For each given
conguration q, letq:val denote the valuation function
of the conguration q.

--- Page 18 ---
18 J. Comput. Sci. & Technol., January 2018, Vol., No.
Soundness Below we state the soundness of the
translation as a renement relation between the two
transition systems. Let Q1;Q2be two sets of cong-
urations, and !1, !2,V1;V2the transition relation-
s and the variables for Q1andQ2respectively, and
V=V2\V1. Letq:valjVdenote the projection of the
valuation of qto the variable set V.
Denition 1 (Simulation) LetTi= (Qi; !i;Q0
i;Vi)
fori= 1;2be two transition systems. A relation
BQ1Q2is a simulation relation from T1toT2,
i for all (q1;q2)2B, we have (1) q1:valjV=q2:valjV,
and (2) for any q1 !1q0
1, there exists a transition
q2 !2q0
2such that (q0
1;q0
2)2B.
We say that T1is a renement of T2, writtenT1
T2, if there exists a simulation relation from T1toT2
according to the above denition.
Theorem 1 (Soundness of the translation) .LetDbe
a Stateow chart, and Ube the TA obtained from Dby
applying our translation. Assume Ti= (Qi; !i;Q0
i;Vi)
fori= 1;2are the transition systems of DandU, with
the same initial valuation for variables in V1\V2. Then
there exists a simulation relation B Q1Q2such
that, for any q0
12Q0
1, there exists q0
22Q0
2satisfying
(q0
1;q0
2)2B.
The proof is by explicitly constructing a simulation
relation betweenDandU, which means for each transi-
tion inD, nd a corresponding transition in Uresulting
in equivalent evaluations over common variables. The
details are given in the appendix.
5.3 Preservation of Properties
According to the semantics of Stateow, we obtain
the following fact.
Proposition 1. LetDbe a Stateow chart. As-
sume its transition system is T= (Q; !;Q0;V), then if
Dcontains no terminal junction, the transition relation !is total, i.e. for every conguration C2Q, there is
C02Qsuch that (C;C0)2 ! is enabled.
The requirement that the transition relation  !is
total is necessary for the preservation of properties. It
ensures that a path of a Stateow chart corresponds to
a full path of the translated TA, and not a proper prex
of the path. The proof is given in the appendix.
Based on the above fact and Theorem 1, we can
further get the following result.
Proposition 2. Let'be a property in the uni-
versal fragment of untimed TCTL and Dis a Stateow
chart without terminal junction. If all variables occur-
ring in'are inV, thenT2satises'impliesT1satis-
es'. HereD;T1;T2;Vare as dened in Theorem 1.
This is a direct result of the preservation theorem
of the classical abstraction renement framework [26].
Discussion Above we prove the preservation of prop-
erties in the general renement framework, i.e. provid-
ed two transition systems satisfy the renement rela-
tion, the concrete model has a total transition relation,
and the property is in the universal fragment, then the
property proved for the abstract model is preserved for
the concrete model. But in fact, the TA translated
from the Stateow model according to our translation
process satisfy stronger property than renement: each
transition of the TA corresponds to some one step ex-
ecution of the original Stateow model. They are not
equivalent only because the TA does not keep the prior-
ity order of the execution of parallel states of the State-
ow model. However, in most cases, parallel states do
not share variables in Stateow, e.g. the model for the
RTPS protocol in this paper. Therefore, more proper-
ties other than the universal fragment of the TCTL are
preserved for the Stateow model. We will leave the
formal justication of these for future work.

--- Page 19 ---
Qianqian Lin et al. : Modelling and Verication of RTPS Protocol 19
6 Verication in Uppaal
Using the above translation method, we transform
the whole Stateow model of the RTPS protocol into
Uppaal timed automata. Fig. 8 shows the result for
one module as an illustration. In this section, we de-
scribe the verication and performance estimation of
the model in Uppaal .
First, we verify that the TA model is deadlock-free
using the TCTL formula A[] not deadlock . Since
this formula is not in the universal fragment of TCTL,
it does not automatically carry over to the Stateow
model. All TCTL properties shown below are in the
universal fragment of untimed TCTL, and hence by
Proposition 2 also hold for the Stateow model.
Consistency and sequentiality A writer must send
out data samples in the order they were added to its
HistoryCache and the readers will get the messages in
the same order of the sequence number in their Histo-
ryCache.
•Changes in the writer's HistoryCache are even-
tually added from the matched DDS Writer in
order.
A<> forall (sq: sq_t )
WHC [sq ]== cachechanges [sq]
•Once the RTPS Writer receives acknowledgemen-
t for all messages, the data is consistent between
the writer and the matched readers, and the order
of the data is the same as in the DDS Writer.
A[] forall (id: rid_t ) ( forall (sq:
sq_t )
acked_num [id ]== sq
imply WHC [sq ]== cachechanges [sq]
and RHC [id ][ sq ]== cachechanges [sq
])
Heartbeat and acknowledgement mechanism A
writer must periodically inform each matching reader ofthe availability of data samples by sending a HEART-
BEAT message.
•When the transmission is not complete, the RTP-
S Writer always sends HEARTBEAT messages
with a period of Heartbeat Period . The function
acked all() is used to indicate the acknowledged
information from all matched Readers and identi-
fy whether the transfer is complete. The variable
sendFlag is used to record the sending of HEART-
BEAT andxis the periodic clock. sendFlag == 1
means the HEARTBEAT message is sending at
that time, otherwise sendFlag == 0.
Writer_send ( WriterId ).x>
Heartbeat_Period
and ! acked_all ()
--> Writer_send ( WriterId ).
sendFlag ==1
•When receiving an ACKNACK message indicating
a reader is missing some data samples, the writer
must enter the must repair state to eventually re-
spond by sending the missing data samples. Here
the variable ackFlag identies the signal to be re-
paired sent by the readers.
A<> Writer_repair ( WriterId ).
ackFlag ==1
and ! acked_all ()
imply Writer_repair ( WriterId ).
must_repair
•Upon receiving a HEARTBEAT message with nal
ag not set, the reader must enter must send ack
state to eventually respond with an ACKNACK
message. Here hFlag indicates that the reader
received the HEARTBEAT message.
A<> Reader_response ( ReaderId ).
hFlag ==1
and buffer_heartbeat [ WriterId ].
finalFlag == NO_SET
imply Reader_response ( ReaderId ).
must_send_ack
•After receiving a HEARTBEAT while a sample
is missing, the reader must enter must send ack

--- Page 20 ---
20 J. Comput. Sci. & Technol., January 2018, Vol., No.
Fig.9. Verication results.
state to eventually respond with an ACKNACK
message. The function hasmissing sample () is
used to judge whether some data is missing at
present.
A<> Reader_response ( ReaderId ).
hFlag ==1
and has_missing_sample ( ReaderId )
imply Reader_response ( ReaderId ).
must_send_ack
•Therefore, the acknowledgement mechanism
guarantees that once the acknowledged number
equals the last sequence number sent to matched
readers, all changes in the readers' HistoryCache
are the same as in writer's HistoryCache, that is,
A[] forall (sq: sq_t )
is_acked_by_all (sq)
imply
forall (id: rid_t ) RHC [id ][ sq ]== WHC
[sq]
A[] acked_all () imply
forall (id: rid_t ) RHC [id ]==
cachechanges
where the functions isacked byall() and
acked all() are used to indicate the acknowledged
information from all matched Readers.
The verication results for all of the above proper-
ties are shown in Fig. 9, in which green circles indicate
that the corresponding property is proved to hold for
the TA model.
Statistical Model Checking (SMC) is concerned with
running a sucient number of simulations of a stochas-
tic system model to obtain statistical evidence witha predened level of condence of the property to be
checked. This oers advantages over probabilistic mod-
el checking as it does not need to traverse the whole s-
tate space of the system, and so scales up to more com-
plex systems and properties. In our case, we perform
the query Pr[<=300;1000] (<> acked all()) , which
estimates the probability that the given input data can
be successfully transmitted and the acknowledgemen-
t signals are received by the function acked all() in a
xed amount of time (300s). Each query is performed
with 1000 runs. Starting from the choice of parameters
of the model in Section 4.5, we perform experiments
with variations of dierent parameters one at a time.
Fig.10. The probability for dierent passing rates with 95% con-
dence interval.
First, we perform the simulation with dierent pass-
ing rates in Channel ranging from 0 to 1. The relation-
ship between passing rate and the probability that the
query holds is shown in Fig. 10. Uppaal SMC reports
the probability interval with 95% condence. It is clear

--- Page 21 ---
Qianqian Lin et al. : Modelling and Verication of RTPS Protocol 21
that the probability of successful transmission within
the time bound increases as the passing rate increases.
When the passing rate exceeds 0.8, data transmission
is almost guaranteed to complete.
Next, we test the eect of dierent timing parame-
ters on the transmission eciency of the model. In par-
ticular, we consider the inuence of timing parameters
nackResponseDelay andheartbeatResponseDelay on the
model when the channel quality ( PassingRate = 0:7)
and heartbeat period ( heartbeatPeriod = 10) are xed.
Other model settings also remain the same. As shown
in Fig. 11, dierent timing parameter settings lead to
dierent probability that the query holds. Fig. 11(a)
shows the probabilities when heartbeatResponseDelay
changes from 0 to 40 with nackResponseDelay set to 5,
10 and 20 respectively. Fig. 11(b) shows the probabili-
ties when nackResponseDelay changes from 0 to 40 with
heartbeatResponseDelay set to 5, 10 and 20 respectively.
It can be seen that smaller delay leads to more ecient
data transmission in the formal model. On the other
hand, a small delay may cause network congestion in
actual deployment of the system, so we should choose
the appropriate timing parameter to improve the model
without seriously aecting the transmission eciency.
Note that we do not consider probability in the re-
nements, hence these quantitative properties cannot
be automatically transferred to the Stateow model.
However, from the discussion of Section 5.3, plus the
analysis of the concrete Stateow model, we infer that
both the deadlock freedom property and the quantita-
tive properties also hold for the Stateow model. But
the formal guarantee is not given here.
7 Conclusions
This paper presents formal models of the RTP-
S (Real-Time Publish and Subscribe) protocol using
Simulink/Stateow and Uppaal . The Simulink/State-ow model is used for simulation and code generation.
We check that the results of the simulation are as ex-
pected from the specication, and agree with the be-
havior of the generated code. The Uppaal model is
used to verify the important properties of the protocol
by model checking. Statistical model checking in Up-
paal is used to estimate the performance of the model
as a function of dierent choices of parameters. The
translation rules from Simulink/Stateow to timed au-
tomata are dened and the soundness of the translation
(stated as a renement relation) is proved. Our work
builds a complete framework of modelling, simulation
and verication of the RTPS protocol.
Currently, we only handle limited aspects of the
RTPS protocol. Possible future extensions include tak-
ing into consideration of message fragments and the dis-
covery module. This will make the model more com-
plex, likely beyond the model-checking capabilities of
Uppaal . Hence, verifying properties of the extended
model will be a major challenge. Finally, translation
from Simulink/Stateow to timed automata is current-
ly manual. The next step is to implement an automat-
ic translation tool, and add other advanced features of
Simulink/Stateow.
References
[1] Andres F, Boulos J. DDS: the data delivery service.
InIFIP World Conference on IT Tools. , January
1996, pp.487-494.
[2] Hugues J, Pautet L, Kordon F. A Framework for
DRE middleware, an Application to DDS. In Proc.
Ninth IEEE International Symposium on Objec-
t and Component-Oriented Real-Time Distributed
Computing , May 2006, pp.224-231.
[3] Al-Madani B. RTPS Middleware for Real-Time
Distributed Industrial Vision Systems. In Proc.

--- Page 22 ---
22 J. Comput. Sci. & Technol., January 2018, Vol., No.
(a)
 (b)
Fig.11. The average probability with 95 % condence. (a) heartbeatResponseDelay with nackResponseDelay set to 5, 10 and 20
respectively; (b) nackResponseDelay with heartbeatResponseDelay set to 5, 10 and 20 respectively.
Embedded and Real-Time Computing Systems and
Applications Conference , September 2005, pp.361-
364.
[4] Al-Madani B, Al-Saeedi M, Al-Roubaiey A. S-
calable Wireless Video Streaming over Real-Time
Publish Subscribe Protocol (RTPS). In Proc. 17th
IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Dis-
tributed Simulation and Real Time Applications ,
October 2013, pp. 221-230.
[5] Behrmann G, David A, Larsen K G. A Tutorial
on UPPAAL. In Proc. of Formal Methods for the
Design of Real-Time Systems, LNCS 3185 , 2004,
pp. 200-236.
[6] David A, Larsen K G, Legay A, Mikucionis M,
Poulsen D B. UPPAAL SMC tutorial. Internation-
al Journal on Software Tools for Technology Trans-
fer, 2015, 17(4): 397-415.
[7] Beckman K, Reininger J. Adaptation of the DDS
security standard for resource-constrained sensor
networks. In International Symposium on Indus-
trial Embedded Systems , June 2018, pp.1-4.[8] Youssef T A, Hariri M E, Elsayed A T, Mohammed
O A. A dds based energy management framework
for small microgrid operation and control. IEEE
Trans. Industrial Informatics , 2018, 14(3):958-968.
[9] Perez H, Gutierrez J J. Modelling the QoS pa-
rameters of DDS for event driven real-time appli-
cations. Journal of Systems and Software , 2015,
104(6):126-140.
[10] Alaerjan A, Kim D, Kafaf D A. Modeling func-
tional behaviors of DDS. In Proc. of IEEE Smart-
World , 2017, pp.1-7.
[11] Anneke K. Object Constraint Language: Meta-
modeling Semantics. In UML 2 Semantics and Ap-
plications. , 2009, pp.163-178.
[12] Liu Y, Guan Y, Li X, Wang R, Zhang J. Formal
analysis and verication of DDS in ROS2. In Proc.
of International Conference on Formal Method-
s and Models for System Design , October 2018,
pp.62-66.
[13] Yin J, Zhu H, Fei W, Xu Q, Wu R. Formalization
and Verication of RTPS StatefulWriter Module

--- Page 23 ---
Qianqian Lin et al. : Modelling and Verication of RTPS Protocol 23
Using CSP. In Proc. of International Conference
on Software Engineering and Knowledge Engineer-
ing, July 2019, pp.147-198.
[14] Brookes S D, Hoare C A R, Roscoe A W. A theory
of communicating sequential processes. Journal of
the ACM , 1984, 31(3):560-599.
[15] Hoare C A R. Communicating Sequential Process-
es. Prentice-Hall, 1985.
[16] Yang Y, Jiang Y, Gu M, Sun J. Verifying simulink
stateow model: timed automata approach. In
Proc. of IEEE/ACM International Conference on
Automated Software Engineering , 2016, pp.852-
857.
[17] Kang E, Ke L, Hua M, Wang Y. Verifying Au-
tomotive Systems in EAST-ADL/Stateow Using
UPPAAL. In Proc. of Software Engineering Con-
ference, IEEE , 2016, pp.143-150.
[18] Hamon G, Rushby J. An operational semantics for
Stateow. International Journal on Software Tools
for Technology Transfer , 2007, 9(5-6):447-456.
[19] Tiwari A. Formal semantics and analysis methods
for Simulink/Stateow models. Technical Report,
SRI International. http://citeseerx.ist.psu.
edu/viewdoc/summary?doi=10.1.1.1.3492 ,
Mar. 2002.
[20] Zou L, Zhan N, Wang S, Franzle M. Formal veri-
cation of Simulink/Stateow diagrams. In Proc. of
Automated Technology for Verication and Analy-
sis, LNCS vol. 9346, Springer , 2015, pp.464-481.
[21] Chen C, Sun J, Liu Y. Formal modeling and valida-
tion of Stateow diagrams. International Journal
on Software Tools for Technology Transfer , 2012,
14(6):653-671.[22] Rajeev A, David L D. A Theory of Timed
Automata. Theoretical Computer Science , 1994,
126(2):183-235.
[23] Berhmann G, David A, Larsen K G, Pettersson P,
Yi W. Developing UPPAAL over 15 years. Soft-
ware - practice and Experience , 2011, 41(2):133-
142.
[24] Younes H L S, Kwiatkowska M, Normaln G, Park-
er D. Numerical vs. statistical probabilistic model
checking. International Journal on Software Tools
for Technology Transfer , 2007, 15(11):1427-1434.
[25] Georgios E F, George J P. Robust Sampling for
MITL Specications. In Proc. of Formal Modeling
and Analysis of Timed Systems , Oct. 2007, pp.147-
162.
[26] Grumberg O, Long D E. Model checking and mod-
ular verication. ACM Transactions on Program-
ming Languages and Systems , 1994, 16(3):843-871.
First Author [Qianqian Lin]
Qianqian Lin received her Bachelor's
degree in Electrical and Information
Engineering from University of
Science and Technology in China
in 2017. She is currently a master
student at Institute of Software,
Chinese Academy of Sciences. Her
research interests are modelling and
simulation of embedded systems.

--- Page 24 ---
24 J. Comput. Sci. & Technol., January 2018, Vol., No.
Second Author [Shuling
Wang] Shuling Wang received her
Bachelor's degree in Mathematics
from Lanzhou University in 2003,
and Ph.D. degree in Computer Sci-
ence from Peking University in 2008.
She worked as a postdoc at United
Nations University - International
Institute for Software Technology from 2008 to 2010, and
at Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences
from 2010 to 2012. Since 2017, she is an associate research
professor at Institute of Software, Chinese Academy
of Sciences. Her research interests are formal methods
related to embedded systems, including formal modelling,
verication, and code generation.
Third Author [Bohua Zhan]
Bohua Zhan received his Bachelor's
degree in Mathematics from Mas-
sachusetts Institute of Technology in
2010, and Doctorate in Mathematics
from Princeton University in 2014.
He worked as a postdoc at Mas-
sachusetts Institute of Technology
from 2014 to 2017, and at Technical
University of Munich from 2017 to 2018. Since 2018, he
is an associate research professor at Institute of Software,
Chinese Academy of Sciences. His research interests are
formal methods, in particular interactive theorem proving
and cyber-physical systems.
Fourth Author [Bin Gu] Bin
Gu received his Master's degree in
1994 and Ph.D. degree in 2020 from
Harbin Institute of Technology and
Northwest Polytechnical Univer-
sity respectively. He is currently
a professor at Beijing Institute of
Control Engineering. His research
interests are embedded systems and
dependable softwares.
Appendix
In the appendix, we rst present the more complete semantics of TA, then the proof of the soundness of the
translation from Stateow to TA.
8 Semantics of TA
Formally, a timed automaton is a tuple ( L;l0;C;A;E;I ), whereLis a set of locations, l02Lthe initial location,
Cthe set of clocks, Athe set of actions, co-actions and the internal -action,ELAB(C)2CLthe
set of edges between locations with an action, a guard and a set of clocks to be reset, and I:L!B(C) assigns
invariants to locations. The semantics can be dened as a labelled transition system hS;s0;!i, whereSLRC
is the set of states, s0= (l0;u0) is the initial state, and !S(R0[A)Sis the transition relation such that
•(l;u)d !(l;u+d) if8d0: 0d0d)u+d02I(l),
•(l;u)a !(l0;u0) if there exists e= (l;a;g;r;l0)2E s:t: u2g;u0= [r7!0]uandu02I(l0),
where ford2R0,u+dmaps each clock xinCto the value u(x) +d, and [r7!0]udenotes the clock valuation
which maps each clock in rto 0 and agrees with uoverCnr.

--- Page 25 ---
Qianqian Lin et al. : Modelling and Verication of RTPS Protocol 25
The TAs can be composed into a network of timed automata over a common set of clocks and actions, consisting
ofnTAsAi= (Li;li
0;C;A;Ei;Ii);1in. Let l0= (l0
1;:::;l0
n) be the initial location vector. The semantics is
dened as a transition system hS0;s0;!i, whereS0= (L1Ln)RCis the set of states, s0
0= (l0;u0) is the
initial state, and !S0S0is the transition relation dened by:
•(l;u)d !(l;u+d), if8d0:0d0)u+d02I(l),
•(l;u)a !(l[l0
i=li];u0), if there exists ligr!l0
is:t: u2g;u0= [r7!0]uandu02I(l[l0
i=li]),
•(l;u)a !(l[l0
i=li;l0
j=lj];u0) if there exist lic?giri!l0
iandlic!gjrj!l0
i, s.t.u2(gi^gj);u0= [ri[rj7!0]uand
u02I(l[l0
i=li;l0
j=lj]).
9 Soundness proof
Theorem 1 (Soundness of translation) LetDbe a Stateow chart and Ube the TA obtained from Daccording
to our translation. Assume (Qi; !i;Q0
i;Vi)fori= 1;2are the transition systems of DandU, with the same initial
valuation for variables in V1\V2. Then there exists a simulation relation BQ1Q2such that, for any q0
12Q0
1,
there exists q0
22Q0
2satisfying (q0
1;q0
2)2B.
Proof According to the translation given in Section 5.1, for each state vector ( S1;;Sn) inD, there is a location
vector (U1;;Un) dened inU(each denoted by USiin the following). We use qito represent state vectors in the
following. We construct the simulation relation BbetweenDandUas follows. First of all, add fq0
1;Uq0
1gwhere
q0
12Q0
1, in factq0
1= (S1;;S2;v0) for some initial v0. Obviously, Uq0
12Q0
2.
Consider the initialization transition of D, i.e. ([S1;;Sn];v0) !([S1;;Sn];v0
0) where v0
0=
exec(enS1de;;enSnde;v0). For ease of presentation, below we will use enS1andexS1to represent enS1deand
exS1deresp., i.e. the entry and exit actions are always referring to the ones of a state and its decomposition.
According to our translation, in the translated TA U, for eachUSi, there is a transition
USi:entry (Si);enSi;entry (Si)=1! USi
enabled, as in the beginning, entry (Si) is 0. By taking the one-step transitions of all corresponding USifor alli,
we get the resulting location vector and the valuation. The resulting state and location vector are still the same as
initial ones, and the valuations also satisfy the requirement, since parallel states do not write the same variables.
Thus the resulting congurations are still in B.
Now consider the more complex transition that corresponds to the execution of states within one sample time
step. For some state Samong the parallel states, if ( S;v) !(p;v0), there are four cases (the following assume a
general setting that the Stateow states have non-disjoint transitions and have decomposition inside. The simpler
case can be proved easily).
•Ifpis a state by taking transition (3), there exists h>0 such that trans (S;h) = (e;c;ca;ta ) with target p,
v2c,:(v2(cond(S;1)^eventP (S;1))__ (cond(S;h1)^eventP (S;h1))) (the transitions with higher

--- Page 26 ---
26 J. Comput. Sci. & Technol., January 2018, Vol., No.
priority than hare disabled), gveis 1, and v0=exec(ca;exA;ACT ;ta;enp;v)[ACT7!skip; clock (A)7!0],
whereAisSifSis a state, otherwise sourceSta (S) if it is a junction. In the translated TA, there is a
corresponding transition
USc^entry (S)^gve^:((cond (S;1)^eventP (S;1))__ (cond (S;k1)^eventP (S;k1)));ca;exA;(ACT ;ta);enp;entry (p)=1;ACT =skip! Up:
Obviously, the resulting valuations are equal over the common variables as they execute the same actions.
Thus the targets are in B.
•Ifpis a state without available outgoing transitions, then before reaching p,Stried all its outgoing transitions,
execute the during transitions and its decomposition (if there is any). We prove that for each transition of
S, there is a corresponding transition of US.
If the transition (1) executes, there exists h > 0 such that trans (S;h) = (e;c;ca;ta ) with target t,v2c,
:(v2(cond(S;1)^eventP (S;1))__ (cond(S;h1)^eventP (S;h1))) (the transitions with higher
priority< h are disabled), gveis 1,tis a junction, and v0=exec(ca;v)[ACT7!(v(ACT );tc);source (t)7!
S;sourceSta (t)7!A], whereAisSifSis a state, otherwise sourceSta (S) if it is a junction. In the translated
TA, there is a corresponding transition:
USc^entry (S)^gve^:((cond (S;1)^eventP (S;1))__ (cond (S;h1)^eventP (S;h1)));!
ca;ACT =(ACT ;ta);source (Ut)=US;sourceSta (Ut)=sourceSta (US)! Ut:
Obviously, the resulting valuations are equal over the common variables.
If transition (2) executes, in the translated TA, there is a corresponding transition
USgve;gve=0!US:
The transition (3) will not happen for the case when the nal state pis a state without available outgoing
transitions.
If transition (4) executes, in the translated TA, there is a corresponding transition:
US:during (S)^:((cond (S;1)^eventP (S;1))__ (cond (S;n)^eventP (S;n)));durS;during (S)=1;clock (S)=clock (S)+1! US:
If transition (5) executes, i.e. ( S;v) !(C;v[during (S)7!0]), if:(v2(cond(S;1)^eventP (S;1))__
(cond(S;n)^eventP (S;n))) and v(during (S)) is 1, and Cis the outmost decomposition of S. In the translated
TA, there is a corresponding transition:
(US;O):((cond (S;1)^eventP (S;1))__ (cond (S;n)^eventP (S;n)))^during (S);during (S)=0! (I;UC)
where
USin!;:((cond (S;1)^eventP (S;1))__ (cond (S;n)^eventP (S;n)))^during (S)! I;Oin?;during (S)=0! UC

--- Page 27 ---
Qianqian Lin et al. : Modelling and Verication of RTPS Protocol 27
hold. By hiding IandU, the transition is consistent with the Stateow transition.
If transition (6) executes, in the translated TA, there is a corresponding transition:
US:isTer (J)^:((cond (S;1)^eventP (S;1))__ (cond (S;n)^eventP (S;n)))! source (US):
If transition (7) executes, then rst by induction, there are corresponding transitions ( US1;w)gve! (US0
1;w1)
and (US2;w)gve=1! (US0
2;w2)gve;gve=0! (US0
2;w3). Then according to the semantics of TA, we have
(US1;US2;w) !(US0
1;US0
2;w0) such that w0=w1]w3. The disjoint case with event broadcasting can
be proved easily.
All the above cases produce equivalent valuations over common variables.
For the case when pis a state without available outgoing transitions, the control will go back to the outmost
source state as dened in the second transition rule for Stateow chart. This is also achieved using the out!
andout? between the source state and its decomposition inside in our translation.
•Ifpis a terminal junction, the execution process is part of the above case, and the proof is similar. If pis
recursively a state vector, the case holds by structural induction.
From the above proof, starting from the states in the simulation set, for each one-step transition (including the
transitions within one sample time step) of Stateow, there is a corresponding transition of the translated TA such
that the targets of the two transitions still satisfy the simulation relation. The proof of this theorem is completed.
10 Proof of Proposition 1
Given a Stateow chart Dand its transition system T= (Q; !;Q0;V), we need to prove that, for every
conguration CofT, there exists a successor C0such thatC !C0.
First of all, the initial set Q0is not empty. Furthermore, for each conguration C, it is a tuple of the form
(S1;S2;;Sn;v), then we need to prove that for each Si, there is a possible transition path starting from a
corresponding state, to reach a next state. Notice that, according to the semantics presented in Section 5.2, the
disjunction of the transitions for each state or junction in Tconstitutes a total set. We show the case for a state
S. The rules (1)-(5) dene the dierent cases for execution of S. If there is an enabled transition from Sto
another state or junction, then the transitions in (1) or (3) is taken. Otherwise, the condition of transition (4) or
(5) must be true and taken, depending on whether the during action is executed or not. For the special case that
the during action is not explicitly dened, the transition (4) performs a time progress on the activation clock of
current state (this is not considered as deadlock, and this time progress is explicitly preserved in the corresponding
TA model). The transition (2) is enabled after an event occurs. The case for junction is dierent as dened in
transition (6). But the fact also holds for it under the condition that no terminal junction exists. From the fact
that the disjunction of transitions constitutes a total set, we can conclude that the transition relation  !is total
directly.
