--- Page 1 ---
Component-Based Design and Analysis of Embedded
Systems with UPPAAL PORT
John H ˚akansson1, Jan Carlson2, Aurelien Monot3, Paul Pettersson2, and Davor Slutej2
1Department of Information Technology, Uppsala University, Sweden.
johnh@it.uu.se
2M¨alardalen Real-Time Research Centre, V ¨aster ˚as, Sweden.⋆⋆
jan.carlson@mdh.se, paul.pettersson@mdh.se, davor@slutej.com
3Ecole des Mines, Nancy, France. aurelien.monot@mines-nancy.org
Abstract. UPPAAL PORT is a new tool for component-based design and analysis
of embedded systems. It operates on the hierarchically structured continuous time
component modeling language SaveCCM and provides efﬁcient model-checking
by using partial-order reduction techniques that exploits the structure and the
component behavior of the model. UPPAAL PORT is implemented as an extension
of the veriﬁcation engine in the UPPAAL tool. The tool can be used as back-end
in to the Eclipse based SaveCCM integrated development environment, which
supports user friendly editing, simulation, and veriﬁcation of models.
1 Introduction
UPPAAL PORT4is a new extension of the UPPAAL tool. It supports simulation and
model-checking of the component modelling language SaveCCM [1,6], which has been
designed primarily for development of embedded systems in the area of vehicular sys-
tems. In SaveCCM, an embedded system is modelled as interconnected components
with explicitly deﬁned input and output ports for data and control. A component can be
an encapsulation of a system of interconnected components, which externally behaves
as a component, or a primitive component. In the latter case the functional and timing
behaviour of a component is described as a timed automaton [2].
UPPAAL PORT accepts the hierarchical SaveCCM modelling language, represented
in XML format, and provides analysis by model-checking without conversion or ﬂat-
tening to the model of network of timed automata normally used in the UPPAAL tool.
The hierarchical structure of the model, and the particular “read-execute-write” compo-
nent semantics adopted in SaveCCM is exploited in the tool to improve the efﬁciency
of the model-checking analysis, which is further improved by a partial order reduction
technique [10].
To provide user friendliness, UPPAAL PORT can serve as back-end in the SaveCCM
integrated development environment (SA VE-IDE) based on Eclipse, see Fig. 1. We have
⋆⋆This work was partially supported by the Swedish Foundation for Strategic Research via the
strategic research centre PROGRESS.
4UPPAAL PORT is available from the web page www.uppaal.org/port .

--- Page 2 ---
Fig. 1. SA VE-IDE architectural editor (upper view) and UPPAAL PORT simulator (lower view).
developed several plug-ins to integrate the two tools: an editor for timed automata de-
scriptions of the functional and timing behaviour of components, support for mapping
internal timed automata variables to external ports, a simulator that can be used to val-
idate the behaviour of a SaveCCM system, and support for verifying reachability and
liveness properties formalised in a subset of Timed CTL.
Related work includes for example the BIP component framework [9], where a
system is constructed in three layers: behaviour, interaction, and priorities. Partial order
techniques for timed automata are described for example in [11,7,5]. See also [10] for
additional related work.
2 Real-Time Component Speciﬁcation
The modelling language employed in UPPAAL PORT is SaveCCM — a component mod-
elling language for embedded systems [1,6]. In SaveCCM, systems are built from in-
terconnected components with well-deﬁned interfaces consisting of input- and output
ports. The communication style is based on the pipes-and-ﬁlters paradigm, but with an
explicit separation of data transfer and control ﬂow. The former is captured by connec-
tions between data ports where data of a given type can be written and read, and the
latter by trigger ports that control the activation of components. Fig. 2 shows an exam-
ple of the graphical SaveCCM notation. Triangles and boxes denote trigger ports and
data ports, respectively.

--- Page 3 ---
A component remains passive until all input trigger ports have been activated, at
which point it ﬁrst reads all its input data ports and then performs the associated compu-
tations over this input and an internal state. After this, the component writes to its output
data ports, activates the output trigger ports, and returns to the passive state again. This
strict “read-execute-write” semantics ensures that once a component is triggered, the
execution is functionally independent of any concurrent activity.
<<Component>> <<Component>>
Fig. 2. Composition of two SaveCCM com-
ponents.Components are composed into
more complex structures by connect-
ing output ports to input ports of other
components. In addition to this “hor-
izontal” composition, components can
be composed hierarchically by plac-
ing a collection of interconnected com-
ponents inside an enclosing compo-
nent. From the outside, such a com-
posite component is indistinguishable
from a primitive component where the
behaviour is given by a single model or
piece of code.
To support analysis and synthesis, a number of quality attributes and models can be
associated with a component, such as execution time information, reliability estimates,
safety models, etc. For UPPAAL PORT , it is required that each component is associated
with a behavioural model consisting of a timed automaton and a mapping between
component data ports and automata variables.
3 Model-Checking Real-Time Components
To support the dependability requirements of embedded real-time systems, SaveCCM
is designed for predictability in terms of functionality, timeliness, and resource usage.
In particular, the independence introduced by the “read-execute-write” semantics can
be exploited for analysis purposes using partial order reduction techniques (PORT).
When model-checking, PORTs explore only a subset of the state space. The idea is
to deﬁne equivalence between traces based on reordering of independent actions, and
to explore a representative trace for each equivalence class.This approach has been suc-
cessful for untimed systems, but for timed automata (TA) the implicit synchronization
of global time restricts independence of actions [3,11].
In [10] we have described a PORT for SaveCCM which we have implemented in the
UPPAAL PORT tool. As in [3,12] we use local time semantics to increase independence.
The structure of a SaveCCM system is used to partition local time-scales, to determine
independence of activities, and to construct the Ample-set.
Fig. 3 shows the tool architecture of UPPAAL PORT . The SA VE-IDE integrates an
editor for SaveCCM systems in the Eclipse framework, as well as a TA editor to model
the timing and behaviour of components. UPPAAL PORT adds support for simulation
and veriﬁcation, using a client-server architecture. When a new SaveCCM system is
loaded into the server, the XML parser builds internal representations of UPPAAL TA

--- Page 4 ---
SAVE-IDE
(SaveCCM modelling tool)
UPPAAL PORT  server command response
state space
repres entationUPPAA LTA
repres entation
 Trans Delay Norm Succ Ample
initial state XML Pa rser
SaveCCM
system
repres entationQuery
yes /  no / maybeUppaal PORT plu g-in
(simulation and ve rification)TA edito r plug-in
(timing/b ehaviour modelling)Fig. 3. Overview of the UPPAAL PORT tool architecture.
and the SaveCCM system. By separating the UPPAAL TA representation when a new
SaveCCM system is parsed we can reuse much of the source code from the UPPAAL
model-checker.
The veriﬁcation setup is shown in Fig. 3 as pipeline stages connected to the state
space representation, as described in [8]. Unexplored states are put into the transition
ﬁlter (Trans), which computes the enabled transitions. Each transition is forwarded with
a copy of the state to the successor ﬁlter (Succ), which computes the resulting state after
the transition. These two ﬁlters of the UPPAAL veriﬁer are extended to implement the
SaveCCM semantics. An additional ﬁlter (Ample) selects a sufﬁciently large subset
of enabled transitions to be explored in order to model-check the property. This ﬁlter
implements the PORT described in [10].
The zone representation is replaced with local time zones that are implemented as
a data structure similar to Difference Bound Matrices (DBMs), as described for exam-
ple in [3]. When a component writes data to other components, the local time-scales
of participating components are synchronized by the successor ﬁlter. In combination
with a modiﬁed ﬁlter (Delay) this implements local time semantics. The purpose of the
normalisation ﬁlter (Norm) is to ensure that the state space is ﬁnite. This remains to be
updated in order to handle the ‘difference constraints’ introduced by using local time.
The transition, successor, and delay ﬁlters are used also during simulation to com-
pute possible transitions from the current state of the simulator, and to compute a new
state for the simulation when the user selects to make a transition.
4 Case Studies
UPPAAL PORT has so far been applied to some benchmark examples, and two larger
case studies. In [1], we present how an early version of UPPAAL PORT is applied to
analyse a SaveCCM model of an adaptive cruise controller. A small benchmark of the

--- Page 5 ---
partial order reduction technique implemented in the tool is described in [10], showing
signiﬁcant improvement over the standard global time semantics of, e.g., UPPAAL .
We are currently modelling and analysing a turntable production unit [4]. The sys-
tem has been modelled and the speciﬁed requirements (similar to those given in [4])
have been analysed by model-checking.
The turntable system consists of a rotating disc (turntable) with four product slots
and four tools in ﬁxed positions around the turntable; the tools operate on the products,
as illustrated in Fig. 4. Each slot either holds a single product in some state of the
production cycle or is empty. After each 90◦rotation of the turntable, the tools are
allowed to operate - the turntable is stationary until all tools have ﬁnished operating.
All slots can hold products and tools are allowed to work in parallel.
Fig. 4. Turntable system overview.The architecture of the
system is encapsulated by
ﬁve SaveCCM components (a
turntable and four tools) mod-
elled using SaveCCM timed
automata, which are passive
and activated by trigger ports.
Each component TA wraps C-
style code that deﬁnes the ac-
tual behaviour of the compo-
nent. This C-style code is di-
rectly interpreted by UPPAAL
PORT and is suitable as ba-
sis for expansion into a pro-
duction system (the code used
in the model for veriﬁcation
has no timeout-detection and
error-handling).
The control system communicates with the environment by means of external ports
that are deﬁned at the root application level. When the code is generated for the target
platform these ports are connected to the sensors and actuators. For simulation and
veriﬁcation purposes however, the external ports are mapped to global variables in the
environment model. The environment model is constructed using the UPPAAL tool and
utilizes UPPAAL timed automata, which, contrasting the SaveCCM TAs, are active.
Properties of safety and liveness are expressed as statements in the UPPAAL require-
ment speciﬁcation language. To support more complex queries (involving a sequence of
states), a test automaton is constructed in UPPAAL as a part of the environment model.
The test automaton is connected to relevant ports in the SaveCCM model, to eliminate
the need for test ﬂags and other veriﬁcation speciﬁc (as opposed to functional) additions
to the control system model.
Model-checking the properties requires around 16MB at peak and an average of
around 3 seconds per veriﬁed property (on an Intel T2600 2.16 GHz processor). The
veriﬁcation tool only needs to explore a maximum of 38,166 states to verify properties
such as deadlock freedom.

--- Page 6 ---
5 Conclusion
In this paper, we have brieﬂy described the new tool UPPAAL PORT that extends the ver-
iﬁcation engine of UPPAAL with partial order veriﬁcation techniques for the real-time
component language SaveCCM. Our initial experiments with the new veriﬁer have been
very encouraging and we are now in progress with evaluating UPPAAL PORT (together
with the SaveCCM component modeling language and Save IDE) in a larger case study.
As future work, UPPAAL PORT will be expended to support a richer component mod-
eling language with components that may be active, have multiple service interfaces, or
use other forms of communication.
References
1.Mikael ˚Akerholm, Jan Carlson, Johan Fredriksson, Hans Hansson, John H ˚akansson, An-
ders M ¨oller, Paul Pettersson, and Massimo Tivoli. The SA VE approach to component-based
development of vehicular systems. Journal of Systems and Software , 80(5):655–667, May
2007.
2.Rajeev Alur and David L. Dill. A theory of timed automata. Theoretical Computer Science ,
126(2):183–235, 1994.
3.J. Bengtsson, B. Jonsson, J. Lilius, and W. Yi. Partial order reductions for timed systems.
InProceedings, Ninth International Conference on Concurrency Theory , volume 1466 of
Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 485–500. Springer–Verlag, 1998.
4.E. Bortnik, N. Tr ˇcka, A.J. Wijs, S.P. Luttik, J.M. van de Mortel-Fronczak, J.C.M. Baeten,
W.J. Fokkink, and J.E. Rooda. Analyzing a χmodel of a turntable system using Spin, CADP
and Uppaal. Journal of Logic and Algebraic Programming , 65(2):51–104, 2005.
5.P. Bouyer, S. Haddad, and P.-A. Reynier. Timed unfoldings for networks of timed automata.
In S. Graf and W. Zhang, editors, Proc. of the 4th International Symposium on Automated
Technology for Veriﬁcation and Analysis, ATVA 2006 , number 4218 in Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, pages 292–306. Springer–Verlag, 2006.
6.Jan Carlson, John H ˚akansson, and Paul Pettersson. SaveCCM: An analysable component
model for real-time systems. In Proc. of the 2nd Workshop on Formal Aspects of Components
Software (FACS 2005) , Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Science. Elsevier, 2005.
7.F. Cassez, T. Chatain, and C. Jard. Symbolic unfoldings for networks of timed automata.
In S. Graf and W. Zhang, editors, Proc. of the 4th International Symposium on Automated
Technology for Veriﬁcation and Analysis, ATVA 2006 , number 4218 in Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, pages 307–321. Springer–Verlag, 2006.
8.Alexandre David, Gerd Behrmann, Kim G. Larsen, and Wang Yi. A tool architecture for the
next generation of UPPAAL. In Proc. of UNU/IIST 10th Anniversary Colloquium , number
2757 in Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer–Verlag, 2003.
9.Gregor G ¨ossler and Joseph Sifakis. Composition for component-based modelling. Science
of Computer Programming , 55(1-3):161–183, 2005.
10.J. H˚akansson and P. Pettersson. Partial order reduction for veriﬁcation of real-time compo-
nents. In Proc. of 1st International Workshop on Formal Modeling and Analysis of Timed
Systems , Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer–Verlag, 2007.
11.D. Lugiez, P. Niebert, and S. Zennou. A partial order semantics approach to the clock explo-
sion problem of timed automata. Theoretical Computer Science , 345(1):27–59, 2005.
12.Marius Minea. Partial order reduction for model checking of timed automata. In Proceed-
ings, 10th International Conference on Concurrency Theory , volume 1664 of Lecture Notes
in Computer Science , pages 431–446. Springer–Verlag, 1999.
