--- Page 1 ---
Model-Driven Design of Clinical Guidance Systems
Maryam Rahmaniheris
Dep. of Computer Science
University of Illinois
Urbana, IL 61801, USA
rahmani1@illinois.eduYu Jiang
Dep. of Computer Science
University of Illinois
Urbana, IL 61801, USA
jy1989@illinois.eduLui Sha
Dep. of Computer Science
University of Illinois
Urbana, IL 61801, USA
lrs@illinois.edu
ABSTRACT
Clinical guidance systems have been widely adopted to help
medical staffs to avoid preventable medical errors such as
delay in diagnosis, treatment or untended deviations from
best practice guidelines. However, because patient condition
changes rapidly and medical staffs are usually overloaded
in acute care setting, how to ensure the correctness of the
system reaction to those rapid changes and managing inter-
action with physicians remains challenging. In this paper,
we propose a domain-speciﬁc model-driven design approach
to address these challenges for designing clinical guidance
systems. Firstly, we translate the relevant medical knowl-
edge described in generic literature and different best prac-
tice guidelines into a set of executable and indirectly veri-
ﬁable ﬁnite state machine models. We introduce an organ-
centric paradigm to construct clinical models, and also de-
velop a physician model to track physician-system interac-
tions and deviations. Secondly, for veriﬁcation of the com-
positional system model, we translate the model into timed
automata, based on which, we formalize a set of clinical and
system safety requirements as computation tree logic(CTL)
formulas and use the UPPAAL model checking tool to for-
mally verify those requirement. In this way, the correctness
of the model can be mathematically proved. Finally, we can
automatically generate the executable code from the veriﬁed
model using the corresponding code generation tools for ﬁ-
nite state machine. For evaluation, we apply the approach
to the design of clinical guidance systems for cardiac arrest.
The generated code can be deployed and interact with exist-
ing guidance systems.
1. INTRODUCTION
According to the Institute of Medicine, close to 100,000
safety-related medical incidents happens each year in US due
topreventable medical errors [16]. These errors are often
caused by delayed diagnosis, delayed or ineffective thera-
peutic interventions, and unintended deviation from the best
practice guidelines. These situations may occur more of-
ten in acute care settings, where the medical staffs are over-
loaded, and must make quick decisions based on the best
available evidence.
An integrated clinical guidance system can reduce such
medical errors in acute care by helping medical staff track
and assess patient state more accurately and adapt her care
plan according to the best practice guidelines. Clinical guid-ance systems can greatly affect patient safety,and therefore,
it is critical to validate and formally verify their correctness.
However, medical information is considerably vast and com-
plex. Moreover, the functional complexity of modern clini-
cal systems has increased over the years. This makes it difﬁ-
cult to ensure the correctness of the encoded medical knowl-
edge in the system.
Traditionally, such systems may be developed by directly
implementing the clinical monitoring and treatment proto-
cols in procedural style using a high level language such as
Java. The proof of correctness process can become compli-
cated. Moreover, it would be greatly valuable to have physi-
cian in the loop to validate the clinical correctness of the en-
coded medical knowledge. If implemented using a high level
language such as Java, patient state representation and other
encoded clinical knowledge could not be easily validated by
physicians. Therefore, it is critical to have representations
at the same (or as close as possible to) level of abstraction,
which medical knowledge and reasoning are known to physi-
cians.
Proposed Approach :In this paper, we propose a domain-
speciﬁc model-driven approach for designing clinical guid-
ance system, in which we develop a cyber-medical-human.
Figure 1 shows the overview of our approach, which includes
the following main steps: 1)We ﬁrst translate the generic
medical knowledge into a set of communicating ﬁnite state
machines. We propose an organ-centric paradigm, in which
we model patient state as a network of disease and organ
state machines. We use the ﬁnite state machine formalism to
develop a best practice manager model that encodes all the
monitoring and treatment guidelines. A compositional au-
tomata model is also proposed to handle and track the physi-
cian interaction with the system. We use an open source tool,
called Yakindu, to develop the models. The tool provides an
integrated modeling environment and development based on
the concept of statecharts. The tool also allows simulation of
the developed model to validate its dynamic behavior [1]. 2)
A set of clinical requirements have been drafted in collabora-
tion with our physician collaborators. Physician can directly
look at these organ models and cross reference with the spec-
iﬁed clinical requirements. Note that, the developed models
are at same level of abstraction the medical knowledge and
reasoning are known to physician. At our proposed level
of abstraction, physicians with minimal IT background can
easily understand the models and review the design. Further-
more, Yakindu simulation of executable organ models allowsarXiv:1610.06895v1  [cs.CY]  21 Oct 2016

--- Page 2 ---
dynamic clinical validation. We then apply the necessary
changes, as suggested by physician(s), and re-validate the
reﬁned model. 3)The ﬁnalized Yakindu model is manually
translated to UPPAAL for exhaustive veriﬁcation of clinical
and system requirements. The clinical requirements drafted
previously are formalized as computation tree logic formu-
las and along side the system requirements are veriﬁed using
UPPAAL. Note that any necessary modiﬁcation to UPPAAL
model are reﬂected back to the Yakindu Model. 4) As the
last step, the Java code is generated automatically from the
validated and veriﬁed Yakindu model and is integrated with
the code from an existing guidance system, using some hand-
written communication code.
UPPAAL%Formal%Veriﬁca1on%UPPAAL%Model%
Exis1ng%Guidance%System%Code%Yakindu%Model%
HandBWriDen%Communica1on%%Code%Clinical%Simula1on%TCTL%Formulas%Valida1on%by%Physician%UPPAAL%Model%Revision%Revise%Yakindu%Model%%
Generated%Code%Yakindu%Code%Generator%
Best%Prac1ce%Guidelines%System%Requirements%
Yes%No%
Manual%Transla1on%to%UPPAAL%%
No%
Yes%
Subset%
Executable%OrganBCentric%Guidance%System%System%Integra1on%
Revised%Yakindu%Model%Update%the%Yakindu%Model%(if%necessary%)%
ModelBDriven%Design%System%Integra1on%
Clinical%Requirements%
Medical%Knowledge%%
Figure 1: Model-Driven Design for Clinical Guidance System
Main Contribution :Overall contributions are:
1. Proposing a model-driven approach for the design of
clinical guidance systems, where a cyber-medical-human
model has been developed that facilitates clinical vali-
dation by physician. The proposed model also includes
a compositional physician model, which tracks and man-
ages the physician interaction with the system. We
have formulated a set of clinical and system require-
ments to verify against the developed models.
2. Using real case study to show how the models can be
constructed and then integrated into an existing guid-
ance system.
Paper Organization: An overview of the clinical guidance
system is presented in Section 2. We present the detail of our
model-driven approach in Section 3. The details of our pro-
posed cyber-medical-model is discussed in Section 3.2; clin-
ical validation and veriﬁcation of the models are addressed
in Sections 3.3 and 3.4. We demonstrate how the developed
models are integrated in the clinical guidance system in Sec-
tion 3.5. We further elaborate our approach using the cardiac
arrest case study in Section 4. Finally, the related work and
our concluding remarks are presented in Sections 5 and 6,
respectively.2. SYSTEM OVERVIEW
Figure 2 shows the overall architecture of the proposed ap-
proach. Our domain-speciﬁc model is at the heart of this ar-
chitecture. The disease and organ models, developed using
communicating state machine formalism, allow us to keep
track of multiple organ states changing concurrently. As new
patient data is received, each organ state machine is updated
to reﬂect the most recent patient condition. The model also
includes a physician manager, which is responsible for in-
teraction with the attending physician and keeping track of
his/her response. The physician can conﬁrm or put a hold on
the patient state suggested by our system. The best practice
model encodes the monitoring and treatment guidelines. We
only consider the diseases and acute care scenarios, where
best practice algorithm and guidelines exist. One example is
the ACLS (Advanced Cardiac Life Support) algorithm pro-
vided by American Heart Association ( AHA ) to reverse car-
diac arrest.
!!!!!!!!!!!!
Physician!Response!Pa.ent!!Clinical!Data!Pa.ent!Measurements&!!Clinical!Data!
!Best!Prac.ce!!Clinical!Guidance!System!
Organ!State!Models!
Disease!Model!
Domain!Speciﬁc!Model!
Suspected!Organ!States!Conﬁrmed!Organ!States!&!Best!Prac.ce!Guidelines!1!2!!3!4!
Physician!Model!
Best!Prac.ce!Manager!Model!
Physician/Nurse!Interface!Medical!Sensors!
Figure 2: System Overview
3. MODEL-DRIVEN APPROACH
As shown in Figure 1, developing efﬁcient cyber-medical
models is the ﬁrst step in our model-driven approach for
design of clinical guidance systems. We ﬁrst translate the
relevant medical knowledge described in generic literature
and different best practice guidelines into a set of executable
models, using ﬁnite state machine formalism. We have cho-
sen to use an organ-based pathophysiological paradigm for
developing the models. We have also developed a best prac-
tice manager that encodes the treatment and monitoring guide-
lines. On the other hand, the role of human in medical sys-
tem can be more critical compared to most of other cyber-
physical human systems (CPHS) . Moreover, the complexity
and uncertainty of medicine sometimes makes deﬁnitive de-
cisions difﬁcult. Therefore, it is critical to account for the
human (speciﬁcally, physician) as an important aspect of the
system. In this paper we propose a compositional model to
record and track physician response to the information pro-
vided by our system. In the following subsections, we dis-
cuss the details of this paradigm and how the models are con-
structed. However, to explain the model construction more
clearly we ﬁrst look at an illustrative example. More details

--- Page 3 ---
on this case study is presented in Section 4.
3.1 Illustrative Example
We use the case of cardiac arrest scenario to illustrate the
proposed model construction procedure. Cardiac arrest is
initially the devastating cessation of cardiac activity, which is
caused by the loss of heart’s electrical and muscular pumping
function. The cardiovascular organ system is the main organ
affected by this disease. In cardiac arrest, the heart rhythm
may change and include abnormal or irregular heart rhythms
or waveforms (arrhythmias). Furthermore, The insufﬁcient
blood circulation in the lungs impedes the CO2andO2ex-
change resulting in CO2accumulation in the blood, which
may be related to a rise in blood acidity level indicated by
decrease in blood pHlevel. The abnormal pHis revealed
in arterial blood gas (ABG) test. These are two examples of
pathophysiological changes in cardiovascular organ system
caused by cardiac arrest. In addition to the cardiovascular or-
gan system, as resuscitation efforts continue, it may be found
that the lung (pulmonary) and kidney (renal) organ systems
are also affected
Cardiac arrest can lead to death within minutes. The guide-
line provided by American Heart Association ( AHA ) to re-
verse the cardiac arrest includes cardiopulmonary resuscita-
tion ( CPR ), using the deﬁbrillator device to shock the heart
by delivering a therapeutic dose of electrical energy to the
heart, and administration of intravenous drugs such as epinephrine
[2]. Epinephrine is a vessel constrictor that stimulates the
heart and increases the arterial blood pressure.
3.2 Model Construction
3.2.1 Organ-Centric Pathophysiological Model
We have chosen to translate medical knowledge to exe-
cutable models using an organ-based pathophysiological
paradigm. We model the changes in patient state according
to the pathophysiology of affected organ systems. Differ-
ent diseases may impair one or more of the physiological
functions performed by different organ systems. Pathophys-
iology describes the process of such change in physiological
measurements and organ states throughout disease progress.
Multiple pathophysiological processes must often be tracked
for each disease. The main reasons behind developing our
models according to this paradigm are as follows:
Physicians are taught body organ systems and struc-
tural relationships within the body. Moreover, the patho-
physiological description of disease processes is how
medical knowledge is commonly known by the physi-
cians [6, 5]. Therefore, the developed models would
be at the same abstraction level that medical knowl-
edge and reasoning are known to physicians. Con-
sequently, organizing patient information according to
organ-based pathophysiological models can make clin-
ical validation easier and more effective. Physicians
may directly look at the organ models and cross refer-
ence with the requirements.
Physicians often describe monitoring and therapeutic
requirements for different organ states . For example,ACLS algorithm indicates that shock must be consid-
ered when shockable rhythm is conﬁrmed. This is a
treatment guideline for arrhythmia, which is an insufﬁ-
ciency of cardiovascular organ system. Therefore, the
proposed modeling paradigm could also facilitate the
design of any clinical guidance system that encodes the
best practice monitoring and treatment guidelines.
We use ﬁnite state machine formalism to model patho-
physiological processes of different organ systems. Each
automaton is a labeled transition system. The nodes rep-
resent different stages/types organ insufﬁciency. The state
variables may include physiological measurements and lab
values. The deﬁnition of each state and the condition en-
abling transitions between the states are extracted from med-
ical literature and clinical best practice guidelines.
In this section we discuss our modeling methodology and
the steps we have taken during the modeling process to make
the clinical validation less complex and more straightfor-
ward. In the process of developing our pathophysiological
organ models, we have gone through multiple iterations of
design, validation and close discussion with our ICU physi-
cian collaborators. At each iteration a set of modeling guide-
lines were generated, which were used to update the patho-
physiological models for the next iteration. The following
modeling guidelines are generated as a result of this whole
process:
G1. Considering all relevant pathophysiological mod-
els in the best practice guideline: As mentioned in the pre-
vious section, each disease can cause several abnormalities
and insufﬁciencies in different organ systems. For example,
in cardiac arrest, the main affected organ is the cardiovas-
cular system. The effect mainly includes abnormal heart
rhythm and blood acidity and gas levels. However, other or-
gans might also be affected by cardiac arrest. For example,
while medical staff focus on treating arrhythmia and inject-
ing various drugs, such as epinephrine, patient may develop
renal insufﬁciency. If the medical staff do not notice the new
condition and continue giving the same drugs with the same
dosage, patient’s kidney may become severely insufﬁcient or
even fail. Therefore, we must include all the organ and insuf-
ﬁciency category models relevant to the disease under study.
For cardiac arrest, in addition to arrhythmia and blood gas
imbalance state machines, our model also includes a renal
insufﬁciency state machine to demonstrate the multi-organ
interactions.
G2. Determining the correct level of concurrency: An-
other important modeling choice is modeling a pathophysi-
ological process by a single state machine vs. multiple con-
current state machines. For each disease, several organ in-
sufﬁciencies may happen simultaneously. To keep track of
all abnormalities, we model each insufﬁciency as a separate
state machine. This also increases the modularity and pre-
vent any critical patient state change from being overlooked.
We also observe that, there are measurements, which physi-
cians often look at as a group and interpret together to have
a better assessment of patient state. We decided to model all
such measurements in one single process represented by one
single state machine. An example of this case, is the urine
output, creatinine and potassium Physicians often evaluate

--- Page 4 ---
(a) Best Practice Automaton
(b) Physician Automaton
Figure 3: Manually Constructed Arrhythmia Automata in Yakindu
these values together to conclude the degree of renal insuf-
ﬁciency. Putting the two guidelines together, for the cardiac
arrest case study we have designed a renal insufﬁciency ma-
chine to keep track of kidney state, which can change in par-
allel with cardiovascular organ functions. We use these three
measurements to deﬁne the different states of renal insufﬁ-
ciency in the kidney state machine.
G3. Choosing the correct level of abstraction for each
model: The abstraction level for each automaton is derived
from the best practice algorithm for the disease in coopera-
tion with the physicians. For example, in the case of cardiac
arrest, most guidelines focus on cardiovascular system as the
main affected organ. Therefore, more detailed information
regarding cardiovascular abnormalities such as arrhythmia,
blood gas imbalance and etc. may be codiﬁed in the model.
The organ insufﬁciency states are deﬁned as a function of
physiological measurements. This information is retrieved
from medical literature and/or given by our physician col-
laborators.
G4. Correlating relevant clinical data: Most current
medical systems raise alerts based on single measurements,
which creates considerable false positive alerts. Identify-
ing the relation between measurements and structuring them
according to organ pathophysiology add a layer of intelli-gence to patient state representation. For example, we con-
sider heart rate and blood pressure in addition to the EKG
rhythm to help medical staff keep track of the state of ar-
rhythmia in a cardiac arrest patient. This enables us to detect
inconsistencies between correlated measurements and help
medical staff with a more precise assessment of patient state.
Following the proceeding example, if the EKG rhythm indi-
cates PEA but the systolic blood pressure reading is above
20mmHg , our model recognizes this inconsistency and in-
forms the medical staff of the issue. In this example, there
might be a problem with blood pressure cuff or one of the
EKG leads might be loose. Bringing such inconsistencies to
the attention of physician can reduce the likelihood of admin-
istering the inappropriate treatment due to imprecise patient
state evaluation.
G5. Deﬁning clinically sound and useful states: In the
previous two guidelines, we discuss the number of parallel
state machines, and the measurements to be included in each
machine. The next step is to deﬁne each state as a function
of the chosen physiological measurements. The deﬁnition of
each state must be clinically sound; however, deﬁning a large
number of states for each machine can make the model very
complex and unmanageable. Moreover, not all the changes
in physiological measurements are relevant or useful for a

--- Page 5 ---
given disease. Providing too much information and too many
alerts to the medical staff may create confusion and increase
their mental overload, which is what our system aims to pre-
vent in the ﬁrst place. Therefore, we have used the notion
ofactionable states . We deﬁne a new state when there is a
need for new monitoring and therapeutic plan. The action-
able states can be extracted from the requirements. Note that
each requirement specify the organ states, which trigger an
action from the medical staff.
G6. Deﬁning state transitions : Similar to the deﬁnition
of states in each machine, deﬁning a large number of transi-
tions can make the model complex and less understandable.
Moreover, the process of model development becomes more
error prone. The key in identifying the correct and optimal
number of transitions is considering the medical knowledge
underlying our models. Development and similarly resolu-
tion of organ failure may take some time. Therefore, when
continuous physiological variables are used to deﬁne differ-
ent insufﬁciency states, we may not need to create an edge
between every insufﬁciency states. The exception may be
the initial state; since we do not know the patient state when
we start, we can deﬁne a transition between the initial state
and every other insufﬁciency states. This can remove the
any potential latency in patient state tracking associated with
the model stabilization. If we do not have the transitions
edges from the initial state, when the system starts the mod-
els might need a few cycles to stabilize and reﬂect the current
patient state.
Following the modeling guidelines, G1-G3 , and after a se-
ries of discussions with our ICU physician collaboratives,
we have come up with a set of organ insufﬁciency models
for cardiac arrest: the cardiac arrhythmia ,blood gas imbal-
ance (BGI) , and renal insufﬁciency automata. Let us take a
closer look at the arrhythmia machine as an example. As
you can see in Figure 3(a), the model represent different
types of heart rhythm irregularity. Let us assume the cur-
rent readings indicate no meaningful heart rate reading and
an EKG rhythm that is not a ﬂat line but does not produce
a pulse. Therefore, the arrhythmia machine transitions to
pulseless electrical activity state. As a result, the monitor-
ing system using these developed organ models can detect
new organ state and notify the medical staff of the changes
in patient state. Different states of arrhythmia may require
different treatments, and therefore are considered actionable
states ( G5). Furthermore, since the EKG rhyme is not con-
sidered a continuous measurement, following G6, we created
transition edges between all the states.
As mentioned before, the state variables and physiologi-
cal conditions enabling state transitions for each automaton
come from the best practice guidelines. In the arrhythmia
model, the EKG rhythm is the main state variable; however,
following G4and through discussion with our physician col-
laborators, blood pressure and heart rate measurements are
used in addition to EKG rhythm for a better assessment of
the arrhythmia state. Note that the cut-off thresholds for
the blood pressure and heart rate, shown in Figure 3(a), are
for average patients. We use numbers for better readability.
In fact, such threshold values are deﬁnes as parameters to
our model, which can be conﬁgured by the attending physi-
cian before the system starts . In the next section we presentour physician-in-the-loop paradigm form run-time interac-
tion with the attending physician.
3.2.2 Human Model
At times patient states presented by our system may differ
from physician understanding and they may deviate from the
best practice guidelines suggested by our system. A source
of this inconsistency, should it occur, is that there may be in-
formation used by the physician to make a determination but
not available to our system, or the inconsistency cab be the
result of unintended deviation. The physician my override
the best practice guidelines at anytime. However, any devi-
ations from the best practice guidelines must be tracked and
recorded for ofﬂine analysis.
We propose a compositional automata model to handle
and track the physician interaction with the system. For
each patient state suggested by our model, the response from
the physician regarding the new patient state is received and
processed by a physician automata. We dedicate a separate
physician automata for each organ automata included in the
disease model. Figure 3(b), for example, shows the physi-
cian automata for cardiac arrhythmia , which represents the
physician’s belief on the current state of the corresponding
pathophysiological process. If the physician does not ap-
prove the organ state suggested by the system, the physician
automata does not transition to the suggested organ state.
Moreover, at each time physician may decide to transition
(jump ) to a new state independent of the organ states sug-
gested by our system. As seen in Figure 3, the physician
and best practice organ automata for each pathophysiologi-
cal process have identical structures but can have different
run-time states. This compositional approach results in more
modular approach, in which the organ and physician models
can be validated and veriﬁed independently.
3.2.3 Best Practice Model
Best practice (manager) model codiﬁes the well-established
guidelines, categorized according to the patient state. We de-
ﬁne the patient state Sas a tuple (S1; S2; : : : ; S n), in which
Siis the current state in ithpathophysiological process and
nis the total number of these processes developed for the dis-
ease under study. Fo example, for cardiac arrest case we have
developed arrhythmia ,blood gas imbalance (BGI) , and re-
nal insufﬁciency automata representing three different patho-
physiological processes involved in this disease. Therefore,
n= 3 andS=(V Tach ,Metabolic Acidosis ,Normal
Renal Function )can be an example of the current state of
a cardiac arrest patient. Best practice manager model peri-
odically communicates with all the organ models to get their
current states and determine the current patient state. As
mentioned before, the encoded guidelines are categorized to
patient state deﬁned as explained above. Therefore, when the
patient states changes, the best practice model determines the
subset of guidelines for the current patient state. For cardiac
arrest the ACLS algorithm by American Heart Association
[2] is codiﬁed.
In addition to encoding the guidelines, we have included a
divergence-convergence protocol in the best practice model.
As presented in the Section 3.2.2, the compositional model
allows us to track and record the physician belief on the

--- Page 6 ---
Pseudocode 1 Convergence-Divergence Protocol
1 input 1: OrganAutomata
OA= (OA1; OA 2; : : : ; OA n)
2 input 2: PhysicianAutomata
PA= (PA1; PA 2; : : : ; PA n)
3 input 3: PatientState S= (S1; S2; : : : ; S n)
4 input 4: PhysicianBelief
B= (B1; B2; : : : ; B n)
5 input 5: BestPracticeGuidelines G
6 input 6,7: Short Timer Tshort, Long Timer Tlong
7
8 UPDATE ();
9 ifS6=B
10 Send 1st Divergence Alert
11 DeviationCounter + +
12 Wait for Tshort
13 PrevS =S;PrevB =B
14 UPDATE ();
15 if(PrevS ==S&&PrevB ==B)
16 Send 2st Divergence Alert
17 DeviationCounter + +
18 else
19 Go to line 9;
20 end if;
21 Wait for Tlong
22 PrevS =S;PrevB =B
23 UPDATE ();
24 if(PrevS ==S&&PrevB ==B)
25 Send Final DivergenceAlert
26 DeviationCounter + +
27 else
28 Go to line 9;
29 end if;
30 else
31 DeviationCounter = 0
32 Display G0Gfor the current patient state
33 S= (S1; S2; : : : ; S n)
34 end if
35
36 UPDATE ()f
37 fori=1to n
38 Si=CurrentState (OAi)
39 Bi=CurrentState (PAi)
40 end for
41 S= (S1; S2; : : : ; S n)
42 B= (B1; B2; : : : ; B n)g
current patient state. However, to reduce the unintended
divergence from best practice, we propose the divergence-
convergence protocol. When there is a discrepancy between
the organ automata and its corresponding physician automata
an initial alert is generated to reduce any unintended devi-
ation. If patient organ state continues to deteriorate or re-
mains the same, two additional alerts are generated by the
system. Note that all the timer-related values are conﬁg-
urable. After discussion with our physician collaborators,
we designed the last alert to be triggered by a longer timer.
When we transition to a new organ state and the best prac-
tice and physician diagnoses are still inconsistent, the timer
routine restarts. However, if the patient state improves the
system (by design) converges with the physician’s decision.
The protocol steps are presented in Pseudocode 1.
Any deviation from best practice are logged by our system
and may be used for additional review (can be speciﬁcally
useful for residents). According to [20], failure to debrief
after code is one of common errors made in cardiac arrestcare and the logging feature can help alleviate this situation.
Furthermore, the logs can also be analyzed by the developers
to improve the precision of the proposed models.
3.3 Clinical Validation
The executable organ models allow us to simulate the dis-
ease under study. The clinical simulation provides an envi-
ronment for dynamic validation of the models, in addition to
statically cross referencing the clinical requirements and the
models. As mentioned before, we use an open source tool,
called Yakindu, to develop the models. The tool provides
an integrated modeling environment and allows simulation
of the developed model to validate its dynamic behavior [1].
Physician can directly look at the organ models and cross
reference with the speciﬁed clinical requirements. Note that,
the developed models are at same level of abstraction the
medical knowledge and reasoning are known to physician. If
directly implemented in procedural style using a high level
language such as Java, organ-centric patient state represen-
tation could not be easily validated by physicians. On the
other hand, at our proposed level of abstraction, physicians
with minimal IT background can easily understand the mod-
els and review the design. The following are a subset of clin-
ical requirements validated for the developed organ models:
CR1: All the pathophysiological processes relevant to
the disease under study are modeled.
CR2: All the necessary insufﬁciency states are mod-
eled for each pathophysiological process.
CR3: The correct and only necessary subset of physi-
ological measurements are used to deﬁne the states in
each automaton.
CR4: The deﬁnition of insufﬁciency states are correct.
CR5: Any changes in the physiological measurements
will result in transition(s) to the correct insufﬁciency
state(s).
We have shown our developed models and simulation of
cardiac arrest scenario to our physician collaborators for clin-
ical validation. More details on our simulation of cardiac ar-
rest is presented in Section 4. Note that for each pathophysi-
ological process, the physician automaton has the exact same
states as the best practice version of the corresponding au-
tomata. The transitions are simply enabled by the physician
input. The correctness of the physician models are formally
veriﬁed using UPPAAL (Section 3.4).
3.4 Formal Veriﬁcation
To formally verify the correctness of the models, we use
UPPAAL model checker tool. Currently, the translation from
Yakindu to UPPAAL is done manually. The correctness of
the translation is a challenge that also needs to be addressed
but is outside the scope of this paper. However, the UPPAAL
model-checker is also based on the theory of timed automata
and this make the translation process less complex. In [7]
automatic translation of Yakindu models to UPPAAL is dis-
cussed. However, in this paper the translation is done manu-
ally until such research works mature.

--- Page 7 ---
Figure 4: Manually Translated Arrhythmia UPPAAL Model
As mentioned before, we use an open source tool, called
Yakindu, to develop the models. The tool provides an inte-
grated modeling environment and development based on the
concept of statecharts. To make the traslation to UPPAAL
less complex, we avoided using composite states, supported
by statecharts, in the Yakindu models. UPPAAL model checker
tool does not support composite states. Therefore, using
them in our organ models would make the task of transla-
tion to UPPAAL more complex and possibly error-prone.
Another reason for avoiding composite states is to maintain
the model simplicity for clinical validation by physicians.
Understanding complex computer science concepts, such as
composite states, would be a non-trivial tasks for the physi-
cians. Our goal is to keeps the models as simple and intu-
itive as possible. Note that we use the orthogonal regions
supported in statecharts to represent a set of concurrent or-
gan models, which we develop to track concurrent changes
in the patient state. In UPPAAL, a system is also modeled as
a network of communicating state machines. This makes the
task of translation to UPPAAL and formal veriﬁcation more
straightforward.
The Yakindu models may include state and transition ac-
tions. Since UPPAAL only supports transition actions, we
also translated any necessary state action to a transition ac-
tion. In Yakindu, the state actions include entry, exit and
timer based actions. The entry action should be performed
once when entering the state. We translated this to an action
assigned to all the incoming transitions to the corresponding
state. The exit action, which must be executed when exist-
ing the state, was translated to actions on all the outgoing
transitions. For the timer-based state actions, we created a
self-transition and used the timer as transition guard.
Figure 4 shows the arrhythmia UPPAAL model, as an ex-
ample. The four states are mapped to four locations, each
representing an arrhythmia state, with the exception of ini-Property Fromula
P1 A[]Not Deadlock
P2 E <> ArrhythmiaBP:V entricularFibrillation
P3 A <> ((Rhythm ==V FIB &&BP20) =)
ArrhythmiaBP:V entricularFibrillation )
P4 A <> (ArrhythmiaBP:V entricularFibrillation
=)(Rhythm ==V FIB &&BP20))
Table 1: Property List
tial state.The entry state actions are translated to updates on
all the incoming transitions to the corresponding states. For
the Sinus state, an additional transition is added from the ini-
tial state to initialize the state variable.
A subset of presented clinical requirements are formalized
and veriﬁed using UPPAAL. Some clinical requirements such
asCR1may only validated by a physician. We have trans-
lated our cardiac arrest Yakindu models to UPPAAL and for-
malized these clinical requirements and several system re-
quirements as (timed) computation tree logic, CTL, formu-
las. The exact formula depends on the disease under study.
A subset of veriﬁed properties are shown in Table 1. The
absence of deadlock in the model is formalized as P1and
P2is an example of reachability properties ( P2). The safety
properties P3andP4are examples of formalized CR4and
CR5for the arrhythmia model.
3.5 Guidance System Integration
As shown in Figure 1, we can integrate the developed mod-
els with an existing guidance system The Java code can be
generated automatically from the Yakindu model and inte-
grated with the existing system using some glue code. How-
ever, the tool also allows direct interaction between the Yakindu
model and existing Java code. Therefore, for visualization
purposes we integrated the cardiac arrest model with an ex-
isting guidance system, previously developed by our research
group. The models interact with the existing system using
our handwritten communication code. We speciﬁcally inter-

--- Page 8 ---
Figure 6: Best Practice Guidelines Generated by our System
act with two components of this existing system: a patient
control panel andgraphical display , which allow us to sim-
ulate different clinical scenarios.
The communication follows the interface shown in Figure
2. The patient measurements is provided to the model using
patient control panel , which will trigger each pathophysio-
logical state machine to transition to the states corresponding
to the current measurements. The "suspected" organ states
are then sent to the main display for the attending physi-
cian to see. We have emulated the physician response us-
ing a set of Yakindu events. Physician can enter its response
to the new suspected patient states. The responses will be
received and recorded by our physician model. If the new
patient state is not conﬁrmed or a different organ state is en-
tered by the physician, the convergence-divergence protocol,
as explained in Section 3.2.3, is executed. However, if the
new patient state is conﬁrmed, the new guidelines are sent to
themain display . More details on the clinical simulation of
cardiac arrest guidance system is presented in Section 4.
4. CARDIAC ARREST CASE STUDY
A brief discussion of the cardiac arrest scenario is pre-
sented in Section 3. We discussed the set of organ insufﬁ-
ciency models for cardiac arrest and elaborated the arrhyth-
miamodel as an example (Figure 3(a)). The cardiac arrest
model includes two additional pathophysiological processes:
blood gas imbalance (BGI) , and renal insufﬁciency . Due to
space limitation, the details on developed automata is pre-
sented in the appendix.
The best practice model for the cardiac arrest scenario cod-
iﬁes the the ACLS algorithm by American Heart Association
[2], and other well-established guidelines recommended by
our physician collaborators. Readers are referred to the ap-
pendix for more details on ACLS algorithm. In addition to
the these guidelines, the cardiac arrest best practice model
includes the divergence-convergence protocol, as explained
in Section 3.2.3.
To further demonstrate how the models can be used to de-
sign clinical systems, we have developed a cardiac arrest
guidance system using our constructed models and follow-
ing the approach presented in Section 3.5. Figure 5(a) shows
a simulation snapshot including the organ models (Statechart
implementation) and the graphical display. The snapshotProperty Fromula
P5 E<>BGI _BestPractice:MetabolicAcidosis
P6 A<>BGI _BestPractice:MetabolicAcidosis =)(pH <
PH _LOW _THRESHOLD )
P7 A[] BGI _Physician:MetabolicAcidosis =)
Physician _BGI _State ==METABOLIC _ACIDOSIS
P8 A<> (BGI _BestPractice:MetabolicAcidosis &&
BGI _Physician:NormalBloodGasLevels ) =)
(MetabolicAcidosis _DeviationCounter > 0)
Table 2: Cardiac Arrest Property List
shows a point in the simulation, in which the patient’s blood
pHvalue indicates metabolic acidosis. However, the physi-
cian does not approve the organ state suggested by the sys-
tem. Therefore, the two versions of Blood Gas Imbalance au-
tomata have different runtime states. We have deﬁned a set of
events in Yakindu to emulate the physician’s response to the
system’s suggestions. As shown in Figure 5(b), the deviation
from best practice guided acidosis diagnosis is logged by the
system. Note that when blood pHgoes above the thresh-
old, the best practice BGI automaton automatically transi-
tions to Normal Blood Gas Levels state and converges with
the physician diagnosis. This case is not shown due to space
limitations.
When the physician approves the organ states suggested
by the system, the subset of best practice guidelines appli-
cable to the current patient state are placed on the main dis-
play. Figure 6 shows a simulation snapshot, in which PEA
rhythm, metabolic acidosis and renal insufﬁciency states have
been approved by physician. We have shown our simulation
of cardiac arrest guidance system to our physician collabo-
rators to ensure the clinical correctness. The following are a
subset of clinical requirements for the cardiac arrest, which
are instantiations of the generic requirements presented in
Section 3.3.
CR1: All the pathophysiological processes relevant to
cardiac arrest are modeled.
CR2: All the abnormal rhythms relevant to cardiac ar-
rest are modeled in the Arrhythmia machine.
CR3: EKG rhythm, heart rate and blood pressure are
the correct and necessary physiological measurements
to deﬁne different arrhythmia states.
CR4: The deﬁnition of each arrhythmia, BGI and renal
state is correct.
CR5: Any changes in blood pHand/or PaCO 2result
in transition to the correct blood gas imbalance state.
After validating the clinical requirements, using Yakindu
simulation, we verify a set of formalized safety properties us-
ing UPPAAL model checker. We followed the approach ex-
plained in Section 3.4, and manually translated all the mod-
els to UPPAAL. Due to space limitation, the other UPPAAL
models are not presented in this paper. Some of the proper-
ties have been presented in Section 3.4. Additional veriﬁed
properties are listed in Table 2. For example, P7ensures the
correctness of physician model and P8is a safety property
of the divergence-convergence protocol.

--- Page 9 ---
Physician AutomataBest Practice AutomataMetabolic Acidosis
Normal Blood Gas LevelsPhysician Interface(a) Simulation Snapshot
(b) Log Snapshot
Figure 5: Inconsistent Physician and Best Practice Blood Gas Imbalance Automata
5. RELATED WORK
The necessity of proper infrastructures and the principles
of medical systems have been discussed in [18, 8]. Medical
Device Coordination Framework (MDCF) facilitates integra-
tion of different medical devices, and provides an app pro-
gramming environment for easy assembling of a new med-
ical application [15, 14]. Our focus is on developing ex-
ecutable disease models to use for designing an integrated
monitoring system for acute care. The proposed system can
beneﬁt from the services provided by such platforms.
Most current medical monitoring devices and systems pro-
vide single (physiological) measurement-alerts and thus little
contextual information to medical staff. Some research has
been done on exploiting the relations between measurements
and the development of smart alarms [11], [12]. However,we believe that an integrated computerized system is neces-
sary to help medical staff keep track of critical changes in
patient state and perform treatments in a timely manner.
A great body of work in this domain has been focused
on expert systems, which are designed to provide medical
diagnosis and treatment suggestions by codifying experts’
knowledge, reasoning using the rules and deducing new knowl-
edge [9]. Several inference and decision making methodolo-
gies have been developed, such as rule-based reasoning [22],
fuzzy logic [10] and probabilistic network [4]. Approaches
based on machine learning aim to excerpt common patterns
from empirical medical data and make decisions based on
the learned behaviors [17]. However, most clinical problems
are complicated and involve many dynamic decision-making
steps; therefore, straightforward attempts to chain together
larger sets of rules encounter major difﬁculties [21]. Unlike

--- Page 10 ---
such decision support systems, in this paper, we focus on de-
veloping an organ-centric patient monitoring system to aid
medical staff to keep track of critical changes in the patient
state and adhere to best practice guidelines.
Our computational approach codiﬁes patient information
into executable organ automata.The main reason behind de-
veloping organ-centric disease models is that medical liter-
ature and training represent disease as a set of abnormal or-
gan states. There have been similar works on organization
of patient data. The authors in [19] propose a framework to
transform EHR data into standards-conforming, comparable
information suitable for large-scale analysis and inference.
In [13] a new application system is proposed to store and cat-
egorize patient information according to body system view.
However, the focus is on storing and displaying the value and
trend of correlated (raw) measurements together. We focus
on developing executable disease models that can be directly
used to derive the best practice assist system.
6. CONCLUDING REMARKS
In this paper, we propose a domain-speciﬁc model-driven
design approach for designing clinical guidance systems. We
introduce an organ-centric paradigm to construct clinical mod-
els, and also develop a physician model to track physician-
system interactions. We translate the model into timed au-
tomata, based on which, we formalize a set of clinical and
system safety requirements as computation tree logic formu-
las and use the UPPAAL model checking tool to formally
verify them. As part of our future work, we will consider
more complex diseases such as sepsis and discuss the use
of physiological trends in organ models. Furthermore, to
demonstrate the effectiveness of our system, we are in the
process of evaluating our models and integrated system in
the context of simulated resuscitation using an ACLS train-
ing scenario.
Acknowledgment
This work is supported by NSF CNS 1329886, NSF CNS
1545002, NIH Sub MGH 217183 and in part by ONR N00014-
14-1-0717.
7. REFERENCES
[1] http://statecharts.org/.
[2] www.heart.org/acls.
[3] http://carle.org.
[4] S. Andreassen, F. V . Jensen, and K. G. Olesen.
Medical expert systems based on causal probabilistic
networks. International journal of bio-medical
computing , 28(1):1–30, 1991.
[5] H. Gao, A. McDonnell, D. A. Harrison, T. Moore,
S. Adam, K. Daly, L. Esmonde, D. R. Goldhill, G. J.
Parry, A. Rashidian, et al. Systematic review and
evaluation of physiological track and trigger warning
systems for identifying at-risk patients on the ward.
Intensive care medicine , 33(4):667–679, 2007.
[6] U. Geary and U. Kennedy. Clinical decision-making in
emergency medicine. Emergencias , 22:56–60, 2010.[7] C. Guo, S. Ren, Y . Jiang, P. L. Wu, L. Sha, and R. B.
Berlin. Transforming medical best practice guidelines
to executable and veriﬁable statechart models. In 2016
ACM/IEEE 7th International Conference on
Cyber-Physical Systems (ICCPS) , pages 1–10, April
2016.
[8] J. Hatcliff, A. King, I. Lee, A. MacDonald,
A. Fernando, M. Robkin, E. Vasserman, S. Weininger,
and J. M. Goldman. Rationale and architecture
principles for medical application platforms. In
Cyber-Physical Systems (ICCPS), 2012 IEEE/ACM
Third International Conference on , pages 3–12. IEEE,
2012.
[9] D. L. Hudson. Medical expert systems. Wiley
Encyclopedia of Biomedical Engineering , 2006.
[10] D. L. Hudson and M. E. Cohen. Fuzzy logic in
medical expert systems. Engineering in Medicine and
Biology Magazine, IEEE , 13(5):693–698, 1994.
[11] M. Imhoff and S. Kuhls. Alarm algorithms in critical
care monitoring. Anesthesia & Analgesia ,
102(5):1525–1537, 2006.
[12] M. Imhoff, S. Kuhls, U. Gather, and R. Fried. Smart
alarms from medical devices in the or and icu. Best
Practice & Research Clinical Anaesthesiology ,
23(1):39–50, 2009.
[13] L. Kelly, B. Smith, M. Davenport, and B. Scott.
Presenting patient information by body system,
Dec. 10 2012. US Patent App. 13/709,478.
[14] A. King, D. Arney, I. Lee, O. Sokolsky, J. Hatcliff, and
S. Procter. Prototyping Closed Loop Physiologic
Control with the Medical Device Coordination
Framework. In Proceedings of the 2010 ICSE
Workshop on Software Engineering in Health Care ,
pages 1–11. ACM Special Interest Group on Software
Engineering, 2010.
[15] A. King, S. Procter, D. Andresen, J. Hatcliff,
S. Warren, W. Spees, R. Jetley, P. Jones, and
S. Weininger. An Open Test Bed for Medical Device
Integration and Coordination. In Proceedings of the
2009 International Conference on Software
Engineering (ICSE) , pages 141–151, 2009.
[16] L. T. Kohn, J. M. Corrigan, and M. S. Donaldson. To
err is human, building a safer health system, 1999.
[17] I. Kononenko. Machine learning for medical
diagnosis: history, state of the art and perspective.
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in medicine , 23(1):89–109,
2001.
[18] I. Lee, G. J. Pappas, R. Cleavland, J. Hatcliff, B. H.
Krogh, P. Lee, H. Rubin, and L. Sha. High-Conﬁdence
Medical Device Software and Systems. IEEE
Computer , 39:33–38, April 2006.
[19] S. Rea, J. Pathak, G. Savova, T. A. Oniki, L. Westberg,
C. E. Beebe, C. Tao, C. G. Parker, P. J. Haug, S. M.
Huff, et al. Building a robust, scalable and
standards-driven infrastructure for secondary use of
ehr data: the sharpn project. Journal of biomedical
informatics , 45(4):763–771, 2012.
[20] N. Strzyzewski. Common errors made in resuscitation
of respiratory and cardiac arrest. Plastic Surgical

--- Page 11 ---
Nursing , 26(1):10–14, 2006.
[21] P. Szolovits, R. S. Patil, and W. B. Schwartz. Artiﬁcial
intelligence in medical diagnosis. Annals of internal
medicine , 108(1):80–87, 1988.
[22] S. Tsumoto and H. Tanaka. Automated discovery of
medical expert system rules from clinical databases
based on rough sets. In KDD , pages 63–69, 1996.
APPENDIX
A. CARDIAC ARREST YAKINDU MODELS
In this section we present the blood gas imbalance (BGI) ,
and renal insufﬁciency automata (Figures 7(a), and 8(a)).
The nodes represent different stages/types of imbalance in
arterial blood gas levels and renal insufﬁciency according
to existing medical knowledge. The changes in the relevant
physiological measurements and lab values, which result in
satisfaction of the condition for a new organ state cause the
transition. For example, when the blood pHvalue from a
recent ABG test is below the lower threshold, the blood gas
imbalance automaton transitions to metabolic acidosis . Sim-
ilarly, the renal insufﬁciency automaton, shown in Figure ref-
ﬁg:kidneyBP), keeps track of current renal function state, ac-
cording to best practice monitoring guidelines.

--- Page 12 ---
(a) Best Practice Automaton
(b) Physician Automaton
Figure 7: Blood Gas Imbalance Automata
(a) Best Practice Automaton
(b) Physician Automaton
Figure 8: Kidney Automata
