--- Page 1 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
Timed I/O Automata: It Is Never Too Late
to Complete Your Timed Specification
Theory
Martijn A. Goorden1*, Kim G. Larsen1, Axel Legay2, Florian
Lorber1, Ulrik Nyman1and Andrzej Wąsowski3
1*Department of Computer Science, Aalborg University, Selma
Lagerlöfs Vej 300, Aalborg Öst, 9220, Danmark.
2Department of Computer Science Engineering, UC Louvain,
Place Sainte Barbe 2, Louvain-la-Neuve, 1348, Belgium.
3Department of Computer Science, IT University, Rued
Langgaards Vej 7, Copenhagen S, 2300, Denmark.
*Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s): mgoorden@cs.aau.dk;
Contributing authors: kgl@cs.aau.dk; axel.legay@uclouvain.be;
florber@cs.aau.dk; ulrik@cs.aau.dk; wasowski@itu.dk;
Abstract
A specification theory combines notions of specifications and imple-
mentations with a satisfaction relation, a refinement relation and
a set of operators supporting stepwise design. We develop a com-
plete specification framework for real-time systems using Timed I/O
Automata as the specification formalism, with the semantics expressed
in terms of Timed I/O Transition Systems. We provide constructs
for refinement, consistency checking, logical and structural composi-
tion, and quotient of specifications—all indispensable ingredients of a
compositional design methodology. The theory is backed by rigorous
proofs and is being implemented in the open-source tool ECDAR.
Keywords: Specification theory, timed input-output automata, timed
input-output transition systems
1arXiv:2302.04529v2  [cs.FL]  13 Jul 2023

--- Page 2 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
2Timed I/O Automata
1 Introduction
Modularity is a highly desired property of a software architecture. Modular
software systems are decomposed into components, often designed by inde-
pendent teams, working under a common agreement on what the interface of
each component should be. Consequently, compositional reasoning [1, 2], the
mathematical foundations of reasoning about interfaces, is an active research
area. Besides supporting compositional development, it enables compositional
reasoning about the system (verification) and allows well-grounded reuse.
In a logical interpretation, interfaces are specifications, while components
that implement an interface are understood as models/implementations. Spec-
ification theories should support various features including (1) a refinement
that allows to compare specifications and to replace a specification by another
one in a design, (2) a logical conjunction that expresses combining the require-
ments of two or more specifications, (3) a structural composition , which allows
to combine specifications, and (4) a quotient operator that, being a dual to
structural composition, allows decomposing the design by groups of require-
ments. The latter is crucial to perform incremental design. Also, the operations
have to be related by compositional reasoning theorems, guaranteeing both
incremental design and independent implementability [3].
Building good specification theories is the subject of intensive stud-
ies [2, 4, 5]. Interface automata are one such successful direction [3, 5–7]. In
this framework, an interface is represented by an input/output automaton [8],
i.e., an automaton whose transitions are typed with inputandoutput. The
semanticsofsuchanautomatonisgivenbyatwo-playergame:the inputplayer
represents the environment, and the outputplayer represents the component
itself. Contrary to the input/output model proposed by Lynch and Tuttle [8],
this semantic offers an optimistic treatment of composition: two interfaces can
be composed if there exists at least one environment in which they can interact
together in a safe way. A timed extension of the theory of interface automata
has been motivated by the fact that real time can be a crucial parameter in
practice, for example in embedded systems [9].
There have been several other attempts to propose an interface theory for
timed systems (see [9–16] for some examples). Our model shall definitely be
viewed as an extension of the timed input/output automaton model proposed
by Lynch and Tuttle [8] and Kaynar et al. [17]. The majors differences are
in the game-based treatment of interactions and the addition of quotient and
conjunction operators.
In [9], de Alfaro et al. suggested timed interfaces , a model that is simi-
lar to the one of TIOTSs. Our definition of composition builds on the one
proposed in there. However, the work in [9] is incomplete. Indeed, there is
no notion of implementation and refinement. Moreover, conjunction and quo-
tient are not studied. Finally, the theory has only been implemented in a
prototype tool [10] which does not handle continuous time, while our contri-
bution takes advantages of the powerful Difference Bound Matrices (DBM)
representation [18–20].

--- Page 3 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
Timed I/O Automata 3
In [6], Larsen proposes modal automata , which are deterministic automata
equipped with transitions of the following two types: mayandmust. The com-
ponents that implement such interfaces are simple labeled transition systems.
Roughly, a must transition is available in every component that implements
the modal specification, while a may transition need not be. Recently, [11, 12]
a timed extension of modalautomata was proposed, which embeds all the
operations presented in the present paper. However, modalities are orthogonal
to inputs and outputs, and it is well-known [21] that, contrary to the game-
semantic approach, they cannot be used to distinguish between the behaviors
of the component and those of the environment.
Component interface specification and consistency. We represent specifi-
cations by timed input/output transition systems [17], i.e., timed transitions
systems whose sets of discrete transitions are split into input and output tran-
sitions. Contrary to de Alfaro and colleagues [9] and unlike Kaynar et al. [17]
we distinguish between implementations and specifications. This is done by
assuming that the former have fixed timing behavior and they can always
advance either by producing an output or delaying. We also provide a game-
based methodology to decide whether a specification is consistent, i.e., whether
it has at least one implementation. The latter reduces to deciding existence of
a strategy that despite the behavior of the environment will avoid states that
cannot possibly satisfy the implementation requirements.
Refinement and logical conjunction. A specification S1refinesa specifica-
tionS2iff it is possible to replace S2with S1in every environment and obtain
a system satisfying the same high-level specification (the substitutability prin-
ciple). In the input/output setting, checking refinement reduces to deciding an
alternating timed simulation between the two specifications [5]. In our timed
extension, checking such simulation can be done with a slight modification of
the theory proposed by Bulychev and coauthors [22]. As implementations are
specifications, refinement coincides with the satisfaction relation. Our refine-
ment operator has the model inclusion property , i.e., S1refines S2iff the set
of implementations satisfied by S1is included in the set of implementations
satisfied by S2. We also propose a logical conjunction operator between spec-
ifications. Given two specifications, the operator will compute a specification
whose implementations are satisfied by both operands. The operation may
introduce error states that do not satisfy the implementation requirement.
Those states are pruned by synthesizing a strategy for the component to avoid
reaching them. As we assume that we want to avoid reaching error states
with any possible environment, hence this pruning is called adversarial prun-
ing. We also show that conjunction coincides with shared refinement, i.e., it
corresponds to the greatest specification that refines both S1andS2.
Structural composition. Following Timed Interfaces [9], specifications
interact by synchronizing on inputs and outputs. However, like in I/O
Automata[8, 17], we restrict ourselves to input-enabled systems. This makes it
impossible to reach an immediate deadlock state , where a component proposes
an output that cannot be captured by the other component. However, unlike

--- Page 4 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
4Timed I/O Automata
in I/O Automata, input-enabledness shall not be seen as a way to avoid error
states.Indeed,sucherrorstatescanstillbedesignatedbythedesignerasstates
which do not warrant desirable temporal properties. When composing specifi-
cationstogether,onewouldliketosimplifythecompositionasmuchaspossible
before continuing the compositional analysis. We show that adversarial prun-
ing does not distribute over the parallel composition operator. Therefore, we
introduce the notion of cooperative pruning . Finally, we show that our com-
position operator is associative and that refinement is a precongruence with
respect to it.
Quotient. We propose a quotient operator dual to composition. Intuitively,
given a global specification Tof a composite system as well as the specification
of an already realized component S, thequotient will return the most liberal
specification Xfor the missing component, i.e., Xis the largest specification
such that Sin parallel with Xrefines T.
Extension over the earlier versions of this paper. This journal paper is
an extended and revised version of earlier conference papers [23, 24] and the
journal paper [25]. In this journal paper, we clarify the notion and effect of
pruning by introducing adversarial pruning and cooperative pruning, we show
that adversarial pruning (previously just called pruning [23–25]) does not dis-
tribute over the parallel composition so we no longer want to and require
pruning after each composition, we corrected several definitions, including the
one of the quotient, we removed the notion of strictly undesirable states, we
included proofs for all theorems, and we updated the section on tool support.
In the rest of the paper, we try to indicate changes to the theory with respect
to these original works as much as possible.
Structure of the paper. The paper is organized as follows. We continue first
by providing a motivating example in Section 2. Parts of this example are used
later in the paper to illustrate the theory. Section 3 introduces the general
framework of timed input/output transition systems and timed input/output
automata, the notions of specification and implementation, and the concept
of refinement. Section 4 continues by introducing consistency, the conjunction
operator, and adversarial pruning. Then, in Section 5 we introduce and discuss
parallel composition and in Section 6 the quotient operator. Finally, Section 7
concludes the paper.
2 Motivating Example
Universities operate under increasing pressure and competition. One of the
popular factors used in determining the level of national funding is that of soci-
etal impact, which is approximated by the number of news articles published
based on research outcomes. Clearly one would expect that the number (and
size) of grants given to a university has a (positive) influence on the number
of news articles.
Figure 1 gives the insight as to the organization of a very small Univer-
sitycomprising three components Administration ,Machine andResearcher . The

--- Page 5 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
Timed I/O Automata 5
z≤2
z≤2grant?, z:= 0
coin!
pub?, z:= 0news!pub?
z:= 0grant?, pub?
grant?
grant?, pub?Administration
y≤6coin?
y:= 0
cof!
y≥4tea!tea!
y≥2
coin?Machine
x≤4 x≤8Err
cof?
x:= 0x≤15
tea?
x:= 0tea?, x >15
pub!x≥2x:= 0
pub!x≥4x:= 0
cof?, tea? cof?, tea?cof?, tea?
pub!Researchercoin
cof teapub news grant
Fig. 1: Specifications for and interconnections between the three main com-
ponents of a modern University :Administration ,Machine andResearcher .
Administration is responsible for interaction with society in terms of acquiring
grants( grant)andwritingnewsarticles( news).However,theothercomponents
are necessary for news articles to be obtained. The Researcher will produce the
crucial publications ( pub) within given time intervals, provided timely stimuli
in terms of coffee ( cof) or tea ( tea). Here coffee is clearly preferred over tea.
The beverage is provided by a Machine, which given a coin ( coin) will provide
either coffee or tea within some time interval, or even the possibility of free
tea after some time.
In Figure 1 the three components are specifications, each allowing for a
multitude of incomparable, actual implementations differing with respect to
exact timing behavior (e.g., at what time are publications actually produced
by the Researcher given a coffee) and exact output produced (e.g., does the
Machine offer tea or coffee given a coin).
As a first property, we may want to check that the composition of the
three components comprising our University is compatible: we notice that the
specification of the Researcher contains an Errstate, essentially not providing
any guarantees as to what behavior to expect if tea is offered at a late stage.
Now, compatibility checking amounts simply to deciding whether the user
of the University (i.e., the society) has such a strategy for using it that the
Researcher will avoid ever entering this error state.

--- Page 6 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
6Timed I/O Automata
u≤20grant?
u >2grant?, u≤2
u:= 0
news!, u:= 0grant? grant?
news!Specification
news grant
Fig. 2: Overall specification for a University .
As a second property, we may want to show that the composition of arbi-
trary implementations conforming to respective component specification is
guaranteed to satisfy some overall specification. Here Figure 2 provides an
overall specification (essentially saying that whenever grants are given to the
University sufficiently often then news articles are also guaranteed within a
certain upper time-bound). Checking this property amounts to establishing a
refinement between the composition of the three component specifications and
the overall specification. We leave the reader in suspense until the concluding
section before we reveal whether the refinement actually holds or not!
3 Specifications and refinements
Throughout the presentation of our specification theory, we continuously
switch the mode of discussion between the semantic and syntactic levels. In
general, the formal framework is developed for the semantic objects, Timed
I/O Transition Systems (TIOTSs in short) [26], and lifted to the syntactic
constructions for Timed I/O Automata (TIOAs), which act as a symbolic and
finite representation for TIOTSs. However, it is important to emphasize that
the theory for TIOTSs does not rely in any way on the TIOAs representation
– one can build TIOTSs that cannot be represented by TIOAs, and the theory
remains sound for them (although we do not know how to manipulate them
automatically).
Definition 1 ATimed Input Output Transition System (TIOTS) is a tuple S=
(QS, qS
0,ActS,→S), where QSis usually an infinite set of states, q0∈Qthe initial
state, ActS=ActS
i⊎ActSoa finite set of actions partitioned into inputs ( ActS
i) and
outputs ( ActSo), and →S⊆QS×(ActS∪R≥0)×QSa transition relation satisfying
the following conditions:
[time determinism] whenever qd− −→Sq′andqd− −→Sq′′, then q′=q′′
[time reflexivity] q0− −→Sqfor all q∈QS
[time additivity] for all q, q′′∈QSand all d1, d2∈R≥0we have qd1+d2− − − − −→Sq′′iff
qd1− −→Sq′andq′d2− −→Sq′′for some q′∈QS.

--- Page 7 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
Timed I/O Automata 7
We write qa− −→Sq′instead of (q, a, q′)∈→Sand use i?,o!, and dto range
over inputs, outputs, and R≥0, respectively. When no confusion can arise, for
example when only a single specification is given in a definition, we might
drop the superscript for readability, like Qinstead of QSifSis the only given
TIOTS. We write qa− −→to indicate that there exists a q′∈Qs.t.qa− −→q′,
andqXa− −→to indicate that there does not exist q′∈Qs.t.qa− −→q′. In the
interestofsimplicity,weworkwith deterministic TIOTSs:forall a∈Act∪R≥0
whenever qa− −→Sq′andqa− −→Sq′′, we have q′=q′′(determinism is required
not only for timed transitions but also for discrete transitions). In the rest of
the paper, we often drop the adjective ‘deterministic’. Finally, the action set
ActSis also called the alphabet.
For a TIOTS Sand a set of states X, we write
predS
a(X) ={q∈QS| ∃q′∈X:qa− −→Sq′}
for the set of all a-predecessors of states in X. We write ipredS(X)for the set
of all input predecessors and opredS(X)for all output predecessors of X:
ipredS(X) =[
a∈ActS
ipredS
a(X)
opredS(X) =[
a∈ActS
opredS
a(X).
Furthermore, postS
d(q)is the set of all time successors of a state qthat can be
reached by delays smaller than d:
postS
d(q) ={q′∈QS| ∃d′∈[0, d⟩:qd′
− −→Sq′}.
Note that postS
d(q)is defined using the open interval [0, d⟩, while our previous
work used the closed interval [0, d]. This subtle difference is needed for its
application in adversarial pruning (Section 4).
We shall now introduce a symbolic representation for TIOTSs in terms
of Timed I/O Automata (TIOAs). Let Clkbe a finite set of clocks. Aclock
valuation over Clkis a mapping v∈[Clk7→R≥0]. We write v+dto denote
a valuation such that for any clock rwe have (v+d)(r) =v(r) +d. Given
d∈R≥0and a set of clocks c, we write v[r7→0]r∈cfor a valuation which
agrees with von all values for clocks not in c, and returns 0 for all clocks in
c. So this notation resets the clocks in c. For example, {x7→3, y7→4.5}[r7→
0]r∈{x}≡ {x7→0, y7→4.5}. A guard over Clkis a finite Boolean formula with
the usual propositional connectives where clauses are expressions of the form
x≺n, where x∈Clk,≺∈ { <,≤, >,≥,=}, and n∈N. We write B(Clk)for
the set of all guards over Clk. The notation Tis used for the logical true and F
for the logical false. The reset of a guard q∈ B(Clk), denoted by g[r7→0]r∈c,
is again a guard where each occurrence of clock x∈cis replaced by 0. For
example (x <4∧y >2)[x7→0]≡0<4∧y >2≡y >2.

--- Page 8 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
8Timed I/O Automata
Definition 2 ATimed Input Output Automaton (TIOA) is a tuple A=
(Loc, l0,Act,Clk, E,Inv)where Locis a finite set of locations, l0∈Locthe initial
location, Act=Acti⊎Actois a finite set of actions partitioned into inputs ( Acti)
and outputs ( Acto),Clka finite set of clocks, E⊆Loc×Act× B(Clk)×2Clk×Loc
a set of edges, and Inv:Loc7→ B(Clk)a location invariant function.
If(l, a, φ, c, l′)∈Eis an edge, then lis a source location, ais an action
label, φis a guard over clocks that must be satisfied when the edge is executed,
cis a set of clocks to be reset, and l′is a target location. Examples of TIOAs
have been shown in the introduction. Note that, contrary to standard defini-
tions of timed automata, guards and invariants are allowed to be a Boolean
formula using all usual propositional connectives, including the disjunction.
The disjunction connective naturally arises in adversarial pruning (Section 4)
and the quotient (Section 6).
Definition 3 Thesemantic of a TIOA A= (Loc, l0,Act,Clk, E,Inv)is the TIOTS
JAKsem= (Loc×[Clk7→R≥0],(l0,0),Act,→), where 0is a constant function map-
ping all clocks to zero, 0|=Inv(l0), and→is the largest transition relation generated
by the following rules:
•Each (l, a, φ, c, l′)∈Egives rise to (l, v)a− −→(l′, v′)for each clock valuation
v∈[Clk7→R≥0]such that v|=φandv′=v[r7→0]r∈candv′|=Inv(l′).
•Each location l∈Locwith a valuation v∈[Clk7→R≥0]gives rise to a transition
(l, v)d− −→(l, v+d)for each delay d∈R≥0such that v+d|=Inv(l)and
∀d′∈R≥0, d′< d:v+d′|=Inv(l).
Compared to the definition of the semantic of TIOAs from previous
works [23–25], we additionally require 1) for a delay transition that ∀d′∈
R≥0, d′< d :v+d′|=Inv(l), since guards and invariants are relaxed to
Boolean formulas using conjunction anddisjunction, and 2) 0|=Inv(l0)to
prevent an undesirable edge case for the initial state. Note that the TIOTSs
induced by TIOAs satisfy the axioms 1–3 of Definition 1. In order to guaran-
tee determinism, the TIOA has to be deterministic: for each action–location
pair, if more than one edge is enabled at the same time, the resets and target
locations need to be the same. This is a standard check. We assume that all
TIOAs below are deterministic.
HavingintroducedasyntacticrepresentationforTIOTSs,wenowturnback
to the semantic level in order to define the basic concepts of implementation
and specification.
Definition 4 A TIOTS Sis aspecification if each of its states q∈Qis input-
enabled: ∀i?∈Acti:∃q′∈Qs.t.qi?− −→q′. A TIOA Ais aspecification automaton
if its semantic JAKsemis a specification.

--- Page 9 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
Timed I/O Automata 9
The assumption of input-enabledness, also seen in many interface theo-
ries [27–31], reflects our belief that an input cannot be prevented from being
sent to a system, but it might be unpredictable how the system behaves
after receiving it. Input-enbledness encourages explicit modeling of this unpre-
dictability, and compositional reasoning about it; for example, deciding if an
unpredictablebehaviorofonecomponentinducesunpredictabilityoftheentire
system.
In practice tools can interpret absent input transitions in at least two rea-
sonable ways. First, they can be interpreted as ignored inputs, corresponding
to location loops in the automaton. Second, they may be seen as unavailable
(‘blocking’) inputs, which can be achieved by assuming implicit transitions to
a designated error state.
The role of specifications in a specification theory is to abstract, or
underspecify, sets of possible implementations. Implementations are concrete
executable realizations of systems. We will assume that implementations of
timed systems have fixed timing behavior (outputs occur at predictable times)
and systems can always advance either by producing an output or delaying.
This is formalized using axioms of output-urgency andindependent-progress
below.
Definition 5 A specification P= (Q, q0,Act,→)is animplementation if for each
state q∈Qwe have
[output urgency] ∀q′, q′′∈Q, ifqo!− −→Pq′andqd− −→Pq′′for some o!∈Actoand
d∈R≥0, then d= 0.
[independent progress] either ∀d∈R≥0:qd− −→Por∃d∈R≥0,∃o!∈Actos.t.
qd− −→Pq′andq′o!− −→P.
A specification automaton Ais animplementation automaton if its semantic JAKsem
is an implementation.
Independent progress is one of the central properties in our theory: it states
that an implementation cannot ever get stuck in a state where it is up to the
environment to induce progress. So in every state there either exists an ability
to delay until an output is possible or the state can delay indefinitely. An
implementation cannot wait for an input from the environment without letting
time pass. Unfortunately, implementations might contain zeno behavior, for
example, a state having an output action as a self-loop might stop time by
firingthistransitioninfinitelyoften.Sotimeshouldbeabletodiverge[32].Yet,
to verify whether an implementation has time divergence, we need to analyze
it in the context of an environment to form a closed-system. Environments
could both ensure or prevent time to diverge, so one cannot determine time
divergence by analyzing the system without an environment. In this paper, we
focus on specifying components as part of a system. Therefore, we ignore the
problem of time divergence for now and postpone it to future work.

--- Page 10 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
10Timed I/O Automata
d− −→o!− −→i?←− −≤
S T
Fig. 3: Visual representation of the simulation relation defined by refinement.
A notion of refinement allows to compare two specifications as well as
to relate an implementation to a specification. Refinement should be a pre-
congruence when we compose several specifications of a system together. This
is formalized with Theorem 8 in Section 5.
Westudythesekindofpropertiesinlatersections.Itiswellknownfromthe
literature [3, 5, 22] that in order to give these kind of guarantees a refinement
should have the flavour of alternating (timed) simulation [33]. Figure 3 shows
a visual representation of the direction of the simulation relation captures by
refinement. While it is typical to define simulation relations on transitions sys-
tems that have equal alphabet, we relaxed that in our definition of refinement
below. Then it fits the main theorem of quotient in Section 6 and it matches
the usage in practical examples, see for example the university example in this
paper.
Definition 6 Given specifications S= ( QS, qS
0,ActS,→S)and T=
(QT, qT
0,ActT,→T)where ActS
i∩ActTo=∅,ActSo∩ActT
i=∅,ActS
i⊆ActT
i, and
ActTo⊆ActSo.Srefines T, denoted by S≤T, iff there exists a binary relation
R⊆QS×QTsuch that (qS
0, qT
0)∈Rand for each pair of states (s, t)∈Rit holds
that
1. Whenever ti?− −→Tt′for some t′∈QTandi?∈ActT
i∩ActS
i, then si?− −→Ss′and
(s′, t′)∈Rfor some s′∈QS
2. Whenever ti?− −→Tt′for some t′∈QTandi?∈ActT
i\ActS
i, then (s, t′)∈R
3. Whenever so!− −→Ss′for some s′∈QSando!∈ActSo∩ActTo, then to!− −→Tt′and
(s′, t′)∈Rfor some t′∈QT
4. Whenever so!− −→Ss′for some s′∈QSando!∈ActSo\ActTo, then (s′, t)∈R
5. Whenever sd− −→Ss′for some s′∈QSandd∈R≥0, then td− −→Tt′and(s′, t′)∈
Rfor some t′∈QT
A specification automaton Arefinesanother specification automaton B, denoted by
A≤B, iffJAKsem≤JBKsem.
Itiseasytoseethattherefinementisreflexive.Refinementisonlytransitive
under specific conditions. These conditions are captured in Lemma 1. A special
case satisfying these conditions is when the action sets of all specifications are

--- Page 11 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
Timed I/O Automata 11
y≤5coin?
y:= 0
cof!
y≥4tea!
y≥2
coin?Machine
cof tea coin
Fig. 4: A coffee machine specification that refines the coffee machine in
Figure 1.
the same. Refinement can be checked for specification automata by reducing
the problem to a specific refinement game, and using a symbolic representation
to reason about it. Figure 4 shows a coffee machine that is a refinement of the
one in Figure 1. It has been refined in two ways: one output transition has
been completely dropped and one state invariant has been tightened.
Lemma 1 Given specifications Si= (Qi, qi
0,Acti,→i)withi∈ {1,2,3}. IfS1≤S2,
S2≤S3,Act1
i∩Act3o=∅, and Act1o∩Act3
i=∅, then S1≤S3.
Proof(⇒) We first show that the action sets of S1andS3satisfy the conditions of
refinement. From S1≤S2it follows that Act1
i⊆Act2
i, and Act2o⊆Act1o; similarly,
from S2≤S3it follows that Act2
i⊆Act3
i, and Act3o⊆Act2o. Combining this results
inAct1
i⊆Act3
i, and Act3o⊆Act1o. Together with the antecedent and Definition 6 of
refinement we can conclude that action sets of S1andS3satisfy the conditions of
refinement.
It remains to show that there exists a relation R13witnessing S1≤S3. Let
R12andR23the relations witnessing S1≤S2andS2≤S3, respectively. Using a
standard co-inductive argument it can be shown that
R13=n
(q1, q3)∈R13| ∃q2∈Q2: (q1, q2)∈R12∧(q2, q3)∈R23o
witnesses S1≤S3.
□
Since our implementations are a subclass of specifications, we simply use
refinement as an implementation relation.
Definition 7 An implementation Psatisfies a specification SiffP≤S. We write
JSKmodfor the set of all implementations of S, soJSKmod={P|P≤S}.

--- Page 12 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
12Timed I/O Automata
x≤4 coin?
cof!, x≥5
coin?Inconsistent
cof tea coin
Fig. 5: An inconsistent specification.
From a logical perspective, specifications are like formulae, and imple-
mentations are their models. This analogy leads us to a classical notion of
consistency as existence of models.
Definition 8 A specification Sisconsistent iff there exists an implementation P
such that P≤S. A specification automaton Aisconsistent iff its semantic JAKsem
is consistent.
All specification automata in Figure 1 are consistent. An example of an
inconsistent specification can be found in Figure 5. Notice that the invariant
in the second state ( x≤4) is stronger than the guard ( x≥5) on the cofedge.
This location violates the independent progress property.
We also define a stricter, more syntactic, notion of consistency, which
requires that all states are consistent.
Definition 9 A specification Sislocally consistent iff every state s∈Qallows inde-
pendent progress. A specification automaton Aislocally consistent iff its semantic
JAKsemis locally consistent.
Theorem 1 Every locally consistent specification is consistent in the sense of
Definition 8.
The proof of Theorem 1 can be found in Appendix A.1.
The opposite implication in the theorem does not hold as we shall see
later. Local consistency, or independent progress, can be checked for specifica-
tion automata establishing local consistency for the syntactic representation.
Technically it suffices to check for each location that if the supremum of all
solutions of every location invariant exists then it satisfies the invariant itself
and allows at least one enabled output transition.
Prior specification theories for discrete time [6] and probabilistic [34] sys-
tems reveal two main requirements for a definition of implementation. These
are the same requirements that are typically imposed on a definition of a
model as a special case of a logical formula. First, implementations should be
consistent specifications (logically, models correspond to some consistent for-
mulae). Second, implementations should be most specified (models cannot be

--- Page 13 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
Timed I/O Automata 13
refined by non-models), as opposed to proper specifications, which should be
underspecified . For example, in propositional logics, a model is represented as
a complete consistent term. Any implicant of such a term is also a model (in
propositional logics, it is actually equivalent to it).
Our definition of implementation satisfies both requirements, and to the
best of our knowledge, it is the first example of a proper notion of implemen-
tation for timed specifications. As the refinement is reflexive we get P≤Pfor
any implementation and thus each implementation is consistent as per Defini-
tion 8. Furthermore, each implementation cannot be refined anymore by any
underspecified specifications.
Theorem 2 Any locally consistent specification Srefining an implementation Pis
an implementation as per Definition 5.
The proof of Theorem 2 can be found in Appendix A.1.
We conclude the section with the first major theorem. Observe that every
preorder ⪯is intrinsically complete in the following sense: S⪯Tiff for every
smaller element P⪯SalsoP⪯T. This means that a refinement of two spec-
ifications coincides with inclusion of sets of all the specifications refining each
of them. However, since out of all specifications only the implementations cor-
respond to real world objects, another completeness question is more relevant:
does the refinement coincide with the inclusion of implementation sets? This
property, which does not hold for any preorder in general, turns out to hold
for our refinement.
Theorem3 For any two locally consistent specifications S,Thaving the same action
set we have that S≤TiffJSKmod⊆JTKmod.
Proof(⇒) Assume existence of relations R1andR2witnessing satisfaction of S
by the implementation Pand refinement of TbyS, respectively. Use a standard
co-inductive argument and Lemma 1 to show that
R=n
(p, t)∈QP×QT| ∃s∈QS: (p, s)∈R1∧(s, t)∈R2o
is a relation witnessing satisfaction of TbyP. Also observe that (p0, t0)∈R.
(⇐) In the following we write p≤sfor states pandsmeaning that there exists
a relation R′witnessing P≤Sthat contains (p, s).
We construct a binary relation R⊆QS×QT:
R={(s, t)| ∀P:p0≤s=⇒p0≤t},
where p0is the initial state of P. We shall argue that Rwitnesses S≤T. Consider
a pair (s, t)∈R. There are two cases to be considered.
•Consider any input i?. Due to input-enabledness, there exists t′∈QTsuch that
ti?− −→Tt′. We need to show existence of a state s′∈QSsuch that si?− −→Ss′and
(s′, t′)∈R, so∀P:p0≤s′=⇒p0≤t′.

--- Page 14 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
14Timed I/O Automata
Due to input-enabledness, for the same i?there exists a state s′∈QSsuch
that si?− −→Ss′. We need to show that (s′, t′)∈R. By Theorem 1 applied to
QSwe have that there exists an implementation Pand its state p0∈QPsuch
that p0≤s′(technically speaking smay not be an initial state of S, but we
can consider a version of Swith initial state changed to sto apply Theorem 1,
concluding existence of an implementation).
Consideranarbitraryimplementation Q≤Sanditsstate q0∈QQsuchthat q0≤
s′.Weneedtoshowthatalso q0≤t′.Wedothisbyextending Qdeterministically
to a model of s, showing that this is also a model of t, and then arguing that
the only i?successor state models t′. Create an implementation Q′by merging
QandPabove and adding a fresh state qwith transition qi?− −→Q′q0and
transitions qj?− −→Q′p0for all j?̸=i?,j?∈Acti1. Now q≤sasqi?− −→Q′q0
with q0≤s′andqj?− −→Q′p0with p0≤s′forj?̸=i?. By assumption, every
implementation of Sis also an implementation of T, soq≤tand consequently
q0≤t′asqis deterministic on i?. Summarizing, for any implementation q0≤s′
we are able to argue that q0≤t′, thus necessarily (s′, t′)∈R.
•Consider any action a(which is an output or a delay) for which there exists
s′such that sa− −→Ss′. Using a construction similar to the one above it is not
hard to see that one can actually construct (and thus postulate existence of)
an implementation Pcontaining p∈QPsuch that p≤sthat has a transition
pa− −→Pp′. Since also p≤t, we have that there exists t′∈QTsuch that ta− −→Tt′.
It remains to argue that (s′, t′)∈R. This is done in the same way as with the
first case, by considering any model of s′, then by extending it deterministically
to a model of s, concluding that it is now a model of tand the only a-derivative,
which is p′, must be a model of t′. Consequently (s′, t′)∈R.
It follows directly from the definition of Rwith JSKsem⊆JTKsemthat (s0, t0)∈R.
□
The restriction of the theorem to locally consistent specifications is not
a serious one. As we shall see in Theorem 5, any consistent specifica-
tion can be transformed into a locally consistent one preserving the set of
implementations.
4 Consistency and conjunction
Animmediate error occurs in a state of a specification if the specification
disallowsprogressoftimeandoutputtransitionsinagivenstate–suchaspeci-
ficationwillbreakiftheenvironmentdoesnotsendaninput.Foraspecification
Swe define the set of immediate error states imerras follows2.
1State qallows independent progress if you combine the construction of qwith the second case
for action a.
2In our previous work [23–25] immediate error states were represented by err, a symbol we have
re-purposed in this work, see Definition 11.

--- Page 15 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
Timed I/O Automata 15
q1 q2
x≤0q3
x≤0a!
x:= 0a!
x:= 0
Fig. 6: Example of a specification that illustrates difference between immedi-
ate error states ( q3) and error states ( q2andq3).
Definition 10 Given a specification S= (Q, q0,Act,→), the set of immediate error
states, denoted by err, is defined as
imerr =n
q∈Q|(∃d∈R≥0:qXd− −→)∧
∀d∈R≥0∀o!∈Acto∀q′∈Q:qd− −→q′⇒q′Xo!− −→o
.
It follows that no immediate error states can occur in implementations, or in
locally consistent specifications. In Figure 6 state q3is an immediate error
state, as it does not allow independent progress. Error states can also be cre-
atedwhenoutputactionsaredisabled,forexamplebypruningawayimmediate
error states, see Definition 12 below. Therefore, we extend the definition of
immediate error states into error states erras follows, which was not done in
our previous work.
Definition 11 Given a specification S= (Q, q0,Act,→)and a set of states X⊆Q,
the set of errorstates, denoted by err, is defined as
err(X) =n
q∈Q|(∃d∈R≥0:qXd− −→)∧ ∀d∈R≥0∀o!∈Acto∀q′∈Q:
qd− −→q′⇒(q′Xo!− −→ ∨∀ q′′∈Q:q′o!− −→q′′⇒q′′∈X)o
.
Note that err(∅) = imerr , thus for any Xwe have that imerr ⊆err(X). For
the example in Figure 6 we have that err(imerr) = {q2, q3}. State q2is an error
state as all outgoing output transitions go to immediate error states and time
cannot progress indefinitely. Thus, while q2allows independent progress in the
current form of the specification, disabling all transitions going to immediate
error states (something that adversarial pruning will do) will make q2violate
independent progress.
In general, error states in a specification do not necessarily mean that a
specification cannot be implemented. Figure 7 shows a partially inconsistent
specification, a version of the coffee machine that becomes inconsistent if it
ever outputs tea. The inconsistency can be possibly avoided by some imple-
mentations, who would not implement delay or output transitions leading to
it. More precisely an implementation will exist if there is a strategy for the
output player in a safety game to avoid err. In order to be able to build on
existing formalizations [35] we will consider a dual reachability game, asking

--- Page 16 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
16Timed I/O Automata
y≤6y≤0
coin?
y:= 0
cof!
y≥4tea!y:= 0
coin?coin?Partially Inconsistent
cof tea coin
Fig. 7: A partially inconsistent specification.
for a strategy of the input player to reach err. We first define a timed prede-
cessor operator [35–37], which gives all the states that can delay into Xwhile
avoiding Y:
PredS
t(X, Y) =n
q∈QS| ∃d∈R≥0∧ ∃q′∈Xs.t.qd− −→Sq′∧postS
d(q)⊆Yo
.
Since postS
d(q)is defined on an open interval, we have that X∩Y⊆
PredS
t(X, Y). This means that the input player has priority over the output
player when both could do an action from a state. For example, if a certain
state has an outgoing input action going to an error state and an outgoing
output action to a non-error state, the output action cannot disable the input
action, thus the error state is still reachable. The controllable predecessors
operator, denoted by πS(X), which extends the set of states that can reach an
error state uncontrollably, is defined by
πS(X) = errS(X)∪PredS
t(X∪ipredS(X),opredS(X)).
The set of all inconsistent states inconsS⊆QSof specification S(i.e. the
states for which the environment has a winning strategy for reaching an error
state) is defined as the least fixpoint of πS:inconsS=πS(inconsS), which is
guaranteed to exist by monotonicity of πSand completeness of the powerset
lattice due to the theorem of Knaster and Tarski [38]. For transitions systems
enjoying finite symbolic representations, automata specifications included, the
fixpoint computation converges after a finite number of iterations [35].
Now we define the set of consistent states, consS, simply as the complement
ofinconsS, i.e. consS=inconsS. We obtain it by complementing the result
of the above fixpoint computation for inconsS. For the purpose of proofs it
is more convenient to formalize the dual operator, say ΘS, whose greatest
fixpoint directly and equivalently characterizes consS. While least fixpoints are
convenient for implementation of on-the-fly algorithms, characterizations with
greatest fixpoint are useful in proofs as they allow use of coinduction. Unlike

--- Page 17 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
Timed I/O Automata 17
induction on the number of iterations, coinduction is a sound proof principle
without assuming finite symbolic representation for the transition system (and
thus finite convergence of the fixpoint computation). We define ΘSas
ΘS(X) =errS(X)∩n
q∈QS| ∀d≥0 :[∀q′∈QS:qd− −→Sq′⇒q′∈X∧
∀i?∈ActS
i:∃q′′∈X:q′i?− −→Sq′′]∨
[∃d′≤d∧ ∃q′, q′′∈X∧ ∃o!∈ActS
o:
qd′
− −→Sq′∧q′o!− −→Sq′′∧
∀i?∈ActS
i:∃q′′′∈X:q′i?− −→Sq′′′]o
,
so the greatest fixpoint becomes consS= ΘS(consS).
Theorem 4 A specification S= (Q, s0,Act,→)is consistent iff s0∈cons.
The proof of Theorem 4 can be found in Appendix A.2. The set of
(in)consistent states can be computed for timed games, and thus for specifica-
tion automata, using controller synthesis algorithms [35].
The inconsistent states can be pruned from a consistent Sleading to a
locally consistent specification. Adversarial pruning is applied in practice to
decrease the size of specifications.
Definition 12 Given a specification S= (Q, q0,Act,→), the result of adversarial
pruning, denoted by S∆, is specification (cons , q0,Act,→∆)where →∆=→ ∩(cons×
(Act∪R≥0)×cons).
For specification automata adversarial pruning is realized by applying a
controller synthesis algorithm, obtaining a maximum winning strategy, which
is then presented as a specification automaton itself. Theorem 5 captures the
main result of adversarial pruning. It also explains the reason of the name of
adversarial pruning: the pruned specification contains all winning strategies
independently of an environment, including those that are adversarial. This
contrasts with cooperative pruning, which we define in Section 5 later in the
paper.
Theorem 5 For a consistent specification S,S∆is locally consistent and JSKmod=
JS∆Kmod.
The proof of Theorem 5 can be found in Appendix A.2.
Consistency guarantees realizability of a single specification. It is of further
interest whether several specifications can be simultaneously met by the same

--- Page 18 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
18Timed I/O Automata
component, without reaching error states of any of them. We formalize this
notion by defining a logical conjunction for specifications.
Definition 13 Given two TIOTSs Si= (Qi, qi
0,Acti,→i), i= 1,2where Act1
i∩
Act2o=∅ ∧Act1o∩Act2
i=∅, theconjunction ofS1andS2, denoted by S1∧S2, is
TIOTS (Q1×Q2,(q1
0, q2
0),Act,→)where Act=Acti⊎ActowithActi=Act1
i∪Act2
i
andActo=Act1o∪Act2o, and→is defined as
•(q1
1, q2
1)a− −→(q1
2, q2
2)ifa∈Act1∩Act2,q1
1a− −→1q1
2, and q2
1a− −→2q2
2
•(q1
1, q2)a− −→(q1
2, q2)ifa∈Act1\Act2,q1
1a− −→1q1
2, and q2∈Q2
•(q1, q2
1)a− −→(q1, q2
2)ifa∈Act2\Act1,q2
1a− −→2q2
2, and q1∈Q1
•(q1
1, q2)d− −→(q1
2, q2)ifd∈R≥0,q1
1d− −→1q1
2, and q2
1d− −→2q2
2
Comparedtodefinitionsfrompreviouswork,we1)definetheoldproductoper-
ator to be directly the conjunction operator, thereby eliminating the build-in
adversarial pruning like in previous work, because adversarial pruning does not
distribute over parallel composition, see the upcoming discussion in Section 5,
and 2) relax the definition to specifications with unequal alphabets.
In general, a result of the conjunction may be locally inconsistent, or even
inconsistent. To guarantee consistency, one could apply a consistency check to
the result, checking if (s0, t0)∈consS×Tand, possibly, adversarially pruning
the inconsistent parts. Clearly conjunction is commutative and associative.
Lemma 2 For two specifications S,T, and their states sandt, respectively, if there
exists an implementation Pand its state psuch that simultaneously p≤sandp≤t
then (s, t)∈consS∧T.
The proof of Lemma 2 can be found in Appendix A.2.
Theorem 6 For any locally consistent specifications S,TandUover the same
alphabet:
1.S∧T≤SandS∧T≤T
2.(U≤S)and(U≤T)implies U≤(S∧T)
3.JS∧TKmod=JSKmod∩JTKmod
ProofWe will prove the three items separately.
1. We will prove that S∧Trefines S(the other refinement is entirely symmetric).
LetS∧T= (QS×QT,(s0, t0),Act,→)constructed according to the definition
of conjunction. We abbreviate the set of states of S∧TasQS∧T. It is easy
to see that the following relation on states of S∧Tand states of Twitnesses
refinement of SbyS∧T:
R=n
((s1, t), s2)∈QS∧T×QS|s1=s2o

--- Page 19 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
Timed I/O Automata 19
The argument is standard, and it takes into account that QS∧T= consS∧Tis
a fixpoint of Θ. How Θis taken into account is demonstrated in more detail in
the proof for the next item.
2. Assume that U≤SandU≤T. Then U≤S∧T. The first refinement is
witnessed by some relation R1, the second refinement by R2. Then the third
refinement is witnessed by the following relation R⊆QU×QS∧T:
R=n
(u,(s, t))∈QU×consS∧T|(u, s)∈R1∧(u, t)∈R2o
.
The argument that Ris a refinement is standard again, relying on the fact that
consS∧Tis a fixed point of Θ.
Consider an output case when uo!− −→Uu′for some output o!and the target state
u′. Then so!− −→Ss′andto!− −→Tt′for some states s′andt′and(u′, s′)∈R1and
(u′, t′)∈R2. This means that (s, t)o!− −→S∧T(s′, t′). In order to finish the case we
need to argue that (s′, t′)∈QS∧T= consS∧T. This follows from Lemma 2 since
U, and thus u′, is locally consistent, and by transitivity any implementation
satisfying u′would be a common implementation of s′andt′.
The case for delay is identical, while the case for inputs is unsurprising (since
adversarial pruning in the computation of conjunction never removes input
transitionsfromconsistenttoinconsistentstates–therearenosuchtransitions).
3. The 3rd statement follows from the above facts. First assume that Uis an
implementation (and thus also a specification) such that U∈JS∧TKmod. This
means that U≤S∧T. Using statement 1 and Lemma 1 we can extend this to
U≤S∧T≤S. Therefore, U∈JSKmod. With the same argument we can also
show U∈JTKmod, thus U∈JSKmod∩JTKmod.
The reverse of the 3rd statement can be shown by assuming that U∈JSKmod∩
JTKmod. This implies that U≤SandU≤T. Now, using statement 2 we have
U≤S∧T, which concludes that U∈JS∧TKmod.
□
We turn our attention to syntactic representations again.
Definition 14 Given two TIOAs Ai= (Loci, li
0,Acti,Clki, Ei,Invi), i= 1,2where
Act1
i∩Act2o=∅∧Act1o∩Act2
i=∅3, theconjunction ofA1andA2, denoted by A1∧A2,
is TIOA (Loc1×Loc2,(l1
0, l2
0),Act,Clk1⊎Clk2, E,Inv)where Act=Acti⊎Actowith
Acti=Act1
i∪Act2
iandActo=Act1o∪Act2o,Inv((l1, l2)) =Inv1(l1)∧Inv2(l2), and
Eis defined as
•((l1
1, l2
1), a, φ1∧φ2, c1∪c2,(l1
2, l2
2))∈Eifa∈Act1∩Act2,(l1
1, a, φ1, c1, l1
2)∈E1,
and(l2
1, a, φ2, c2, l2
2)∈E2
•((l1
1, l2), a, φ1, c1,(l1
2, l2))∈Eifa∈Act1\Act2,(l1
1, a, φ1, c1, l1
2)∈E1, and
l2∈Loc2
•((l1, l2
1), a, φ2, c2,(l1, l2
2))∈Eifa∈Act2\Act1,(l2
1, a, φ2, c2, l2
2)∈E2, and
l1∈Loc1
3Formulated differently, ∄a∈S
i∈IActis.t.a∈Acti
i∧a∈Actj
o, i, j∈I, i̸=jandI={1,2}.
This is a more direct formulation of the desired property and can be extended easily for the
conjunction of more than two TIOAs.

--- Page 20 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
20Timed I/O Automata
x≤2grant?
x:= 0coin!
grant?HalfAdm1
y≤2pub?
y:= 0news!
pub?HalfAdm2
y≤2x≤2
x≤2∧y≤2pub?
y:= 0news!pub?
y:= 0news!grant?, x:= 0
coin!
grant?, x:= 0
coin!
pub?grant?
pub?, grant?HalfAdm2 ∧HalfAdm2
coin news coin news grant pub grant pub
Fig. 8: Example of two specifications each handling one aspect of the admin-
istration and their conjunction.
It might appear as if two systems can only advance on an input if both are
ready to receive an input, but because of input enableness this is always the
case. An example of a conjunction is shown in Figure 8. The two aspects of the
administration, handing out coins and writing news articles, is split into two
specifications. HalfAdm1 describes the alternation between grant?and coin!,
while HalfAdm2 describes the alternation between pub?and news!. Together
they form HalfAdm1 ∧HalfAdm2 . Observe that this is an alternative and
slightly more loose specification of the administration than the one in Figure 1.
Yet it is the case that Administration refines HalfAdm1 ∧HalfAdm2 , while the
opposite is not true.
The following theorem lifts all the results from the TIOTSs level to the
symbolic representation level4:
Theorem 7 Given two TIOAs Ai= (Loci, li
0,Acti,Clki, Ei,Invi), i= 1,2where
Act1
i∩Act2o=∅∧Act1o∩Act2
i=∅. Then (JA1∧A2Ksem)∆= (JA1Ksem∧JA2Ksem)∆.
Before we can prove this theorem, we have to introduce several lemmas.
The proofs of these lemmas can all be found in Appendix A.2. The first lemma
shows that the state set of JA1∧A2KsemandJA1Ksem∧JA2Ksemare the same,
including the initial state.
Lemma 3 Given two TIOAs Ai= (Loci, li
0,Acti,Clki, Ei,Invi), i= 1,2where
Act1
i∩Act2o=∅ ∧Act1o∩Act2
i=∅. Then QJA1∧A2Ksem=QJA1Ksem∧JA2Ksemand
qJA1∧A2Ksem
0=qJA1Ksem∧JA2Ksem
0.
4Where we now include adversarial pruning on both sides instead of just on the left-hand side
in previous works.

--- Page 21 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
Timed I/O Automata 21
A11 2 a!
c!
A23 4
Fb!
c!
(a)(1,3) (2,3)
(1,4)
F(2,4)
Fa!
a!b! b! c!
(b)(1,3) (2,3)
(1,4) (2,4)a!
c!
(c)
JA1Ksem1 2 a!
c!
JA2Ksem3 4
c!
(d)(1,3) (2,3)
(1,4) (2,4)a!
a!c!
(e)
Fig. 9: Example demonstrating additional condition in Lemma 6. In (a) two
TIOA A1andA2are shown, where location 4has a Finvariant. In (b) the
conjunction A1∧A2isshown.In(c)thesemanticrepresentation JA1∧A2Ksemis
shown (ignoring the delays for simplicity). In (d) the semantic representations
JA1KsemandJA2Ksemare shown. And finally, in (e) the conjunction JA1Ksem∧
JA2Ksemis shown.
Lemmas 4 and 5 show that JA1∧A2KsemandJA1Ksem∧JA2Ksemmimic each
other with delays and shared actions.
Lemma 4 Given two TIOAs Ai= (Loci, li
0,Acti,Clki, Ei,Invi), i= 1,2where
Act1
i∩Act2o=∅ ∧Act1o∩Act2
i=∅. Denote X=JA1∧A2KsemandY=
JA1Ksem∧JA2Ksem, and let d∈R≥0andq1, q2∈QX∩QY. Then q1d− −→Xq2if and
only if q1d− −→Yq2.
Lemma 5 Given two TIOAs Ai= (Loci, li
0,Acti,Clki, Ei,Invi), i= 1,2where
Act1
i∩Act2o=∅ ∧Act1o∩Act2
i=∅. Denote X=JA1∧A2KsemandY=
JA1Ksem∧JA2Ksem, and let a∈Act1∩Act2andq1, q2∈QX∩QY. Then q1a− −→Xq2
if and only if q1a− −→Yq2.
Lemma 6 considers transitions in JA1∧A2KsemandJA1Ksem∧JA2Ksem
labeled by non-shared actions. A special case of this lemma is captured with
Corollary 1. Compared to Lemma 5, we can see that we need the additional

--- Page 22 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
22Timed I/O Automata
condition v2|=Inv2(l2)in order to show that transitions can be mimicked.
A simple example demonstrating the necessity of this condition is shown in
Figure 9. From two TIOA A1andA2, the TIOTSs JA1∧A2Ksemin (c) and
JA1Ksem∧JA2Ksemin (e) are calculated. As can be seen, JA1Ksem∧JA2Ksemhas
an additional transition (1,4)a!− →(2,4), which is not present in JA1∧A2Ksem.
Thereasonforthisisthatthelocationinvariant Inv(4) = Fisprocessedbythe
semantic operator before JA2Ksemis combined with JA1Ksemby the conjunc-
tion operator. Therefore, it is suddenly possible to reach location (2,4)with
a!inJA1Ksem∧JA2Ksem. Looking at Lemma 6, we can see that the condition
v2|=Inv2(l2)is not satisfied for q2= (l1
2, l2
2, v2) = (2 ,4), asInv2(4) = Fand
no valuation v2can satisfy a false invariant. So, the additional condition in the
lemma ‘remembers’ the original invariant in case we first go to the semantic
representation before we perform the conjunction operation.
Lemma 6 Given two TIOAs Ai= (Loci, li
0,Acti,Clki, Ei,Invi), i= 1,2where
Act1
i∩Act2o=∅ ∧Act1o∩Act2
i=∅. Denote X=JA1∧A2KsemandY=JA1Ksem∧
JA2Ksem, and let a∈Act1\Act2andq1, q2∈QX∩QY, where q2= (l1
2, l2
2, v2). If
v2|=Inv2(l2), then q1a− −→Xq2if and only if q1a− −→Yq2.
Corollary 1 Given two TIOAs Ai= (Loci, li
0,Acti,Clki, Ei,Invi), i= 1,2where
Act1
i∩Act2o=∅ ∧Act1o∩Act2
i=∅. Denote X=JA1∧A2KsemandY=JA1Ksem∧
JA2Ksem, and let a∈Act1\Act2andq1, q2∈QX∩QY. Ifq1a− −→Xq2, then q1a− −→Yq2.
The following two lemmas consider the error states and consistent states
inJA1∧A2KsemandJA1Ksem∧JA2Ksem, respectively. We can show that both
sets are the same for JA1∧A2KsemandJA1Ksem∧JA2Ksem.
Lemma 7 Given two TIOAs Ai= (Loci, li
0,Acti,Clki, Ei,Invi), i= 1,2where
Act1
i∩Act2o=∅ ∧Act1o∩Act2
i=∅. Let Q⊆Loc1×Loc2×[(Clk1∪Clk2)7→R≥0].
Then errJA1∧A2Ksem(Q) = errJA1Ksem∧JA2Ksem(Q).
Lemma 8 Given two TIOAs Ai= (Loci, li
0,Acti,Clki, Ei,Invi), i= 1,2where
Act1
i∩Act2o=∅ ∧Act1o∩Act2
i=∅. Then consJA1∧A2Ksem= consJA1Ksem∧JA2Ksem.
Finally, we are ready to proof Theorem 7. The reason why adversarial
pruning is needed becomes apparent in the second half of the proof where
we consider non-shared events. To further illustrate this, consider again the
example in Figure 9, where we show that JA1Ksem∧JA2Ksemhas an addi-
tional transition (1,4)a!− →(2,4), which is not present in JA1∧A2Ksem. We can
‘remove’ this transition with adversarial pruning by realizing that the target
state (2,4)is an inconsistent state (you can see this by noticing that no time
delay, including a zero time delay, is possible).

--- Page 23 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
Timed I/O Automata 23
Proof of Theorem 7 We will prove this theorem by showing that (JA1∧A2Ksem)∆
and(JA1Ksem∧JA2Ksem)∆have the same set of states, same initial state, same set
of actions, and same transition relation.
It follows from Lemma 3 that JA1∧A2KsemandJA1Ksem∧JA2Ksemhave the same
state set and initial state. As consJA1∧A2Ksem= consJA1Ksem∧JA2Ksem= consfrom
Lemma 8, it follows that (JA1∧A2Ksem)∆and(JA1Ksem∧JA2Ksem)∆have the same
state set and initial state. Also, observe that the semantic of a TIOA and adversarial
pruningdonotaltertheactionset.Therefore,itfollowsdirectlythat (JA1∧A2Ksem)∆
and(JA1Ksem∧JA2Ksem)∆have the same action set and partitioning into input and
output actions.
It remains to show that (JA1∧A2Ksem)∆and(JA1Ksem∧JA2Ksem)∆have the
same transition relation. In the remainder of the proof, we will use v1andv2to
indicate the part of a valuation vof only the clocks of A1andA2, respectively.
Also, for brevity we write X= (JA1∧A2Ksem)∆,Y= (JA1Ksem∧JA2Ksem)∆, and
Clk=Clk1⊎Clk2in the rest of this proof.
(⇒) Assume a transition qX
1a− →qX
2inX. From Definition 12 it follows that
qX
1a− →qX
2inJA1∧A2KsemandqX
2∈cons. Following Definition 3 of the semantic,
it follows that there exists an edge (l1, a, φ, c, l 2)∈EA1∧A2with qX
1= (l1, v1),
qX
2= (l2, v2),l1, l2∈LocA1∧A2,v1, v2∈[Clk7→R≥0],v1|=φ,v2=v1[r7→0]r∈c,
andv2|=Inv(l2). Now we consider the three cases of Definition 14 of the conjunction
for TIOA.
•a∈Act1∩Act2. It follows directly from Lemma 5 that qX
1a− →qX
2is a transition
inJA1Ksem∧JA2Ksem. Since qX
2∈cons, it holds that qX
1a− →qX
2is a transition
inY.
•a∈Act1\Act2.ItfollowsdirectlyfromCorollary1that qX
1a− →qX
2isatransition
inJA1Ksem∧JA2Ksem. Since qX
2∈cons, it holds that qX
1a− →qX
2is a transition
inY.
•a∈Act2\Act1. It follows directly from Corollary 1 (where we switched A1and
A2) that qX
1a− →qX
2is a transition in JA1Ksem∧JA2Ksem. Since qX
2∈cons, it
holds that qX
1a− →qX
2is a transition in Y.
Now consider that ais a delay d. It follows directly from Lemma 4 that qX
1d− →qX
2
is a transition in JA1Ksem∧JA2Ksem. Since qX
2∈cons, it holds that qX
1d− →qX
2is a
transition in Y.
We have shown that when qX
1a− →qX
2is a transition in X= (JA1∧A2Ksem)∆,
it holds that qX
1a− →qX
2is a transition in Y= (JA1Ksem∧JA2Ksem)∆. Since the
transition is arbitrarily chosen, it holds for all transitions in X.
(⇐) Assume a transition qY
1a− →qY
2inY. From Definition 12 it follows that
qY
1a− →qY
2inJA1Ksem∧JA2KsemandqY
2∈cons. Now we consider the three cases of
Definition 13 of the conjunction for TIOTS.
•a∈Act1∩Act2. It follows directly from Lemma 5 that qY
1a− →qY
2is a transition
inJA1∧A2Ksem. Since qY
2∈cons, it holds that qY
1a− →qY
2is a transition in X.
•a∈Act1\Act2. From time reflexivity of Definition 1 we have that qY
2d− −→with
d= 0. From Definitions 12 and 13 it follows that qJA1Ksem
2d− −→andqJA2Ksemd− −→.
Now, from Definition 3 it follows that v2+d|=Inv2(l2), i.e., v2|=Inv2(l2).

--- Page 24 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
24Timed I/O Automata
It now follows directly from Lemma 6 that qY
1a− →qY
2is a transition in JA1∧
A2Ksem. Since qY
2∈cons, it holds that qY
1a− →qY
2is a transition in X.
•a∈Act2\Act1. From time reflexivity of Definition 1 we have that qY
2d− −→with
d= 0. From Definitions 12 and 13 it follows that qJA1Ksemd− −→andqJA2Ksem
2d− −→.
Now, from Definition 3 it follows that v1+d|=Inv1(l1), i.e., v1|=Inv1(l1).
It now follows directly from Lemma 6 (where we switched A1andA2) that
qY
1a− →qY
2is a transition in JA1∧A2Ksem. Since qY
2∈cons, it holds that
qY
1a− →qY
2is a transition in X.
Now consider that ais a delay d. It follows directly from Lemma 4 that qY
1d− →qY
2is
a transition in JA1∧A2Ksem. Since qY
2∈cons, it holds that qY
1d− →qY
2is a transition
inX.
We have shown that when qY
1a− →qY
2is a transition in Y= (JA1Ksem∧JA2Ksem)∆,
it holds that qY
1a− →qY
2is a transition in X= (JA1∧A2Ksem)∆. Since the transition
is arbitrarily chosen, it holds for all transitions in Y. □
The following corollary describes a special case of Theorem 7, which
happens to be one of the unproven main theorems in our previous work [25].
Corollary 2 Given two TIOAs Ai= (Loci, li
0,Acti,Clki, Ei,Invi), i= 1,2where
Act1
i=Act2
i∧Act1o=Act2o. Then JA1∧A2Ksem=JA1Ksem∧JA2Ksem.
ProofThis corollary follows directly as a special case from the proof of Theorem 7.
The special case only depends on Lemmas 3 and 5, which do not require adversarial
pruning to be applied. □
5 Parallel composition
We shall now define structural composition , also called parallel composition ,
between specifications. We follow the optimistic approach of [9], i.e., two spec-
ifications can be composed if there exists at least one environment in which
they can work together . Before going further, we would like to contrast the
structural and logical composition.
The main use case for parallel composition is in fact dual to the one for
conjunction. Indeed, as observed in the previous section, conjunction is used
to reason about internal properties of an implementation set, so if a local
inconsistency arises in conjunction we limit the implementation set to avoid
it in implementations. A pruned specification can be given to a designer,
who chooses a particular implementation satisfying conjoined requirements.
A conjunction is consistent if the output player can avoid inconsistencies,
and its main theorem states that its set of implementation coincides with the
intersection of implementation sets of the conjuncts.
In contrast, parallel composition is used to reason about external use of
two (or more) components. We assume an independent implementation sce-
nario, where the two composed components are implemented by independent

--- Page 25 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
Timed I/O Automata 25
designers. The designer of any of the components can only assume that the
othercomposedimplementationswilladheretotheoriginalspecificationsbeing
composed. Consequently if an error occurs in parallel composition of the two
specifications,theindependentdesignersreceiveadditionalinformationonhow
torestricttheirspecificationstoavoidreachingtheerrorstatesinthecomposed
system.
We now propose our formal definition for parallel composition, which
roughly corresponds to the one defined on timed input/output automata [17].
We consider two TIOTSs S= (QS, qS
0,ActS,→S)andT= (QT, qT
0,ActT,
→T)and we say that they are composable iff their output alphabets are dis-
joint ActS
o∩ActT
o=∅. Similarly, we say that two specifications are composable
if their semantics are composable.
Definition15 Given two specifications Si= (Qi, qi
0,Acti,→i), i= 1,2where Act1o∩
Act2o=∅, theparallel composition ofS1andS2, denoted by S1∥S2, is TIOTS
(Q1×Q2,(q1
0, q2
0),Act,→)where Act=Act1∪Act2=Acti⊎Actowith Acti=
(Act1
i\Act2o)∪(Act2
i\Act1o)andActo=Act1o∪Act2o, and→is defined as
•(q1
1, q2
1)a− −→(q1
2, q2
2)ifa∈Act1∩Act2,q1
1a− −→1q1
2, and q2
1a− −→2q2
2
•(q1
1, q2)a− −→(q1
2, q2)ifa∈Act1\Act2,q1
1a− −→1q1
2, and q2∈Q2
•(q1, q2
1)a− −→(q1, q2
2)ifa∈Act2\Act1,q2
1a− −→2q2
2, and q1∈Q1
•(q1
1, q2
1)d− −→(q1
2, q2
2)ifd∈R≥0,q1
1d− −→1q1
2, and q2
1d− −→2q2
2
Observe that if we compose two locally specifications using the above prod-
uctrules,thentheresultingproductisalsolocallyconsistent.Thisisformalized
in Lemma 9. Furthermore, observe that parallel composition is commutative,
and that two specifications composed give rise to well-formed specifications. It
is also associative in the following sense:
J(S∥T)∥UKmod=JS∥(T∥U)Kmod
Lemma 9 Given two locally consistent specifications Si= (Qi, qi
0,Acti,→i), i= 1,2
where Act1o∩Act2o=∅. Then S1∥S2is locally consistent.
The proof of Lemma 9 can be found in Appendix A.3.
Theorem 8 Refinement is a pre-congruence with respect to parallel composition: for
any specifications S1,S2, and Tsuch that S1≤S2andS1is composable with T,
we have that S2is composable with TandS1∥T≤S2∥T.
The proof of Theorem 8 can be found in Appendix A.3.
Adversarial pruning does not distribute over the parallel composition oper-
ator. Consider two composable specifications SandT:S∆∥T∆̸= (S∥T)∆.

--- Page 26 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
26Timed I/O Automata
1 2 3
x≤0a! b?
b? b?
(a)S4 5 6a? b!
a? a?
(b)T=T∆1
b?
(c)S∆
(1,4)
(d)
S∆∥
T∆(1,4) (2,5) (3,6)
x≤0a! b!
(e)S∥T(1,4) (2,5)a!
(f)(S∥T)∆
Fig. 10: Example showing that adversarial pruning does not distribute over
the parallel composition operator. Observe that the result in (d) differs from
the one in (f).
An example is shown in Figure 10. Observe that S∆∥T∆(Figure 10d) does
not allow any behavior from the initial state, while (S∥T)∆(Figure 10f) still
allows action ato be performed. If we want specification Sto never reach the
error state for allpossible environments, we have to disable output action a!
from location 1. Yet, in the example we are composing Swith the specific envi-
ronment T, which can help Sin avoiding the error state. Therefore, as long
as we are composing components of a system together, we should not apply
adversarial pruning on intermediate specifications.
We still would like to simplify intermediate specifications as much as
possible before and after performing parallel composition without any loss
of possible implementations. This is captured in the following definition of
cooperative pruning.
Definition 16 Given a specification S= (Q, s0,Act,→), the result of cooperative
pruningofS, denoted by S∀, is a subspecification S∀= (Q∀, s0,Act,→∀)withS∀⊆
Sand→∀⊆→such that for all specifications Tcomposable with Sit holds that
JS∥TKmod=JS∀∥TKmod
Unfortunately, the best we can do, in the sense of removing states, transi-
tions, or both, is to remove nothing, i.e., cooperative pruning is the identity
transformation. We prove this with the following lemma.
Lemma 10 Given a specification S= (QS, s0,ActS,→S)and its cooperatively
pruned subspecification S∀. It holds that S=S∀.
The proof of Lemma 10 can be found in Appendix A.3.

--- Page 27 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
Timed I/O Automata 27
y≤6
x≤4 x≤8
x≤4
y≤6x≤8
y≤6Err
Errcoin?
y:= 0
cof!
y≥4
x:= 0tea!
x≤15
x:= 0
coin?
y:= 0coin?
y:= 0tea!, x≥15∧y≥2
tea!
x≥15∧y≥2coin?
y:= 0
pub!x≥2x:= 0
pub!x≥4x:= 0
pub!x≥2x:= 0
pub!x≥4x:= 0tea! tea! cof!
y≥4cof!
y≥4tea!
x≤15∧y≥2
coin?
tea!
y≥2tea!
y≥2
coin? coin?cof!, tea!, pub!
cof!, tea!, pub!coin?Machine ∥Researcher
cof tea pub coin
Fig. 11:Theparallelcompositionofthe Machine andResearcher fromFigure1.
We now switch to the symbolic representation. Parallel composition of two
TIOA is defined in the following way.
Definition 17 Given two specification automata Ai= (Loci, qi
0,Acti,Clki, Ei,
Invi), i= 1,2where Act1o∩Act2o=∅, theparallel composition ofA1andA2,
denoted by A1∥A2, is TIOA (Loc1×Loc2,(q1
0, q2
0),Act,Clk1⊎Clk2, E,Inv)where
Act=Acti⊎ActowithActi= (Act1
i\Act2o)∪(Act2
i\Act1o)andActo=Act1o∪Act2o,
Inv((q1, q2)) =Inv(q1)∧Inv(q2), and Eis defined as
•((q1
1, q2
1), a, φ1∧φ2, c1∪c2,(q1
2, q2
2))∈Eifa∈Act1∩Act2,(q1
1, a, φ1, c1, q1
2)∈
E1, and (q1
1, a, φ2, c2, q1
2)∈E1
•((q1
1, q2), a, φ1, c1,(q1
2, q2))∈Eifa∈Act1\Act2,(q1
1, a, φ1, c1, q1
2)∈E1, and
q2∈Loc2
•((q1, q2
1), a, φ2, c2,(q1, q2
2))∈Eifa∈Act2\Act1,(q2
1, a, φ2, c2, q2
2)∈E2, and
q1∈Loc1
Figure 11 shows the parallel composition Machine ∥Researcher where
Machine andResearcher are from Figure 1. As typical for composing automata,
the parallel composition of Machine andResearcher looks much more compli-
cated that the two individual specifications. Furthermore, the actions cofand
tea, which were outputs in Machine and inputs in Researcher , have become
outputs in the combined specification.

--- Page 28 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
28Timed I/O Automata
Finally, the following theorem lifts all the results from timed input/output
transitionsystemstothesymbolicrepresentationlevel.SimilarlytoTheorem7,
we need to take the special case from Figure 9 into account (but now consider
action cto be an input for A2). The transition in Figure 9 (e) from (1,4)a!− −→
(2,4)can be ‘removed’ with adversarial pruning by realizing that the target
state (2,4)is an inconsistent state (you can see this by noticing that no time
delay, including a zero time delay, is possible).
Theorem 9 Given two specification automata Ai= (Loci, li
0,Acti,Clki, Ei,
Invi), i= 1,2where Act1o∩Act2o=∅. Then (JA1∥A2Ksem)∆= (JA1Ksem∥
JA2Ksem)∆.
Before we can prove this theorem, we have to introduce several lemmas.
These lemmas are almost identical to the ones in Section 4 for the conjunction.
Therefore, we have omitted the proof.
Lemma 11 Given two TIOAs Ai= (Loci, li
0,Acti,Clki, Ei,Invi), i= 1,2where
Act1o∩Act2o=∅. Then QJA1∥A2Ksem=QJA1Ksem∥JA2Ksemand qJA1∥A2Ksem
0=
qJA1Ksem∥JA2Ksem
0.
Lemma 12 Given two TIOAs Ai= (Loci, li
0,Acti,Clki, Ei,Invi), i= 1,2where
Act1o∩Act2o=∅. Denote X=JA1∥A2KsemandY=JA1Ksem∥JA2Ksem, and let
d∈R≥0andq1, q2∈QX∩QY. Then q1d− −→Xq2if and only if q1d− −→Yq2.
Lemma 13 Given two TIOAs Ai= (Loci, li
0,Acti,Clki, Ei,Invi), i= 1,2where
Act1o∩Act2o=∅. Denote X=JA1∥A2KsemandY=JA1Ksem∥JA2Ksem, and let
a∈Act1∩Act2andq1, q2∈QX∩QY. Then q1a− −→Xq2if and only if q1a− −→Yq2.
Lemma 14 Given two TIOAs Ai= (Loci, li
0,Acti,Clki, Ei,Invi), i= 1,2where
Act1o∩Act2o=∅. Denote X=JA1∥A2KsemandY=JA1Ksem∥JA2Ksem, and let
a∈Act1\Act2andq1, q2∈QX∩QY, where q2= (l1
2, l2
2, v2). Ifv2|=Inv2(l2), then
q1a− −→Xq2if and only if q1a− −→Yq2.
Corollary 3 Given two TIOAs Ai= (Loci, li
0,Acti,Clki, Ei,Invi), i= 1,2where
Act1o∩Act2o=∅. Denote X=JA1∥A2KsemandY=JA1Ksem∥JA2Ksem, and let
a∈Act1\Act2andq1, q2∈QX∩QY. Ifq1a− −→Xq2, then q1a− −→Yq2.
Lemma 15 Given two TIOAs Ai= (Loci, li
0,Acti,Clki, Ei,Invi), i= 1,2where
Act1o∩Act2o=∅. Let Q⊆Loc1×Loc2×[(Clk1∪Clk2)7→R≥0]. Then
errJA1∥A2Ksem(Q) = errJA1Ksem∥JA2Ksem(Q).

--- Page 29 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
Timed I/O Automata 29
Lemma 16 Given two TIOAs Ai= (Loci, li
0,Acti,Clki, Ei,Invi), i= 1,2where
Act1o∩Act2o=∅. Then consJA1∥A2Ksem= consJA1Ksem∥JA2Ksem.
Finally, we are ready to proof Theorem 9.
Proof of Theorem 9 We will prove this theorem by showing that (JA1∥A2Ksem)∆
and(JA1Ksem∥JA2Ksem)∆have the same set of states, same initial state, same set
of actions, and same transition relation.
It follows from Lemma 11 that JA1∥A2KsemandJA1Ksem∥JA2Ksemhave the
same state set and initial state. As consJA1∥A2Ksem= consJA1Ksem∥JA2Ksem= cons
from Lemma 16, it follows that (JA1∥A2Ksem)∆and(JA1Ksem∥JA2Ksem)∆have
the same state set and initial state. Also, observe that the semantic of a TIOA
and adversarial pruning do not alter the action set. Therefore, it follows directly
that (JA1∥A2Ksem)∆and(JA1Ksem∥JA2Ksem)∆have the same action set and
partitioning into input and output actions.
It remains to show that (JA1∥A2Ksem)∆and(JA1Ksem∥JA2Ksem)∆have the
same transition relation. In the remainder of the proof, we will use v1andv2to
indicate the part of a valuation vof only the clocks of A1andA2, respectively.
Also, for brevity we write X= (JA1∥A2Ksem)∆,Y= (JA1Ksem∥JA2Ksem)∆, and
Clk=Clk1⊎Clk2in the rest of this proof.
(⇒) Assume a transition qX
1a− →qX
2inX. From Definition 12 it follows that
qX
1a− →qX
2inJA1∥A2KsemandqX
2∈cons. Following Definition 3 of the semantic,
it follows that there exists an edge (l1, a, φ, c, l 2)∈EA1∥A2with qX
1= (l1, v1),
qX
2= (l2, v2),l1, l2∈LocA1∥A2,v1, v2∈[Clk7→R≥0],v1|=φ,v2=v1[r7→0]r∈c,
andv2|=Inv(l2). Now we consider the three cases of Definition 17 of the parallel
composition for TIOA.
•a∈Act1∩Act2.ItfollowsdirectlyfromLemma13that qX
1a− →qX
2isatransition
inJA1Ksem∥JA2Ksem. Since qX
2∈cons, it holds that qX
1a− →qX
2is a transition
inY.
•a∈Act1\Act2.ItfollowsdirectlyfromCorollary3that qX
1a− →qX
2isatransition
inJA1Ksem∥JA2Ksem. Since qX
2∈cons, it holds that qX
1a− →qX
2is a transition
inY.
•a∈Act2\Act1. It follows directly from Corollary 3 (where we switched A1and
A2) that qX
1a− →qX
2is a transition in JA1Ksem∥JA2Ksem. Since qX
2∈cons, it
holds that qX
1a− →qX
2is a transition in Y.
Now consider that ais a delay d. It follows directly from Lemma 12 that qX
1d− →qX
2
is a transition in JA1Ksem∥JA2Ksem. Since qX
2∈cons, it holds that qX
1d− →qX
2is a
transition in Y.
We have shown that when qX
1a− →qX
2is a transition in X= (JA1∥A2Ksem)∆,
it holds that qX
1a− →qX
2is a transition in Y= (JA1Ksem∥JA2Ksem)∆. Since the
transition is arbitrarily chosen, it holds for all transitions in X.
(⇐) Assume a transition qY
1a− →qY
2inY. From Definition 12 it follows that
qY
1a− →qY
2inJA1Ksem∧JA2KsemandqY
2∈cons. Now we consider the three cases of
Definition 15 of the parallel composition for TIOTS.
•a∈Act1∩Act2.ItfollowsdirectlyfromLemma13that qY
1a− →qY
2isatransition
inJA1∥A2Ksem. Since qY
2∈cons, it holds that qY
1a− →qY
2is a transition in X.

--- Page 30 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
30Timed I/O Automata
S X T ∥ ≤ActS
o ActX
o ActT
o ActS
i ActX
i ActT
i
X T S ≤ \\ActS
o ActX
o ActT
o ActS
i ActX
i ActT
i
Fig. 12: Concept of quotient for given specifications SandTand the unknown
implementation X.
•a∈Act1\Act2. From time reflexivity of Definition 1 we have that qY
2d− −→with
d= 0. From Definitions 12 and 15 it follows that qJA1Ksem
2d− −→andqJA2Ksemd− −→.
Now, from Definition 3 it follows that v2+d|=Inv2(l2), i.e., v2|=Inv2(l2).
It now follows directly from Lemma 14 that qY
1a− →qY
2is a transition in JA1∥
A2Ksem. Since qY
2∈cons, it holds that qY
1a− →qY
2is a transition in X.
•a∈Act2\Act1. From time reflexivity of Definition 1 we have that qY
2d− −→with
d= 0. From Definitions 12 and 15 it follows that qJA1Ksemd− −→andqJA2Ksem
2d− −→.
Now, from Definition 3 it follows that v1+d|=Inv1(l1), i.e., v1|=Inv1(l1).
It now follows directly from Lemma 14 (where we switched A1andA2) that
qY
1a− →qY
2is a transition in JA1∥A2Ksem. Since qY
2∈cons, it holds that
qY
1a− →qY
2is a transition in X.
Now consider that ais a delay d. It follows directly from Lemma 12 that qY
1d− →qY
2is
a transition in JA1∥A2Ksem. Since qY
2∈cons, it holds that qY
1d− →qY
2is a transition
inX.
We have shown that when qY
1a− →qY
2is a transition in Y=JA1Ksem∥JA2Ksem,
it holds that qY
1a− →qY
2is a transition in X=JA1∥A2Ksem. Since the transition is
arbitrarily chosen, it holds for all transitions in Y. □
Finally, the following corollary describes a special case of Theorem 9, which
happens to be one of the unproven main theorems in our previous work [25].
Corollary 4 Given two specification automata Ai= (Loci, li
0,Acti,Clki, Ei,
Invi), i= 1,2where Act1o∩Act2o=∅andAct1=Act2. Then JA1∥A2Ksem=
JA1Ksem∥JA2Ksem.
ProofThis corollary follows directly as a special case from the proof of Theorem 9.
ThespecialcaseonlydependsonLemmas11and13,whichdonotrequireadversarial
pruning to be applied. □

--- Page 31 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
Timed I/O Automata 31
6 Quotient
An essential operator in a complete specification theory is the one of quotient-
ing. It allows for factoring out behavior from a larger component. If one has
a large component specification Tand a small one Sthen T\\Sis the spec-
ification of exactly those components that when composed with Srefine T.
(In this context, larger does not necessarily means bigger in terms of the size
of the state set, action set or transition relation, but more like higher in the
refinement hierarchy.) In other words, T\\Sspecifies the work that still needs
to be done, given availability of an implementation of S, in order to provide
an implementation of T.
Figure 12 shows the conceptual idea behind the quotient operator, which is
formalized in Theorem 10 later in this section. Given two specification Sand
T, each with its own action sets, the purpose of the quotient operator is to
calculate the specification for the missing implementation X. Once Xis put
parallel to S, the combined system should refine T. From this figure, we can
derive the true minimal requirement on the quotient operator (our previous
work had stricter requirements): ActS
o∩ActT
i=∅, i.e., an action cannot be
classified as an output action in Sand an input action in T.
We proceed like for structural and logical compositions and start with a
quotient that may introduce error states. Those errors can then pruned if
desired.
Definition 18 Given specifications S= (QS, qS
0,ActS,→S)andT= (QT, qT
0,
ActT,→T)where ActSo∩ActT
i=∅. Thequotient of TandS, denoted by T\\S,
is a specification (QT×QS∪ {u, e},(qT
0, qS
0),Act,→)where uis the universal
state, ethe inconsistent state, Act=Acti⊎Actowith Acti=ActT
i∪ActSoand
Acto=ActTo\ActSo∪ActS
i\ActT
i, and→is defined as
1.(qT
1, qS
1)a− −→(qT
2, qS
2)ifa∈ActS∩ActT,qT
1a− −→TqT
2, and qS
1a− −→SqS
2
2.(qT, qS
1)a− −→(qT, qS
2)ifa∈ActS\ActT,qT∈QT, and qS
1a− −→SqS
2
3.(qT
1, qS)a− −→(qT
2, qS)ifa∈ActT\ActS,qS∈QS, and qT
1a− −→TqT
2
4.(qT
1, qS
1)d− −→(qT
2, qS
2)ifd∈R≥0,qT
1d− −→TqT
2, and qS
1d− −→SqS
2
5.(qT, qS)a− −→uifa∈ActSo,qT∈QT, and qSXa− −→S
6.(qT, qS)d− −→uifd∈R≥0,qT∈QT, and qSXd− −→S
7.(qT, qS)a− −→eifa∈ActSo∩ActTo,qTXa− −→T, and qSa− −→S
8.ua− −→uifa∈Act∪R≥0
9.ea− −→eifa∈Acti
In this definition, uandeare fresh states such that uis universal (allows
arbitrary behavior) and eis inconsistent (no output-controllable behavior can
satisfyit).State edisallowsprogressoftimeandhasnooutputtransitions.The
universal state guarantees nothing about the behavior of its implementations

--- Page 32 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
32Timed I/O Automata
(thus any refinement with a suitable alphabet is possible), and dually the
inconsistent state allows no implementations.
The first four rules are part of the standard rules of parallel composition,
see Definition 15. Rules 5 and 6 capture the situation where Sdoes not allow
a particular output action or delay, respectively, so the parallel composition of
Sand the quotient also does not allow this to happen. Therefore, it technically
does not matter what the quotient does after performing these transitions,
hence they go to the universal state u. Rule 7 captures the situation that an
output shared between SandTas causes a problem in the refinement S≤T
asTis blocking the output. Thus the quotient, representing the missing com-
ponent put into parallel composition with S, needs to block Sfrom performing
this output action. But the output action has become an input action in the
quotient, so we redirect this output to the error state to ‘memorize’ this prob-
lem. Finally, rules 8 and 9 simply express what we mean by universal and error
state, respectively.
Theorem 10 states that the proposed quotient operator has exactly the
property that it is dual of structural composition with regards to refinement.
Theorem 10 For any two specifications SandTsuch that the quotient T\\Sis
defined, and for any implementation Xover the same alphabet as T\\S, we have that
S∥Xis defined and S∥X≤TiffX≤T\\S.
The proof of Theorem 10 can be found in Appendix A.4.
Quotienting for TIOA is defined in the following way.
Definition 19 Given specification automata S= (LocS, lS
0,ActS,ClkS, ES,InvS)
andT= (LocT, lT
0,ActT,ClkT, ET,InvT)where ActSo∩ActT
i=∅. Thequo-
tient of TandS, denoted by T\\S, is a specification automaton (LocT×LocS∪
{lu, le},(lT
0, lS
0),Act,ClkT⊎ClkS⊎ {xnew}, E,Inv)where luis the universal state,
lethe inconsistent state, Act=Acti⊎Actowith Acti=ActT
i∪ActSo∪ {inew}and
Acto=ActTo\ActSo∪ActS
i\ActT
i,Inv((lT, lS)) =Inv(lu) =T,Inv(le) =xnew≤0
andEis defined as
1.((lT
1, lS
1), a, φT∧Inv(lT
2)[r7→0]r∈cT∧φS∧Inv(lS
1)∧Inv(lS
2)[r7→0]r∈cS, cT∪
cS,(lT
2, lS
2))∈Eifa∈ActS∩ActT,(lT
1, a, φT, cT, lT
2)∈ET, and
(lS
1, a, φS, cS, lS
2)∈ES5
2.((lT, lS
1), a, φS∧Inv(lS
1)∧Inv(lS
2)[r7→0]r∈cS, cS,(lT, lS
2))∈Eifa∈ActS\
ActT,lT∈LocT, and (lS
1, a, φS, cS, lS
2)∈ES
3.((lT, lS
1), a,¬GS,∅, lu)∈Eifa∈ActSo,lT∈LocTandGS=W{φS∧
Inv(lS
2)[r7→0]r∈cS|(lS
1, a, φS, cS, lS
2)∈ES}
4.((lT, lS), a,¬Inv(lS),∅, lu)∈Eifa∈Act,lT∈LocT, and lS∈LocS
5Only the target invariant of Tmatters. Inv(lS
1)is used to force the complementary edge to the
universal state (which depends on S, see rules 5 and 6 in Definition 18 of quotient for TIOTS),
Inv(lS
2)[r7→0]r∈cSis used to ensure the transition only appears in feasible states in the semantic
representation as the location invariants are removed.

--- Page 33 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
Timed I/O Automata 33
5.((lT
1, lS
1), a, φS∧Inv(lS
1)∧Inv(lS
2)[r7→0]r∈cS∧ ¬GT,{xnew}, le)∈Eifa∈
ActSo∩ActTo,(lS, a, φS, cS, lS
2)∈ES, and GT=W{φT∧Inv(lT
2)[r7→0]r∈cT|
(lT
1, a, φT, cT, lT
2)∈ET}
6.((lT, lS), inew,¬Inv(lT)∧Inv(lS),{xnew}, le)∈EiflT∈LocTandlS∈LocS
7.((lT, lS), inew,Inv(lT)∨ ¬Inv(lS),∅,(lT, lS))∈EiflT∈LocTandlS∈LocS
8.((lT
1, lS), a, φT∧Inv(lT
2)[r7→0]r∈cT∧Inv(lS), cT,(lT
2, lS))∈Eifa∈ActT\
ActS,lS∈LocS, and (lT
1, a, φT, cT, lT
2)∈ET6
9.(lu, a,T,∅, lu)∈Eifa∈Act
10.(le, a, x new= 0,∅, le)∈Eifa∈Acti
and the conjunction of an empty set equals false (W∅=F).
Compared to definitions of the quotient for TIOAs in our previous works,
we made several changes to correct minor mistakes. 1) Location invariants in
the quotient are simply T, hence the location invariants of the specifications S
andTare now included in the transitions of the quotient. For example, rule 1
captures rule 1 of the quotient for TIOTS (Definition 18) where transitions
are both possible in SandT. A transition is possible when the guard is satis-
fied, captured by the quotient definitions in previous works, andthe updated
valuation satisfies the target location’s invariant, see Definition 3 of the seman-
tics. 2) We resolved a potential nondeterminism caused by the combination of
rules 4 and 8, i.e., in Definition 19 for any given state either the edge emanat-
ing from rule 4 is enabled or the one from rule 8, or none, but never both. 3)
Similarly, we resolved a potential nondeterminism caused by the combination
of rules 4 and 5. 4) Rule 7 is added to ensure that the quotient is actually
input enabled by construction for the new input action inew.
Figure 13 shows the quotient University \\Administration as an example.
Notethat,toincreasethereadabilityofthefigure,weincludedmultipleuniver-
sal locations and error locations, while in theory there is only a single universal
location and a single error location. Furthermore, we omitted the selfloops
labeled with inewthat are generated by rule 7 from Definition 19. As can be
seen from this example, there are two potential problems that can result in
errors for the university specification: it can take too long ( u >20) to create a
newsitem on the research after a granthas been received, or a pubis produces
followed by a newsitem before an actual granthas been received. Any further
refinements, including implementations, of University \\Administration should
resolve these two problems.
Observe that JT\\SKsemandJTKsem\\JSKsemhave different state and action
sets. For example, JT\\SKsemhas a set of error states {(le, v)|v∈[ClkT\\S7→
R≥0]}, while JTKsem\\JSKsemonly has a single error state e. Or JT\\SKsem
contains the input action inewwhich JTKsem\\JSKsemlacks. This makes relating
the quotient for TIOTS and TIOA much more tedious that those theorems
6Location invariant ¬Inv(lS)is added to this transition to avoid nondeterminism caused by
rule 4. This problem is not present in Definition 18 of the quotient for TIOTS, as there we can
directly refer to the delay action din rule 5.

--- Page 34 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
34Timed I/O Automata
Act, z > 2 Act, z > 2news?, z≤2
xnew:= 0Act, z > 2inew, xnew:= 0
u >20∧z≤2
inew, u > 20
xnew:= 0Acti
xnew= 0
inew
u >20∧z≤2
xnew:= 0
Acti
xnew= 0grant?
u≤2
u:= 0, z:= 0
coin?
z≤2
pub!, z:= 0news?
z≤2
u:= 0grant?
z≤2∧u≤20
pub!
z≤2
grant?
u≤20
grant?
z≤2∧u≤20pub!
z≤2grant?
u≤2
z:= 0
coin?
z≤2
pub!, z:= 0news?
z≤2pub!
z:= 0
grant?
grant?
z≤2pub!
z≤2pub!
z≤2grant?
z≤2 grant?
u >2, z:= 0
pub!
z:= 0
grant?
u≤2∧z≤2
u:= 0pub!
z≤2
grant?
u >2∧z≤2lucoin?, news?
news?Act, z > 2
coin?, news? coin?
lulucoin?, news?
news?Act, z > 2
coin?, news?coin?
luAct Act
Act Act le
xnew≤0Acti
xnew= 0le
xnew≤0
le
xnew≤0
coin news grant inew pub
Fig. 13: The quotient University \\Administration . To increase readability,
we included multiple universal locations and error locations, and omitted the
sefloops labeled with inew(see rule 7 of Definition 19).
in previous sections. Therefore, we have to use bisimulation, Definition 20, in
the following main theorem, Theorem 11, that lifts all the results from timed
input/output transition systems to the symbolic representation level7.
Definition 20 Given specifications S= (QS, qS
0,ActS,→S)andT= (QT, qT
0,
ActT,→T).SandTarebisimilar, denoted by S≃T, iff there exists a bisimulation
relation R⊆QS×QTcontaining (qS
0, qT
0)such that for each pair of states (s, t)∈R
it holds that
1. whenever sa− −→Ss′for some s′∈QSanda∈ActS∩ActT, then ta− −→Tt′and
(s′, t′)∈Rfor some t′∈QT
2. whenever sa− −→Ss′for some s′∈QSanda∈ActS\ActT, then (s′, t)∈R
3. whenever ta− −→Tt′for some t′∈QTanda∈ActT∩ActS, then sa− −→Ss′and
(s′, t′)∈Rfor some s′∈QS
4. whenever ta− −→Tt′for some t′∈QTanda∈ActT\ActS, then (s, t′)∈R
5. whenever sd− −→Ss′for some s′∈QSandd∈R≥0, then td− −→Tt′and(s′, t′)∈R
for some t′∈QT
6. whenever td− −→Tt′for some t′∈QTandd∈R≥0, then sd− −→Ss′and(s′, t′)∈R
for some s′∈QS
Two specification automata AandBare bisimilar, denoted by A≃B, iffJAKsem≃
JBKsem.
7In previous works, the bisimulation was replaced by an equation sign, which is technically
incorrect.

--- Page 35 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
Timed I/O Automata 35
Fig. 14: Screenshot of the GUI of Ecdar 2.4
Theorem 11 Given specification automata S= (LocS, lS
0,ActS,ClkS, ES,InvS)
and T= (LocT, lT
0,ActT,ClkT, ET,InvT)where ActSo∩ActT
i=∅. Then
(JT\\SKsem)∆≃(JTKsem\\JSKsem)∆.
The proof of Theorem 11 can be found in Appendix A.4.
7 Concluding Remarks
We have proposed a complete and fully proven game-based specification the-
ory for timed systems, in which we distinguish between a component and the
environment in which it is used. Our contribution is a game-based approach
to support both refinement, consistency checking, logical and structural
composition, and quotient.
In the future one could extend our model with (discrete) variables to ease
themodelingofcyber-physicalsystems.ThiswasalreadysuggestedbyBerend-
sen and Vaandrager in [39], but only for structural composition. One could also
investigate whether our approach can be used to perform scheduling of timed
systems (see [1, 10, 40] for examples). For example, the quotient operation
could perhaps be used to synthesize a scheduler for such problem.
In this paper, we ignored the notion of time divergence as defined in [32].
In Section 3 we observed that to verify whether an implementation has time
divergence, we need to analyze it in the context of an environment to form a
closed-system, as an environment could both ensure or prevent the diverging
of time. It would be interesting to investigate whether one could investigate
time divergence in a compositional manner.
Finally our methodology is being implemented in the open-source tool
ECDAR8. Conjunction, composition, and quotienting are simple product con-
structions allowing for consistency checking to be solved using the zone-based
algorithms for synthesizing winning strategies in timed games [35, 37]. Refine-
ment between specifications can be checked using a variant of the pre-existing
8http://ecdar.net

--- Page 36 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
36Timed I/O Automata
efficient game-based algorithm [22]. A previous version of the tool was closed-
source, contained a few issues and did not implement some of the features, like
quotient. The version currently in development contains all features, is thor-
oughly tested and will support Boolean variables. Besides the implementation
of the algorithms, we are also working an on graphical user interface (GUI) to
model systems. Figure 14 shows a screenshot of the current state of the GUI.
Acknowledgments. This study was funded by the European Research
Council (ERC) Advance grant LASSO, the Villum Investigator grant S4OS,
and the Digital Research Center Denmark (DIREC) Bridge grant ‘Verifiable
and Safe AI for Autonomous Systems’.
Declarations
The authors have no competing interests to declare that are relevant to the
content of this article.
Appendix A Proofs
This section contains all the proofs not included in the main text of the paper.
We will repeat the theorem for clarity before actually providing the proof.
A.1 Omitted proofs of Section 3
Theorem 1 Every locally consistent specification is consistent in the sense of
Definition 8.
ProofLet us begin with defining an auxiliary function δwhich chooses a delay for
every state sin a locally consistent specification S:
δ(s) =(
dthe infimum dsuch that sd− −→Ss′and∃o! :s′o!− −→S
+∞otherwise
Note that since sallows independent progress, it always hold that sδ(s)− − −→S.δis time
additive in the following sense: if sd− −→Ss′andd≤δ(s)then δ(s′) +d=δ(s), which
is due to time additivity of →S, and local consistency of S.
We want to show for an arbitrary locally consistent specifications Sthat it has
an implementation. This can be shown by synthesizing an implementation P=
(QS, s0,ActS,→P), where →Pis the largest transition relation generated by the
following rules:
si?− −→Ps′ifsi?− −→Ss′∧i?∈ActS
i
so!− −→Ps′ifso!− −→Ss′∧o!∈ActS
o∧δ(s) = 0
sd− −→Ps′ifsd− −→Ss′∧d∈R≥0∧d≤δ(s)
Since Ponly takes a subset of transitions of S, the determinism of Simplies
determinism of P. The transition relation of Pis time-additive due to time additivity

--- Page 37 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
Timed I/O Automata 37
of→Sand of δ. It is also time-reflexive due to the last rule ( 0≤δ(s)for every state
sand→Swas time reflexive). So Pis a TIOTS.
The new transition relation is also input enabled as it inherits of input transitions
from S, which was input enabled. So Pis a specification. The second rule guarantees
that outputs are urgent (by construction Ponly outputs when no further delays are
possible). Moreover Pobserves independent progress. Consider a state sinP. Then
ifδ(s) = + ∞clearly scan delay indefinitely. If δ(s)is finite, then by definition
ofδand of P, the state scan delay and hence produce an output. Thus Pis an
implementation in the sense of Definition 5.
Now an unsurprising coinductive argument shows that the following relation R⊆
QS×QSwitnesses P≤S:
R=n
(s, s)|s∈QSo
.
□
Theorem 2 Any locally consistent specification Srefining an implementation Pis
an implementation as per Definition 5.
ProofObserve first that Sis already locally consistent, so all its states warrant inde-
pendentprogress.Weonlyneedtoarguethatitsatisfiesoutputurgency.Withoutloss
of generality, assume that Sonly contains states which are reachable by (sequences
of) discrete or timed transitions.
IfSonly contains reachable states, every state of Shas to be related to some
state of Pin a relation Rwitnessing S≤P(output and delay transitions need
to be matched in the refinement; input transitions also need to be matched as P
is input enabled and Sis deterministic). This can be argued for using a standard,
though slightly lengthy argument, by formalizing reachable states as a fixpoint of a
monotonic operator.
Now that we know that every state of Sis related to some state of Pconsider
an arbitrary s∈QSand let p∈QPbe such that (s, p)∈R. Then if so!− −→Ss′for
some state s′∈QSand an output o!∈ActSo, it must be that also po!− −→Pp′for
some state p′∈QP(and (s′, p′)∈R). But since Pis an implementation, its outputs
must be urgent, so pXd− −→Pfor all d >0, and consequently sXd− −→Sfor all d >0.
We have shown that all states of Shave urgent outputs (if any) and thus Sis an
implementation. □
A.2 Omitted proofs of Section 4
Theorem 4 A specification S= (Q, s0,Act,→)is consistent iff s0∈cons.
ProofFirst, assume that s0∈consS. Show that Sis consistent in the sense of
Definition8.InasimilarfashiontotheproofofTheorem1wefirstpostulateexistence

--- Page 38 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
38Timed I/O Automata
of a function δ, which chooses a delay and an output for every consistent state s:
δ(s) =

dif∃s′, s′′∈consS:the infimum dsuch that sd− −→Ss′
and∃o! :s′o!− −→Ss′′
+∞otherwise
Note that δis time additive in the following sense: if sd− −→Ss′andd≤δ(s)then
δ(s′) +d=δ(s), which is due to time additivity of →Sand the fact that consSis a
fixpoint of ΘS.
We show this by constructing an implementation P= (QS, s0,ActS,→P)where
the transition relation is the largest relation generated by the following rules:
1.so!− −→Ps′iffso!− −→Ss′ands′∈consSandδs= 0,
2.si?− −→Ps′iffsi?− −→Ss′,
3.sd− −→Ps′iffsd− −→Ss′andd≤δs.
Observe that the construction of Pis essentially identical to the one in the proof
of Theorem 1 above. It can be argued in almost the same way as in the above proof,
that Psatisfies the axioms of TIOTSs and is an implementation. Here one has to
use the definition of ΘSin order to see that the side condition in the first rule, that
iss′∈consS, does not introduce a violation of independent progress.
It remains to argue that P≤S. This is done by arguing that the following relation
R
R=n
(p, s)∈QS×QS|p=so
witnesses the refinement of SbyP.
Consider now the other direction. Assume that Sis consistent and show that
s0∈consS. In the following we write that a state sis consistent meaning that a
specification would be consistent if swas the initial state. Let X={s∈QS|
sis consistent }. It suffices to show that Xis a post-fixed point of ΘS, thus X⊆
ΘS(X)(then s0∈X= consS).
Since sis consistent, let us consider an implementation Pand a state psuch
thatp≤s. We will show that s∈ΘS(X). Consider an arbitrary d≥0and the first
disjunct in the definition of ΘS. Ifpd− −→Ppdthen also sd− −→Ssdandpd≤sd, so
sd∈X. Consider an arbitrary input i?such that sdi?− −→Ss′. Then also pdi?− −→Pp′
andp′≤s′(by satisfaction). But then s′∈X. So by the first disjunct of definition
ofΘSwe have that s∈ΘS(X).
IfpXd− −→Pfor our fixed value of d, then by independent progress of pthere exists
admax< dsuch that pdmax− − − −→Pp′for some p′andp′o!− −→Pp′′for some p′′and some
output o!. By p≤sthere also exist s′ands′′such that sdmax− − − −→Ss′ands′o!− −→Ss′′.
Moreover p′′≤s′′, sos′′∈X, which by the second disjunct in the definition of ΘS
implies that s∈ΘS(X).
So we conclude that Xis a fixpoint of ΘS. Since s0is consistent by assumption,
then s0∈X⊆consS. □
Theorem 5 For a consistent specification S,S∆is locally consistent and JSKmod=
JS∆Kmod.

--- Page 39 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
Timed I/O Automata 39
ProofWe first proof that S∆is locally consistent. From Definitions 9 and 5 of local
consistency and implementation, respectively, it follows that we have to show that
∀q∈QS∆: either ∀d∈R≥0:qd− −→Por∃d∈R≥0,∃o!∈Actos.t.qd− −→Pq′and
q′o!− −→P. From Definition 12 of adversarial pruning it follows that QS∆= cons.
Consider a state q∈cons. From the definition of Θ, it follows that q∈err(cons)
andq∈ {q1∈Q| ∀d≥0 : [∀q2∈Q:q1d− −→q2⇒q2∈cons∧ ∀i?∈Acti:∃q3∈
cons : q2i?− −→q3]∨[∃d′≤d∧∃q2, q3∈cons∧∃o!∈Acto:q1d′
− −→q2∧q2o!− −→q3∧∀i?∈
Acti:∃q4∈cons : q2i?− −→q4]}. In case that the condition [∃d′≤d∧ ∃q2, q3∈
cons∧ ∃o!∈Acto:q1d′
− −→q2∧q2o!− −→q3∧ ∀i?∈Acti:∃q4∈cons : q2i?− −→q4]holds
for some d, then it follows immediately that qallows independent progress. In the
other case, i.e., there does not exists a dsuch that [∃d′≤d∧ ∃q2, q3∈cons∧ ∃o!∈
Acto:q1d′
− −→q2∧q2o!− −→q3∧ ∀i?∈Acti:∃q4∈cons : q2i?− −→q4]holds, it follows
from the fact that q∈err(cons)and Definition 11 that ∀d∈R≥0:qd− −→P, thus
allowing independent progress.
We now show that JSKmod =JS∆Kmod. From Definition 7 it follows that
JSKmod=JS∆Kmodiff for all implementations Pit holds that P≤S⇔P≤S∆.
(P≤S⇒P≤S∆) Consider an implementation Psuch that P≤S. This
implies from Definition 6 of refinement that there exists a relation R⊆QP×QS
witnessing the refinement. We will arguing that for any pair (p, s)∈Rit holds that
s∈cons.
For this, consider the controllable predecessor operator πandπ(imerr)to under-
stand what it exactly calculates with respect to the definition of a consistent
specification. A state q∈π(imerr)is either directly an error state or it can first delay
followed by an input action to reach an error state withoutencountering an output
action preventing it reaching an error state. With other words, no implementation
can prevent state qfrom reaching an error state.
Now, denote πn(err)then-th iteration of the fixed-point calculation, i.e.,
π1(imerr) = π(imerr),π2(imerr) = π(π(imerr)), etc. Following the above reason-
ing about the effect of πon the reachability of error states, we can formulate the
following fixed-point invariant: for each nandq∈πn(err), there does not exists
an implementation preventing qfrom reaching an error state. Once the fixed-point
incons = π(incons) = πN(imerr)for some Nis reached, we know for all q∈incons
that it cannot reach the fixed-point inconsbecause either inconsis just simply
unreachable by any means or an implementation can prevent it from reaching it.
Consider a pair (p, s)∈Rwhere s∈incons. This means that specification S
cannot be prevented from reaching an error state s′. If we follow this path, we end
up with pair (p′, s′)∈R. Now, s′is an error state, which either cannot progress
time indefinitely and do an output. But since p′is a state from an implementation
P, it has the independent progress property. Therefore, once the specification wants
to do an output or (indefinite) delay, the second or third property from Definition 6
is violated. Therefore, we can conclude that for pair (p, s)∈R,s /∈incons, i.e.,
s∈cons. As the argument above does not rely on a specific state sinS, it holds for
all states s∈QS.
Now, we effectively have that R⊆QP×cons, thus it follows from Defini-
tion 12 of adversarial pruning that Ris also a relation witnessing the refinement
P≤S∆. As we considered an arbitrarily implementation Prefining S, it holds for
all implementations Prefining S. Therefore, we conclude that P≤S⇐P≤S∆.

--- Page 40 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
40Timed I/O Automata
(P≤S⇐P≤S∆) This case follows directly from the construction of S∆and
the fact that cons⊆QS, i.e., for all implementations Pthat refine S∆, the binary
relation R⊆QP×consalso witnesses the refinement of PandS. □
Lemma 2 For two specifications S,T, and their states sandt, respectively, if there
exists an implementation Pand its state psuch that simultaneously p≤sandp≤t
then (s, t)∈consS∧T.
ProofThis is shown by arguing that the following set Xof states of S∧Tis a
postfixed point of Θ(then (s, t)∈X⊆Θ(X)⊆consS∧T):
X={(s, t)| ∃P:∃p∈QP:p≤s∧p≤t}.
This is done by checking that X⊆Θ(X). Take (s, t)∈X, show that (s, t)∈
Θ(X). So consider an arbitrary d0≥0. We know that there exists state psuch that
p≤sandp≤t. Since pis a state of an implementation it guarantees independent
progress, so there exists a delay dpsuch that pdp
− −→Pp′for some state p′. Now the
proof is split in two cases, proceeding by coinduction.
•dp≤d0is used to show that (s, t)∈Θ(X)using a standard argument with the
second disjunct in definition of Θ(namely that pcan delay and output leading
to a refinement of successors of sandt, which again will be in X).
•dp> d0is used to show that (s, t)∈Θ(X)using the same kind of argument
with the first disjunct in the definition of Θ(namely that then pcan delay
d0time and by refinement for any input transition it can advanced to a state
refining successors of sandt, which are in X).
□
Lemma 3 Given two TIOAs Ai= (Loci, li
0,Acti,Clki, Ei,Invi), i= 1,2where
Act1
i∩Act2o=∅ ∧Act1o∩Act2
i=∅. Then QJA1∧A2Ksem=QJA1Ksem∧JA2Ksemand
qJA1∧A2Ksem
0=qJA1Ksem∧JA2Ksem
0.
ProofFor brevity, we write X=JA1∧A2Ksem,Y=JA1Ksem∧JA2Ksem, and Clk=
Clk1⊎Clk2in the rest of this proof. Following Definition 3 of semantic of a TIOA,
Definition 12 of adversarial pruning, Definition 13 of the conjunction for TIOTS,
and Definition 14 of the conjunction for TIOA, the set of states of XisQX=
(Loc1×Loc2)×[Clk7→R≥0] =Loc1×Loc2×[Clk7→R≥0]andthesetofstatesof Yis
QY= (Loc1×[Clk17→R≥0])×(Loc2×[Clk27→R≥0]) =Loc1×Loc2×[Clk7→R≥0].
Therefore, QX=QY. Furthermore, it now also follows immediately from the same
definitions that qX
0=qY
0, as none of these definitions alter the initial location of a
TIOA or initial state of a TIOTS. □
Lemma 4 Given two TIOAs Ai= (Loci, li
0,Acti,Clki, Ei,Invi), i= 1,2where
Act1
i∩Act2o=∅ ∧Act1o∩Act2
i=∅. Denote X=JA1∧A2KsemandY=
JA1Ksem∧JA2Ksem, and let d∈R≥0andq1, q2∈QX∩QY. Then q1d− −→Xq2if and
only if q1d− −→Yq2.

--- Page 41 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
Timed I/O Automata 41
ProofFirst, from Lemma 3 it follows that QX=QY. Consider a delay d∈R≥0.
For brevity, in the rest of this proof we write Clk=Clk1⊎Clk2, and u1andu2to
indicate the part of a valuation uof only the clocks of A1andA2, respectively.
(⇒) Assume that ∃q1, q2∈QXsuch that q1d− −→Xq2. From Definition 3 of
the semantic of a TIOA it follows that q1= (l, v),q2= (l, v+d),l∈LocA1∧A2,
v∈[Clk7→R≥0],v+d|=InvA1∧A2(l),and∀d′∈R≥0, d′< d:v+d′|=InvA1∧A2(l).
From Definition 14 of the conjunction for TIOA it follows that l= (l1, l2),l1∈Loc1,
l2∈Loc2, and InvA1∧A2(l) =Inv1(l1)∧Inv2(l2). Therefore, v+d|=Inv1(l1)∧
Inv2(l2), and thus v+d|=Inv1(l1)andv+d|=Inv2(l2). Similarly, v+d′|=
Inv1(l1)∧Inv2(l2), and thus v+d′|=Inv1(l1)andv+d′|=Inv2(l2). Because
Clk1∩Clk2=∅, it follows that v1+d|=Inv1(l1),v2+d|=Inv2(l2),v1+d′|=
Inv1(l1),and v2+d′|=Inv2(l2).Now,fromDefinition3ofthesemanticofaTIOA,it
follows that (l1, v1)d− −→JA1Ksem(l1, v1+d)and(l2, v2)d− −→JA2Ksem(l2, v2+d). Finally,
from Definition 13 of the conjunction for TIOTS, if follows that (l1, v1, l2, v2)d− −→
Y(l1, v1+d, l2, v2+d). Again by using that Clk1∩Clk2=∅, we can rewrite the
states: (l1, v1, l2, v2) = (l1, l2, v) =q1and(l1, v1+d, l2, v2+d) = (l1, l2, v+d) =q2.
Thus q1d− −→Yq2.
(⇐) Assume that ∃q1, q2∈QYsuch that q1d− −→Yq2. From Definition 13 of the
conjunction for TIOTS it follows that q1= (q1
1, q2
1),q2= (q1
2, q2
2),q1
1, q1
2∈QJA1Ksem,
q2
1, q2
2∈QJA2Ksem,q1
1d− −→JA1Ksemq1
2, and q2
1d− −→JA2Ksemq2
2. From Definition 3 of the
semantic of a TIOA it follows that for i= 1,2:qi
1= (li, vi),qi
2= (li, vi+d),
li∈Loci,vi∈[Clki7→R≥0],vi+d|=Invi(li), and∀d′∈R≥0, d′< d:v+d′|=
Invi(li). Because Clk1∩Clk2=∅, it follows that for i= 1,2:v+d|=Invi(li)
andv+d′|=Invi(li). Now, from Definition 14 it follows that InvA1∧A2(l1, l2) =
Inv1(l1)∧Inv2(l2). Thus we know that v+d|=InvA1∧A2((l1, l2))andv+d′|=
InvA1∧A2((l1, l2)). Therefore, using Definition 3 of the semantic of a TIOA, it follows
that(l1, l2, v)d− −→X(l1, l2, v+d). Again by using that Clk1∩Clk2=∅, we can rewrite
the states: (l1, l2, v) = (l1, v1, l2, v2) =q1and(l1, l2, v+d) = (l1, v1+d, l2, v2+d) =
q2. Thus q1d− −→Xq2.
As the analysis above holds for any chosen d∈R≥0, it holds for all d. This
concludes the proof. □
Lemma 5 Given two TIOAs Ai= (Loci, li
0,Acti,Clki, Ei,Invi), i= 1,2where
Act1
i∩Act2o=∅ ∧Act1o∩Act2
i=∅. Denote X=JA1∧A2KsemandY=
JA1Ksem∧JA2Ksem, and let a∈Act1∩Act2andq1, q2∈QX∩QY. Then q1a− −→Xq2
if and only if q1a− −→Yq2.
ProofFirst, from Lemma 3 it follows that QX=QY. For brevity, in the rest of this
proof we write Clk=Clk1⊎Clk2, and v1andv2to indicate the part of a valuation
vof only the clocks of A1andA2, respectively.
(⇒) Assume a transition qX
1a− →qX
2inX. Following Definition 3 of the semantic,
it follows that there exists an edge (l1, a, φ, c, l 2)∈EA1∧A2with qX
1= (l1, v1),

--- Page 42 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
42Timed I/O Automata
qX
2= (l2, v2),l1, l2∈LocA1∧A2,v1, v2∈[Clk7→R≥0],v1|=φ,v2=v1[r7→0]r∈c,
andv2|=Inv(l2).
From Definition 14 of the conjunction for TIOA it follows that (l1
1, a, φ1, c1, l1
2)
is an edge in A1and(l2
1, a, φ2, c2, l2
2)inA2,l1= (l1
1, l2
1),l2= (l1
2, l2
2),φ=φ1∧φ2,
c=c1∪c2.Since v1|=φ,itholdsthat v1|=φ1andv1|=φ2.Because Clk1∩Clk2=∅,
it holds that v1
1|=φ1andv2
1|=φ2. Also, since v2=v1[r7→0]r∈c, it holds that
v1
2=v1
1[r7→0]r∈c1andv2
2=v2
1[r7→0]r∈c2. Finally, because InvA1∧A2(l2) =
Inv1(l1
2)∧Inv2(l2
2)(see Definition 14) and v2|=InvA1∧A2(l2), it follows that v2|=
Inv1(l1
2)andv2|=Inv2(l2
2). Since Clk1∩Clk2=∅, it follows that v1
2|=Inv1(l1
2)and
v2
2|=Inv2(l2
2).
Combining all the information about A1, we have that (l1
1, a, φ1, c1, l1
2)is an
edge in A1,v1
1|=φ1,v1
2=v1
1[r7→0]r∈c1, and v1
2|=Inv1(l1
2). Therefore, from
Definition 3 it follows that (l1
1, v1
1)a− →(l1
2, v1
2)is a transition in JA1Ksem. Combining
alltheinformationabout A2,wehavethat (l2
1, a, φ2, c2, l2
2)isanedgein A2,v2
1|=φ2,
v2
2=v2
1[r7→0]r∈c2, and v2
2|=Inv2(l2
2). Therefore, from Definition 3 it follows that
(l2
1, v2
1)a− →(l2
2, v2
2)is a transition in JA2Ksem.
Now, from Definition 13 of the conjunction for TIOTS it follows that
((l1
1, v1
1),(l2
1, v2
1))a− →((l1
2, v1
2),(l2
2, v2
2))is a transition in JA1Ksem∧JA2Ksem. Because
Clk1∩Clk2=∅, we can rearrange the states into ((l1
1, v1
1),(l2
1, v2
1)) = (( l1
1, l2
1), v1) =
qX
1and((l1
2, v1
2),(l2
2, v2
2)) = (( l1
2, l2
2), v2) =qX
2. Thus, qX
1a− →qX
2is a transition in
JA1Ksem∧JA2Ksem=Y.
(⇐)Assumeatransition qY
1a− →qY
2inY.FromDefinition13oftheconjunctionfor
TIOTSitfollowsthat qJA1Ksem
1a− →qJA1Ksem
2isatransitionin JA1KsemandqJA2Ksem
1a− →
qJA2Ksem
2inJA2Ksem,qY
1= (qJA1Ksem
1, qJA2Ksem
1), and qY
2= (qJA1Ksem
2, qJA2Ksem
2). From
Definition 3 of semantic it follows that there exists an edge (l1
1, a, φ1, c1, l1
2)∈E1
with qJA1Ksem
1= (l1
1, v1
1),qJA1Ksem
2= (l1
2, v1
2),l1
1, l1
2∈Loc1,v1
1, v1
2∈[Clk17→R≥0],
v1
1|=φ1,v1
2=v1
1[r7→0]r∈c1, and v1
2|=Inv1(l1
2). Similarly, it follows from the same
definition that there exists an edge (l2
1, a, φ2, c2, l2
2)∈E2with qJA2Ksem
1= (l2
1, v2
1),
qJA2Ksem
2= (l2
2, v2
2),l2
1, l2
2∈Loc2,v2
1, v2
2∈[Clk27→R≥0],v2
1|=φ2,v2
2=v2
1[r7→
0]r∈c2, and v2
2|=Inv2(l2
2).
Now, from Definition 14 of the conjunction for TIOA, it follows that there exists
anedge ((l1
1, l2
1), a, φ1∧φ2, c1∪c2,(l1
2, l2
2))inA1∧A2.Let vi, i= 1,2bethevaluations
that combines the one from A1with the one from A2, i.e.∀r∈Clk1:vi(r) =v1
i(r)
and∀r∈Clk2:vi(r) =v2
i(r). Because Clk1∩Clk2=∅, it holds that v1|=φ1
andv1|=φ2, thus v1|=φ1∧φ2;v2=v1[r7→0]r∈c1∪c2; and v2|=Inv1(l1
2)and
v2|=Inv2(l2
2), thus v2|=Inv1(l1
2)∧Inv2(l2
2).
FromDefinition3itnowfollowsthat ((l1
1, l2
1), v1)a− →((l1
2, l2
2), v2)isatransitionin
JA1∧A2Ksem.Because Clk1∩Clk2=∅,wecanrearrangethestatesinto ((l1
1, l2
1), v1) =
((l1
1, v1
1),(l2
1, v2
1)) = qY
1and((l1
2, l2
2), v2) = (( l1
2, v1
2),(l2
2, v2
2)) = qY
2. Thus, qY
1a− →qY
2
is a transition in JA1∧A2Ksem=Y. □
Lemma 6 Given two TIOAs Ai= (Loci, li
0,Acti,Clki, Ei,Invi), i= 1,2where
Act1
i∩Act2o=∅ ∧Act1o∩Act2
i=∅. Denote X=JA1∧A2KsemandY=JA1Ksem∧
JA2Ksem, and let a∈Act1\Act2andq1, q2∈QX∩QY, where q2= (l1
2, l2
2, v2). If
v2|=Inv2(l2), then q1a− −→Xq2if and only if q1a− −→Yq2.

--- Page 43 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
Timed I/O Automata 43
ProofFirst, from Lemma 3 it follows that QX=QY. For brevity, in the rest of this
proof we write Clk=Clk1⊎Clk2, and v1andv2to indicate the part of a valuation
vof only the clocks of A1andA2, respectively.
(⇒) Assume a transition qX
1a− →qX
2inX. Following Definition 3 of the semantic,
it follows that there exists an edge (l1, a, φ, c, l 2)∈EA1∧A2with qX
1= (l1, v1),
qX
2= (l2, v2),l1, l2∈LocA1∧A2,v1, v2∈[Clk7→R≥0],v1|=φ,v2=v1[r7→0]r∈c,
andv2|=Inv(l2).
From Definition 14 of the conjunction for TIOA it follows that (l1
1, a, φ1, c1, l1
2)
is an edge in A1,l1= (l1
1, l2
1),l2= (l1
2, l2
2),l2
1=l2
2=l2,φ=φ1,c=c1. Since
v1|=φandClk1∩Clk2=∅, it holds that v1
1|=φ1. Also, since v2=v1[r7→
0]r∈candc=c1, it holds that v1
2=v1
1[r7→0]r∈c1andv2
2=v2
1. Finally, because
InvA1∧A2(l2) =Inv1(l1
2)∧Inv2(l2)(see Definition 14) and v2|=InvA1∧A2(l2), it
follows that v2|=Inv1(l1
2)andv2|=Inv2(l2)9. Since Clk1∩Clk2=∅, it follows that
v1
2|=Inv1(l1
2)andv2
2|=Inv2(l2).
Combining all the information about A1, we have that (l1
1, a, φ1, c1, l1
2)is an
edge in A1,v1
1|=φ1,v1
2=v1
1[r7→0]r∈c1, and v1
2|=Inv1(l1
2). Therefore, from
Definition 3 it follows that (l1
1, v1
1)a− →(l1
2, v1
2)is a transition in JA1Ksem. Combining
all the information about A2, we have that v2
1=v2
2andv2
2|=Inv2(l2).
Now, from Definition 13 of the conjunction for TIOTS it follows that
((l1
1, v1
1),(l2, v2
1))a− →((l1
2, v1
2),(l2, v2
1))is a transition in JA1Ksem∧JA2Ksem. Because
Clk1∩Clk2=∅, we can rearrange the states into ((l1
1, v1
1),(l2, v2
1)) = (( l1
1, l2), v1) =
qX
1and((l1
2, v1
2),(l2, v2
2)) = (( l1
2, l2), v2) =qX
2. Thus, qX
1a− →qX
2is a transition in
JA1Ksem∧JA2Ksem=Y.
(⇐) Assume a transition qY
1a− →qY
2inY. From Definition 13 of the conjunc-
tion for TIOTS it follows that qJA1Ksem
1a− →qJA1Ksem
2is a transition in JA1Ksem,
qJA2Ksem∈QJA2Ksem,qY
1= (qJA1Ksem
1, qJA2Ksem), and qY
2= (qJA1Ksem
2, qJA2Ksem). From
Definition 3 of semantic it follows that there exists an edge (l1
1, a, φ1, c1, l1
2)∈E1
with qJA1Ksem
1= (l1
1, v1
1),qJA1Ksem
2= (l1
2, v1
2),l1
1, l1
2∈Loc1,v1
1, v1
2∈[Clk17→R≥0],
v1
1|=φ1,v1
2=v1
1[r7→0]r∈c1, and v1
2|=Inv1(l1
2). Similarly, it follows from the same
definition that qJA2Ksem= (l2, v2),l2∈Loc2, and v2∈[Clk27→R≥0].
Now, from Definition 14 of the conjunction for TIOA, it follows that there exists
an edge ((l1
1, l2), a, φ1, c1,(l1
2, l2))inA1∧A2. Let vi, i= 1,2, be a valuation that
combines the one from A1with the one from A2, i.e.∀r∈Clk1:vi(r) =v1
i(r)
and∀r∈Clk2:vi(r) =v2
i(r). Because Clk1∩Clk2=∅, it holds that v1|=φ1;
v2=v1[r7→0]r∈c1with v2
1=v2
2; and v2|=Inv1(l1
2). As the antecedent states that
v2|=Inv2(l2), it follows that v2|=Inv(l1
2)∧Inv(l2).
FromDefinition3itnowfollowsthat ((l1
1, l2), v1)a− →((l1
2, l2), v2)isatransitionin
JA1∧A2Ksem.Because Clk1∩Clk2=∅,wecanrearrangethestatesinto ((l1
1, l2), v1) =
((l1
1, v1
1),(l2, v2
1)) = qY
1and((l1
2, l2), v2) = (( l1
2, v1
2),(l2, v2
2)) = qY
2. Thus, qY
1a− →qY
2
is a transition in JA1∧A2Ksem=Y. □
Corollary 1 Given two TIOAs Ai= (Loci, li
0,Acti,Clki, Ei,Invi), i= 1,2where
Act1
i∩Act2o=∅ ∧Act1o∩Act2
i=∅. Denote X=JA1∧A2KsemandY=JA1Ksem∧
JA2Ksem, and let a∈Act1\Act2andq1, q2∈QX∩QY. Ifq1a− −→Xq2, then q1a− −→Yq2.
9So the if condition in the lemma is always satisfied once we know that q1a− −→Xq2is a transition
inX. We formalize this in Corollary 1.

--- Page 44 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
44Timed I/O Automata
ProofFirst, from Lemma 3 it follows that QX=QY. For brevity, in the rest of this
proof we write Clk=Clk1⊎Clk2, and v1andv2to indicate the part of a valuation
vof only the clocks of A1andA2, respectively.
Following Definition 3 of the semantic, it follows that there exists an edge
(l1, a, φ, c, l 2)∈EA1∧A2with qX
1= (l1, v1),qX
2= (l2, v2),l1, l2∈LocA1∧A2,
v1, v2∈[Clk7→R≥0],v1|=φ,v2=v1[r7→0]r∈c, and v2|=Inv(l2). From Def-
inition 14 of the conjunction for TIOA it follows that l1= (l1
1, l2
1),l2= (l1
2, l2
2),
l2
1=l2
2=l2, and InvA1∧A2(l2) =Inv1(l1
2)∧Inv2(l2). Since v2|=InvA1∧A2(l2), it
follows that v2|=Inv1(l1
2)andv2|=Inv2(l2).
It now follows directly from Lemma 6 that q1a− −→Yq2. □
Lemma 7 Given two TIOAs Ai= (Loci, li
0,Acti,Clki, Ei,Invi), i= 1,2where
Act1
i∩Act2o=∅ ∧Act1o∩Act2
i=∅. Let Q⊆Loc1×Loc2×[(Clk1∪Clk2)7→R≥0].
Then errJA1∧A2Ksem(Q) = errJA1Ksem∧JA2Ksem(Q).
ProofIt follows from Lemma 3 that JA1∧A2KsemandJA1Ksem∧JA2Ksemhave the
same state set. We will show that errJA1∧A2Ksem(Q)⊆errJA1Ksem∧JA2Ksem(Q)and
errJA1Ksem∧JA2Ksem(Q)⊆errJA1∧A2Ksem(Q). For brevity, we write X=JA1∧A2Ksem,
Y=JA1Ksem∧JA2Ksem, and Clk=Clk1⊎Clk2in the rest of this proof. Also, we
will use v1andv2to indicate the part of a valuation vof only the clocks of A1and
A2, respectively.
(errX(Q)⊆errY(Q)) Consider a state qX∈errX(Q). From Definition 11 of
error states we know that ∃d∈R≥0s.t.qXXd− −→Xand∀d′∈R≥0∀o!∈Acto∀q2∈
QX:qXd′
− −→q2⇒(q2Xo!− −→X∨ ∀q3∈QX:q2o!− −→Xq3⇒q3∈Q). From Definition 3
of the semantic of a TIOA it follows that qX= (l1, v)for some l1∈LocA1∧A2
andv∈[Clk7→R≥0],v+d̸|=InvA1∧A2(l1), and v+d′|=InvA1∧A2(l1) =⇒
[∄(l1, o!, φ, c, l 3)∈EA1∧A2∨ ∀(l1, o!, φ, c, l 3)∈EA1∧A2:v+d′̸|=φ∨v+d′[r7→
0]r∈c̸|=InvA1∧A2(l3)∨(l3, v+d′[r7→0]r∈c)∈Q].
From Lemma 4 it follows immediately that qXXd− −→Ximplies that qXXd− −→Y. So
the first condition in the definition of error states holds for qXinY.
Now, pick any d′,q2, and o!such that v+d′|=InvA1∧A2(l1) = ⇒
[∄(l1, o!, φ, c, l 3)∈EA1∧A2∨ ∀(l1, o!, φ, c, l 3)∈EA1∧A2:v+d′̸|=φ∨v+d′[r7→
0]r∈c̸|=InvA1∧A2(l3)∨(l3, v+d′[r7→0]r∈c)∈Q]. The implication holds if
v+d′̸|=InvA1∧A2(l1)orv+d′|=InvA1∧A2(l1)∧[∄(l1, o!, φ, c, l 3)∈EA1∧A2∨
∀(l1, o!, φ, c, l 3)∈EA1∧A2:v+d′̸|=φ∨v+d′[r7→0]r∈c̸|=InvA1∧A2(l3)∨(l3, v+
d′[r7→0]r∈c)∈Q]. The first case follows directly from Lemma 4 that shows that
qXXd′
− −→Y, which ensures that the second condition in the definition of error states
holds for qXinY. For the second case we again use Lemma 4, thus qXd′
− −→Yq2,
where q2= (l1, v+d′). Now consider the two cases in the right-hand side of the
implication.
•∄(l1, o!, φ, c, l 3)∈EA1∧A2. We have to consider the three cases from Defini-
tion 14 of the conjunction for TIOA.

--- Page 45 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
Timed I/O Automata 45
–o!∈Act1∩Act2. In this case, we know that ∄(l1
1, o!, φ1, c1, l1
3)∈E1or
∄(l2
1, o!, φ2, c2, l2
3)∈E2(or both). Therefore, it follows from Definition 3
of the semantic of a TIOA that (l1
1, v1+d′)Xo!− −→JA1Ksemor(l2
1, v2+d′)Xo!− −→
JA2Ksem(or both). Now, from Definition 13 of the conjunction for TIOTS it
follows that ((l1
1, v1+d′),(l2
1, v2+d′))Xo!− −→Y10.
–o!∈Act1\Act2. In this case, we know that ∄(l1
1, o!, φ1, c1, l1
3)∈E1.
Therefore, it follows from Definition 3 of the semantic of a TIOA that
(l1
1, v1+d′)Xo!− −→JA1Ksem. Now, from Definition 13 of the conjunction for
TIOTS it follows that ((l1
1, v1+d′),(l2
1, v2+d′))Xo!− −→Y.
–o!∈Act2\Act1. In this case, we know that ∄(l2
1, o!, φ2, c2, l2
3)∈E2.
Therefore, it follows from Definition 3 of the semantic of a TIOA that
(l2
1, v2+d′)Xo!− −→JA2Ksem. Now, from Definition 13 of the conjunction for
TIOTS it follows that ((l1
1, v1+d′),(l2
1, v2+d′))Xo!− −→Y.
So, in all three cases we can show that ((l1
1, v1+d′),(l2
1, v2+d′))Xo!− −→Y. And
note that ((l1
1, v1+d′),(l2
1, v2+d′)) =q2.
•∀(l1, o!, φ, c, l 3)∈EA1∧A2:v+d′̸|=φ∨v+d′[r7→0]r∈c̸|=InvA1∧A2(l3)∨
(l3, v+d′[r7→0]r∈c)∈Q. For each edge (l1, o!, φ, c, l 3)∈EA1∧A2, we have to
consider the three cases from Definition 14 of the conjunction for TIOA.
–o!∈Act1∩Act2. In this case, we know that (l1
1, o!, φ1, c1, l1
3)∈E1,
(l2
1, o!, φ2, c2, l2
3)∈E2,φ=φ1∧φ2, and c=c1∪c2. Now consider the
three cases that should hold for each edge (l1, o!, φ, c, l 3)∈EA1∧A2.
∗v+d′̸|=φ. In this case, we know that v+d′̸|=φimplies that
v+d′̸|=φ1orv+d′̸|=φ2(or both). Because Clk1∩Clk2=∅, it holds
thatv1+d′̸|=φ1orv2+d′̸|=φ2(or both). Therefore, it follows from
Definition 3 of the semantic of a TIOA that (l1
1, v1+d′)Xo!− −→JA1Ksem
or(l2
1, v2+d′)Xo!− −→JA2Ksem(or both). Now, from Definition 13 of the
conjunctionforTIOTSitfollowsthat ((l1
1, v1+d′),(l2
1, v2+d′))Xo!− −→Y.
∗v+d′[r7→0]r∈c̸|=InvA1∧A2(l3).Inthiscase,weknowthat v+d′[r7→
0]r∈c̸|=InvA1∧A2(l3)implies that v+d′[r7→0]r∈c̸|=Inv1(l1
3)orv+
d′[r7→0]r∈c̸|=Inv2(l2
3)(or both). Because Clk1∩Clk2=∅, it holds
that v1+d′[r7→0]r∈c1̸|=Inv1(l1
3)orv2+d′[r7→0]r∈c2̸|=Inv2(l2
3)
(or both). Therefore, it follows from Definition 3 of the semantic of a
TIOAthat (l1
1, v1+d′)Xo!− −→JA1Ksemor(l2
1, v2+d′)Xo!− −→JA2Ksem(orboth).
Now, from Definition 13 of the conjunction for TIOTS it follows that
((l1
1, v1+d′),(l2
1, v2+d′))Xo!− −→Y.
∗(l3, v+d′[r7→0]r∈c)∈Q. In this case, assume that v+d′|=φ
andv+d[r7→0]r∈c|=InvA1∧A2(l3)(otherwise, one of the above
cases can be used instead). Because Clk1∩Clk2=∅, it follows that
v1+d′|=φ1,v2+d′|=φ2,v1+d′[r7→0]r∈c1|=Inv1(l1
3), and
v2+d′[r7→0]r∈c2|=Inv2(l2
3). Therefore, it follows from Definition 3
of the semantic of a TIOA that (l1
1, v1+d′)o!− −→JA1Ksem(l1
3, v1+d′[r7→
0]r∈c1)and(l2
1, v2+d′)o!− −→JA2Ksem(l2
3, v2+d′[r7→0]r∈c2). Now, from
10Alternatively, we could use Lemma 5 to come to the same conclusion. This also holds for the
other two cases, where we have to use Corollary 1 instead.

--- Page 46 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
46Timed I/O Automata
Definition 13 of the conjunction for TIOTS it follows that ((l1
1, v1+
d′),(l2
1, v2+d′))o!− −→Y((l1
3, v1+d′[r7→0]r∈c1),(l2
3, v2+d′[r7→0]r∈c2)).
And note that ((l1
3, v1+d′[r7→0]r∈c1),(l2
3, v2+d′[r7→0]r∈c2)) =
(l1
3, l2
3, v+d′[r7→0]r∈c) = (l3, v+d′[r7→0]r∈c).
So, in the first two cases we have shown that ((l1
1, v1+d′),(l2
1, v2+d′))Xo!− −→
Y11and in the third case that ((l1
1, v1+d′),(l2
1, v2+d′))o!− −→Y(l3, v+d′[r7→
0]r∈c).
–o!∈Act1\Act2. In this case, we know that (l1
1, o!, φ1, c1, l1
3)∈E1,φ=φ1,
andc=c1. Now consider the three cases that should hold for each edge
(l1, o!, φ, c, l 3)∈EA1∧A2.
∗v+d′̸|=φ. In this case, we know that v+d′̸|=φimplies that
v+d′̸|=φ1. Because Clk1∩Clk2=∅, it holds that v1+d′̸|=φ1.
Therefore, it follows from Definition 3 of the semantic of a TIOA that
(l1
1, v1+d′)Xo!− −→JA1Ksem. Now, from Definition 13 of the conjunction
for TIOTS it follows that ((l1
1, v1+d′),(l2
1, v2+d′))Xo!− −→Y.
∗v+d[r7→0]r∈c̸|=InvA1∧A2(l3). In this case, we know that v+
d[r7→0]r∈c̸|=InvA1∧A2(l3)implies that v+d[r7→0]r∈c̸|=Inv1(l1
3).
Because Clk1∩Clk2=∅, it holds that v1+d[r7→0]r∈c1̸|=Inv1(l1
3).
Therefore, it follows from Definition 3 of the semantic of a TIOA that
(l1
1, v1+d′)Xo!− −→JA1Ksem. Now, from Definition 13 of the conjunction
for TIOTS it follows that ((l1
1, v1+d′),(l2
1, v2+d′))Xo!− −→Y.
∗(l3, v+d′[r7→0]r∈c)∈Q. In this case, assume that v+d′|=φ
andv+d[r7→0]r∈c|=InvA1∧A2(l3)(otherwise, one of the above
cases can be used instead). Because Clk1∩Clk2=∅, it follows that
v1+d′|=φ1andv1+d′[r7→0]r∈c1|=Inv1(l1
3). Therefore, it follows
from Definition 3 of the semantic of a TIOA that (l1
1, v1+d′)o!− −→
JA1Ksem(l1
3, v1+d′[r7→0]r∈c1). Now, from Definition 13 of the con-
junction for TIOTS it follows that ((l1
1, v1+d′),(l2
1, v2+d′))o!− −→
Y((l1
3, v1+d′[r7→0]r∈c1),(l2
1, v2+d′)). And note that ((l1
3, v1+d′[r7→
0]r∈c1),(l2
1, v2+d′)) = ( l1
3, l2
1, v+d′[r7→0]r∈c) = (l3, v+d′[r7→0]r∈c).
Now notice that (l3, v+d′[r7→0]r∈c)∈Q.
So,inthefirsttwocaseswehaveshownthat ((l1
1, v1+d′),(l2
1, v2+d′))Xo!− −→Y
and in the third case that ((l1
1, v1+d′),(l2
1, v2+d′))o!− −→Y(l3, v+d′[r7→
0]r∈c).
–o!∈Act2\Act1. In this case, we know that (l2
1, o!, φ2, c2, l2
3)∈E2,φ=φ2,
andc=c2. Now consider the three cases that should hold for each edge
(l1, o!, φ, c, l 3)∈EA1∧A2.
∗v+d′̸|=φ. In this case, we know that v+d̸|=φimplies that
v+d′̸|=φ2. Because Clk1∩Clk2=∅, it holds that v2+d′̸|=φ2.
Therefore, it follows from Definition 3 of the semantic of a TIOA that
(l2
1, v2+d′)Xo!− −→JA2Ksem. Now, from Definition 13 of the conjunction
for TIOTS it follows that ((l1
1, v1+d′),(l2
1, v2+d′))Xo!− −→Y.
11Alternatively, we could use Lemma 5 to come to the same conclusion. This also holds for the
other two cases, where we have to use Corollary 1 instead.

--- Page 47 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
Timed I/O Automata 47
∗v+d[r7→0]r∈c̸|=InvA1∧A2(l3). In this case, we know that v+
d[r7→0]r∈c̸|=InvA1∧A2(l3)implies that v+d[r7→0]r∈c̸|=Inv2(l2
3).
Because Clk1∩Clk2=∅, it holds that v2+d[r7→0]r∈c2̸|=Inv2(l2
3).
Therefore, it follows from Definition 3 of the semantic of a TIOA that
(l2
1, v2+d′)Xo!− −→JA2Ksem. Now, from Definition 13 of the conjunction
for TIOTS it follows that ((l1
1, v1+d′),(l2
1, v2+d′))Xo!− −→Y.
∗(l3, v+d′[r7→0]r∈c)∈Q. In this case, assume that v+d′|=φ
andv+d[r7→0]r∈c|=InvA1∧A2(l3)(otherwise, one of the above
cases can be used instead). Because Clk1∩Clk2=∅, it follows that
v2+d′|=φ2andv2+d′[r7→0]r∈c2|=Inv2(l2
3). Therefore, it follows
from Definition 3 of the semantic of a TIOA that (l2
1, v2+d′)o!− −→
JA2Ksem(l2
3, v2+d′[r7→0]r∈c2). Now, from Definition 13 of the con-
junction for TIOTS it follows that ((l1
1, v1+d′),(l2
1, v2+d′))o!− −→
Y((l1
1, v1+d′[r7→0]r∈c1),(l2
3, v2+d′[r7→0]r∈c2)). And note that
((l1
1, v1+d′),(l2
3, v2+d′[r7→0]r∈c2)) = ( l1
1, l2
3, v+d′[r7→0]r∈c) =
(l3, v+d′[r7→0]r∈c).
So,inthefirsttwocaseswehaveshownthat ((l1
1, v1+d′),(l2
1, v2+d′))Xo!− −→Y
and in the third case that ((l1
1, v1+d′),(l2
1, v2+d′))o!− −→Y(l3, v+d′[r7→
0]r∈c).
So, in all three cases we have shown that ((l1
1, v1+d′),(l2
1, v2+d′))Xo!− −→Yor
((l1
1, v1+d′),(l2
1, v2+d′))o!− −→Y(l3, v+d′[r7→0]r∈c). And note that ((l1
1, v1+
d′),(l2
1, v2+d′)) =q2and(l3, v+d′[r7→0]r∈c) =q3.
So we have shown that ((l1
1, v1+d′),(l2
1, v2+d′))Xo!− −→Yor((l1
1, v1+d′),(l2
1, v2+
d′))o!− −→Y(l3, v+d′[r7→0]r∈c)with (l3, v+d′[r7→0]r∈c)∈Q. We can rewrite this
intoqXd′
− −→Yq2Xo!− −→YorqXd′
− −→Yq2o!− −→Yq3. Since we have chosen d′,q2,q3, and
o!arbitrarily, the conclusion holds for all d′,q2,q3, and o!. Therefore, the second
condition in the definition of error states hold for qX.
Now, since both conditions in the definition of the error states hold for qX, we
know that qX∈errY(Q). Since we have chosen qXarbitrarily from errX(Q), it holds
for all qX∈errX(Q). Therefore, it holds that errX(Q)⊆errY(Q).
(errY⊆errX) Consider a state qY∈errY. From Definition 11 of error states we
know that ∃d∈R≥0s.t.qYXd′
− −→Yand∀d′∈R≥0∀o!∈Acto∀q2∈QY:qYd− −→q2⇒
(q2Xo!− −→Y∨ ∀q3∈QY:q2o!− −→Yq3⇒q3∈Q). From Definition 13 of the conjunction
for TIOTS it follows that qY= (qJA1Ksem, qJA2Ksem)andq2= (qJA1Ksem
2, qJA2Ksem
2).
First, consider the first condition in the definition of error states. From Lemma 4
it follows immediately that qYXd− −→Yimplies that qYXd− −→X. So the first condition in
the definition of error states holds for qYinX.
Now, consider the second condition in the definition of error states. Pick any d′,
q2, and o!such that qYd′
− −→q2⇒(q2Xo!− −→Y∨ ∀q3∈QY:q2o!− −→Yq3⇒q3∈Q). The
implication holds if qYXd′
− −→YorqYd′
− −→q2∧(q2Xo!− −→Y∨ ∀q3∈QY:q2o!− −→Yq3⇒
q3∈Q). The first case follows directly from Lemma 4 that shows that qYXd− −→Y
implies that qYXd− −→X, which ensures that the second condition in the definition of

--- Page 48 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
48Timed I/O Automata
error states holds for qYinX. For the second case we again use Lemma 4, thus
qYd′
− −→Xq2, where qY= (l1
1, l2
1, v)andq2= (l1
1, l2
1, v+d).
It remains to be shown that q2Xo!− −→Y∨ ∀q3∈QY:q2o!− −→Yq3⇒q3∈QinY
implies that q2Xo!− −→X∨ ∀q3∈QX:q2o!− −→Xq3⇒q3∈QinX. We have to consider
the three cases from Definition 13 of the conjunction for TIOTS.
•o!∈Act1∩Act2. It follows directly from Lemma 5 that q2Xo!− −→X∨ ∀q3∈QX:
q2o!− −→Xq3⇒q3∈Q.
•o!∈Act1\Act2.UsingDefinition3ofthesemanticofaTIOA,wenowknowthat
∄(l1
1, o!, φ1, c1, l1
3)∈E1or∀(l1
1, o!, φ1, c1, l1
3)∈E1:v1+d′̸|=φ1∨v1+d′[r7→
0]r∈c1̸|=Inv1(l1
3)∨(l1
3, l2
1, v+d′[r7→0]r∈c1)∈Q.
In case that ∄(l1
1, o!, φ1, c1, l1
3)∈E1, it follows directly from Definition 14 of the
conjunction for TIOA that ∄((l1
1, l2
1), o!, φ1, c1,(l1
3, l2
3))∈EA1∧A2. Then, with
Definition 3 of the semantic of a TIOA, it follows that (l1
1, l2
1, v+d′)Xo!− −→X.
In case that ∀(l1
1, o!, φ1, c1, l1
3)∈E1:v1+d′̸|=φ1∨v1+d′[r7→0]r∈c1̸|=
Inv1(l1
3), it follows from Definition 14 that for each edge (l1
1, o!, φ1, c1, l1
3)∈E1,
∃((l1
1, l2
1), o!, φ1, c1,(l1
3, l2
3))∈EA1∧A2. Because Clk1∩Clk2=∅, it holds that
v+d′̸|=φ1∨v+d′[r7→0]r∈c̸|=Inv1(l1
3). Therefore, it also holds that
v+d′̸|=φ1∨v+d′[r7→0]r∈c̸|=Inv1(l1
3)∧Inv2(l2
1).NotethatfromDefinition14
we know that InvA1∧A2((l1
3, l2
1)) =Inv1(l1
3)∧Inv2(l2
1). As we have shown that
v+d′̸|=φ1∨v+d′[r7→0]r∈c̸|=Inv1(l1
3)∧Inv2(l2
1)for all edges labeled with
o!from (l1
1, l2
1), it follows from Definition 3 of the semantic of a TIOA that
(l1
1, l2
1, v+d′)Xo!− −→X.
In case that ∀(l1
1, o!, φ1, c1, l1
3)∈E1: (l1
3, l2
1, v+d′[r7→0]r∈c1)∈Q,
it follows from Definition 14 that for each edge (l1
1, o!, φ1, c1, l1
3)∈E1,
∃((l1
1, l2
1), o!, φ1, c1,(l1
3, l2
3))∈EA1∧A2. Because Clk1∩Clk2=∅, it holds
that v+d′|=φ1∧v+d′[r7→0]r∈c|=Inv1(l1
3)(in case one of them
does not hold, we can use the argument above). Therefore, it also holds that
v+d′|=φ1∧v+d′[r7→0]r∈c|=Inv1(l1
3)∧Inv2(l2
1). Note that from Defi-
nition 14 we know that InvA1∧A2((l1
3, l2
1)) = Inv1(l1
3)∧Inv2(l2
1). As we have
shown that v+d′|=φ1∧v+d′[r7→0]r∈c|=Inv1(l1
3)∧Inv2(l2
1)for all edges
labeled with o!from (l1
1, l2
1), it follows from Definition 3 of the semantic of
a TIOA that (l1
1, l2
1, v+d′)o!− −→X(l1
3, l2
1, v+d′[r7→0]r∈c). Now notice that
(l1
3, l2
1, v+d′[r7→0]r∈c)∈Q.
•o!∈Act2\Act1.UsingDefinition3ofthesemanticofaTIOA,wenowknowthat
∄(l2
1, o!, φ2, c2, l2
3)∈E2or∀(l2
1, o!, φ2, c2, l2
3)∈E2:v2+d′̸|=φ2∨v2+d′[r7→
0]r∈c2̸|=Inv2(l2
3)∨(l1
1, l2
3, v+d′[r7→0]r∈c1)∈Q.
In case that ∄(l2
1, o!, φ2, c2, l2
3)∈E2, it follows directly from Definition 14 of the
conjunction for TIOA that ∄((l1
1, l2
1), o!, φ2, c2,(l1
3, l2
3))∈EA1∧A2. Then, with
Definition 3 of the semantic of a TIOA, it follows that (l1
1, l2
1, v+d′)Xo!− −→X.
In case that ∀(l2
1, o!, φ2, c2, l2
3)∈E2:v2+d′̸|=φ2∨v2+d′[r7→0]r∈c2̸|=
Inv2(l2
3), it follows from Definition 14 that for each edge (l2
1, o!, φ2, c2, l2
3)∈E2,
∃((l1
1, l2
1), o!, φ2, c2,(l1
3, l2
3))∈EA1∧A2. Because Clk1∩Clk2=∅, it holds that
v+d′̸|=φ2∨v+d′[r7→0]r∈c̸|=Inv2(l2
3). Therefore, it also holds that
v+d′̸|=φ2∨v+d′[r7→0]r∈c̸|=Inv2(l2
3)∧Inv2(l2
3).NotethatfromDefinition14

--- Page 49 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
Timed I/O Automata 49
we know that InvA1∧A2((l1
3, l2
1)) =Inv1(l1
3)∧Inv2(l2
1). As we have shown that
v+d′̸|=φ2∨v+d′[r7→0]r∈c̸|=Inv1(l1
1)∧Inv2(l2
3)for all edges labeled with
o!from (l1
1, l2
1), it follows from Definition 3 of the semantic of a TIOA that
(l1
1, l2
1, v+d′)Xo!− −→X.
In case that ∀(l2
1, o!, φ2, c2, l2
3)∈E2: (l1
1, l2
3, v+d′[r7→0]r∈c2)∈Q,
it follows from Definition 14 that for each edge (l2
1, o!, φ2, c2, l2
3)∈E2,
∃((l1
1, l2
1), o!, φ2, c2,(l1
3, l2
2))∈EA1∧A2. Because Clk1∩Clk2=∅, it holds
that v+d′|=φ2∧v+d′[r7→0]r∈c|=Inv2(l2
3)(in case one of them
does not hold, we can use the argument above). Therefore, it also holds that
v+d′|=φ2∧v+d′[r7→0]r∈c|=Inv1(l1
1)∧Inv2(l2
3). Note that from Defi-
nition 14 we know that InvA1∧A2((l1
1, l2
3)) = Inv1(l1
1)∧Inv2(l2
3). As we have
shown that v+d′|=φ2∧v+d′[r7→0]r∈c|=Inv1(l1
1)∧Inv2(l2
3)for all edges
labeled with o!from (l1
1, l2
1), it follows from Definition 3 of the semantic of
a TIOA that (l1
1, l2
1, v+d′)o!− −→X(l1
1, l2
3, v+d′[r7→0]r∈c). Now notice that
(l1
1, l2
3, v+d′[r7→0]r∈c)∈Q.
So, in all three cases, we have shown that (l1
1, l2
1, v+d′)Xo!− −→Xor((l1
1, v1+d′),(l2
1, v2+
d′))o!− −→X(l3, v+d′[r7→0]r∈c)with (l3, v+d′[r7→0]r∈c)∈Q. We can rewrite this
intoqYd′
− −→Xq2Xo!− −→XorqXd′
− −→Yq2o!− −→Yq3. Since we have chosen d′,q2,q3, and
o!arbitrarily, the conclusion holds for all d′,q2,q3, and o!. Therefore, the second
condition in the definition of error states hold for qY.
Now, since both conditions in the definition of the error states hold for qY, we
know that qY∈errX. Since we have chosen qYarbitrarily, it holds for all qY∈errY.
Therefore, it holds that errY⊆errX. □
Lemma 8 Given two TIOAs Ai= (Loci, li
0,Acti,Clki, Ei,Invi), i= 1,2where
Act1
i∩Act2o=∅ ∧Act1o∩Act2
i=∅. Then consJA1∧A2Ksem= consJA1Ksem∧JA2Ksem.
ProofWe will proof this by using the Θoperator. It follows from Lemma 3 that
JA1∧A2KsemandJA1Ksem∧JA2Ksemhave the same state set. Also, observe that the
semantic of a TIOA, conjunction, and adversarial pruning do not alter the action set.
Therefore,itfollowsthat JA1∧A2KsemandJA1Ksem∧JA2Ksemhavethesameactionset
and partitioning into input and output actions. We will show for any postfixed point
PofΘthat ΘJA1∧A2Ksem(P)⊆ΘJA1Ksem∧JA2Ksem(P)andΘJA1Ksem∧JA2Ksem(P)⊆
ΘJA1∧A2Ksem(P). For brevity, we write X=JA1∧A2Ksem,Y=JA1Ksem∧JA2Ksem,
andClk=Clk1⊎Clk2in the rest of this proof. Also, we will use v1andv2to indicate
the part of a valuation vof only the clocks of A1andA2, respectively.
(ΘX(P)⊆ΘY(P)) Consider a state qX∈P. Because Pis a postfixed point of
ΘX, it follows that qX∈ΘX(P). From the definition of Θ, it follows that qX∈
errX(P)andqX∈ {q1∈QX| ∀d≥0 : [∀q2∈QX:q1d− −→Xq2⇒q2∈P∧ ∀i?∈
ActX
i:∃q3∈P:q2i?− −→Xq3]∨[∃d′≤d∧ ∃q2, q3∈P∧ ∃o!∈ActXo:q1d′
− −→
Xq2∧q2o!− −→Xq3∧ ∀i?∈ActX
i:∃q4∈P:q2i?− −→Xq4]}. From Lemma 7 it follows
directly that qX∈errY(P). Now we only focus on the second part of the definition
ofΘ.

--- Page 50 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
50Timed I/O Automata
Consider a d∈R≥0. Then the left-hand side or the right-hand side of the
disjunction is true (or both).
•Assume the left-hand side is true, i.e., ∀q2∈QX:qXd− −→Xq2⇒q2∈P∧∀i?∈
ActX
i:∃q3∈P:q2i?− −→Xq3. Pick a q2∈QX. The implication is true when
qXXd− −→Xq2orqXd− −→Xq2∧q2∈P∧ ∀i?∈ActX
i:∃q3∈P:q2i?− −→Xq3.
– Consider the first case. From Lemma 4 it follows that qXXd− −→Y. Note that
qX= (l1
1, v1
1, l2
1, v2
1). Thus the implication also holds for q2inY.
– Consider the second case. From Lemma 4, we have that qXd− −→Xq2implies
thatqXd− −→Yq2, and from Definition 3 of the semantic of a TIOA it follows
that v1+d|=InvA1∧A2(l1)forqX= (l1, v1),q2= (l1, v1+d),l1∈
LocA1∧A2, and v1∈[Clk7→R≥0]. Now, pick i?∈ActX
iandq3∈QXsuch
thatq2i?− −→Xq3andq3∈P. From Definition 3 of the semantic of a TIOA it
follows that (l1, i?, φ, c, l 3)∈EA1∧A2,q3= (l3, v3),v1+d|=φ,v3=v1+
d[r7→0]r∈c,and v3|=InvA1∧A2(l3).FromDefinition14oftheconjunction
ofTIOAitfollowsthat l1= (l1
1, l2
1),l3= (l1
3, l2
3),InvA1∧A2(l1) =Inv1(l1
1)∧
Inv2(l2
1), and InvA1∧A2(l3) =Inv1(l1
3)∧Inv2(l2
3). We have to consider the
three cases of Definition 14 in relation to i?.
∗i?∈Act1
i∩Act2
i. It follows directly from Lemma 5 that q2i?− →q3is
a transition in Y.
∗i?∈Act1
i\Act2
i. It follows directly from Corollary 1 that q2i?− →q3is
a transition in Y.
∗i?∈Act2
i\Act1
i. It follows directly from Corollary 1 (where we
switched A1andA2) that q2i?− →q3is a transition in Y.
So, in all three cases we have that q2i?− →q3is a transition in Y. As the
analysis above is independent of the particular i?,q2i?− →q3is a transition
inYfor all i?. Because both q2, q3∈PandqXd− −→Yq2, we have that the
implication also holds for q2∈Y.
So, in both cases we have that for qXd− −→Yq2⇒q2∈P∧ ∀i?∈ActY
i:∃q3∈
P:q2i?− −→Yq3. As q2is chosen arbitrarily, it holds for all q2∈QX=QY.
Therefore, the left-hand side is true.
•Assume the right-hand side is true, i.e., ∃d′≤d∧ ∃q2, q3∈P∧ ∃o!∈ActXo:
qXd′
− −→Xq2∧q2o!− −→Xq3∧ ∀i?∈ActX
i:∃q4∈P:q2i?− −→Xq4.
First, following Definition 3 of the semantic of a TIOA, we have that qX=
(l1, v1),q2= (l1, v1+d′),q3= (l3, v3),q4= (l4, v4),l1, l3, l4∈LocA1∧A2,
v1, v3, v4∈[Clk7→R≥0],v1+d′|=InvA1∧A2(l1),∃(l1, o!, φ, c, l 3)∈EA1∧A2,
v1+d′|=φ,v3=v1+d′[r7→0]r∈c, and v3|=InvA1∧A2(l3). First, focus on the
delay transition. From Lemma 4 it follows that qXd′
− −→Yq2inY, with qX=
(l1
1, v1
1, l2
1, v2
1) = (l1
1, l2
1, v1)andq2= (l1
1, v1
1+d′, l2
1, v2
1+d′) = (l1
1, l2
1, v1+d′).
Now consider the output transition labeled with o!. We have to consider the
three cases from Definition 14.
–o!∈Act1o∩Act2o. It follows directly from Lemma 5 that q2o!− →q3is a
transition in Y.

--- Page 51 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
Timed I/O Automata 51
–o!∈Act1o\Act2o. It follows directly from Corollary 1 that q2o!− →q3is a
transition in Y.
–o!∈Act2o\Act1o. It follows directly from Corollary 1 (where we switched
A1andA2) that q2o!− →q3is a transition in Y.
Thus, in all three cases we have that q2o!− →q3is a transition in Y. Therefore,
we can conclude that qXd′
− −→Yq2∧q2o!− −→Yq3with q2, q3∈P.
Finally, consider the input transitions labeled with i?. Using the same argument
as before, we can show that q2i?− →q4inXis also a transition in Y, and q4∈P.
Therefore, we can conclude that qXd′
− −→Yq2∧q2o!− −→Yq3∧ ∀i?∈ActY
i:∃q4∈
P:q2i?− −→Yq4with q2, q3, q4∈P. Thus, the right-hand side is true.
Thus, we have shown that when the left-hand side is true for qXinX, it is also
true for qXinY; and that when the right-hand side is true for qXinX, it is also
true for qXinY. Thus, qX∈ΘY(P). Since qX∈Pwas chosen arbitrarily, it holds
for all states in P. Once we choose Pto be the fixed-point of ΘX, we have that
ΘX(P)⊆ΘY(P).
(ΘY(P)⊆ΘX(P)) Consider a state qY∈P. Because Pis a postfixed point of
ΘY,itfollowsthat p∈ΘX(Y).Fromthedefinitionof Θ,itfollowsthat qY∈errY(P)
andqY∈ {q∈QY| ∀d≥0 : [∀q2∈QY:qd− −→Yq2⇒q2∈P∧ ∀i?∈ActY
i:∃q3∈
P:q2i?− −→Yq3]∨[∃d′≤d∧∃q2, q3∈P∧∃o!∈ActYo:qd′
− −→Yq2∧q2o!− −→Yq3∧∀i?∈
Acti:∃q4∈P:q2i?− −→Yq4]}. From Lemma 7 it follows directly that qX∈errX(P).
Now we only focus on the second part of the definition of Θ.
Consider a d∈R≥0. Then the left-hand side or the right-hand side of the
disjunction is true (or both).
•Assume the left-hand side is true, i.e., ∀q2∈QY:qYd− −→Yq2⇒q2∈P∧∀i?∈
ActY
i:∃q3∈P:q2i?− −→Yq3. Pick a q2∈QY. The implication is true when
qYXd− −→Yq2orqYd− −→Yq2∧q2∈P∧ ∀i?∈ActY
i:∃q3∈P:q2i?− −→Yq3.
– Consider the first case. From Lemma 4 it follows that qYXd− −→X. Note that
qY= (l1, v1, l2, v2). Thus the implication also holds for q2inX.
– Consider the second case. From Lemma 4 we have that qYd− −→Yq2implies
thatqYd− −→Xq2, and from Definition 13 of the conjunction for TIOTS that
qY= (q1
1, q2
1)andq2= (q1
2, q2
2). Also, using Definition 3 of the semantic of
a TIOA it follows for i= 1,2thatqi
1= (li
1, vi
1),qi
2= (li
1, vi
1+d),li
1∈Loci,
andvi
1∈[Clki7→R≥0]. Now, pick an i?∈ActY
iwith its corresponding
q3according to the implication. We have to consider the three cases from
Definition 13.
∗i?∈Act1
i∩Act2
i. It follows directly from Lemma 5 that q2i?− −→Xq3.
∗i?∈Act1
i\Act2
i. From the fact that qYd− −→Xq212, it follows from Def-
initions 3 and 13 that v2
1+d|=Inv2(l2
1)(see also proof of Lemma 4).
Observe that v2
1+d[r7→0]r∈c1=v2
1+d, sov3|=Inv2(l2
1). Now it
follows directly from Lemma 6 that q2i?− −→Xq3.
12This fact is key for finalizing the proof of Theorem 7: without adversarial pruning in that
theorem, you cannot assume this, and you get stuck in proving that v3|=Inv2(l2
1)and thus
v3|=InvA1∧A2((l1
3, l2
1)), i.e., you cannot prove that.

--- Page 52 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
52Timed I/O Automata
∗i?∈Act2
i\Act1
i. From the fact that qYd− −→Xq2, it follows from Defi-
nitions 3 and 13 that v1
1+d|=Inv1(l1
1)(see also proof of Lemma 4).
Observe that v1
1+d[r7→0]r∈c2=v1
1+d, sov3|=Inv1(l1
1). Now it
follows directly from Lemma 6 (where we switched A2andA2) that
q2i?− −→Xq3.
Thus, in all three cases we can show that q2i?− −→Yq3implies q2i?− −→Xq3.
Since we have chosen an arbitrarily i?∈ActY
i, it holds for all i?∈ActY
i.
Thus the implication also holds for q2inX.
Thus, in both cases the implication holds. Therefore, we can conclude that
qYd− −→Xq2⇒q2∈P∧ ∀i?∈ActX
i:∃q3∈P:q2i?− −→Xq3. As q2is chosen
arbitrarily, it holds for all q2∈QX=QY. Therefore, the left-hand side is true.
•Assume the right-hand side is true, i.e., ∃d′≤d∧ ∃q2, q3∈P∧ ∃o!∈ActYo:
qd′
− −→Yq2∧q2o!− −→Yq3∧ ∀i?∈Acti:∃q4∈P:q2i?− −→Yq4. First, focus on
the delay. From Lemma 4 it follows that qd′
− −→Yq2implies qd′
− −→Xq2, and from
Definition 13 of the conjunction for TIOTS that qY= (q1
1, q2
1)andq2= (q1
2, q2
2).
Also, using Definition 3 of the semantic of a TIOA it follows for i= 1,2that
qi
1= (li
1, vi
1),qi
2= (li
1, vi
1+d′),li
1∈Loci, and vi
1∈[Clki7→R≥0]. Now, consider
the output transition labeled with o!. We have to consider the three cases from
Definition 13 of the conjunction for TIOTS.
–o!∈Act1o∩Act2o. It follows directly from Lemma 5 that q2o!− −→Xq3.
–o!∈Act1o⊂Act2o. From the fact that qYd′
− −→Xq2, it follows from Defini-
tions 3 and 13 that v2
1+d′|=Inv2(l2
1)(see also proof of Lemma 4). Observe
thatv2
1+d′[r7→0]r∈c1=v2
1+d′, sov3|=Inv2(l2
1). Now it follows directly
from Lemma 6 that q2o!− −→Xq3.
–o!∈Act2o⊂Act1o. From the fact that qYd′
− −→Xq2, it follows from Defini-
tions 3 and 13 that v1
1+d′|=Inv1(l1
1)(see also proof of Lemma 4). Observe
thatv1
1+d′[r7→0]r∈c2=v1
1+d′, sov3|=Inv1(l1
1). Now it follows directly
from Lemma 6 (where we switched A2andA2) that q2o!− −→Xq3.
Thus, in all three cases we have that q2o!− →Xq3is a transition in X. Therefore,
we can conclude that qYd′
− −→Xq2∧q2o!− −→Xq3with q2, q3∈P. Thus, the
right-hand side is true.
Finally, consider the input transitions labeled with i?. Using the same argument
as before, we can show that q2i?− →q4inYis also a transition in X, and q4∈P.
Therefore, we can conclude that qYd′
− −→Xq2∧q2o!− −→Xq3∧ ∀i?∈ActX
i:∃q4∈
P:q2i?− −→Xq4with q2, q3, q4∈P. Thus, the right-hand side is true.
Thus, we have shown that when the left-hand side is true for qYinY, it is also
true for qYinX; and that when the right-hand side is true for qYinY, it is also
true for qYinX. Thus, qY∈ΘX(P). Since qY∈Pwas chosen arbitrarily, it holds
for all states in P. Once we choose Pto be the fixed-point of ΘY, we have that
ΘY(P)⊆ΘX(P). □

--- Page 53 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
Timed I/O Automata 53
A.3 Omitted proofs of Section 5
Lemma 9 Given two locally consistent specifications Si= (Qi, qi
0,Acti,→i), i= 1,2
where Act1o∩Act2o=∅. Then S1∥S2is locally consistent.
ProofSince, S1andS2are locally consistent, the only reason why S1∥S2could
be inconsistent is when a new error state is created by the parallel composition. We
show by contradiction that this is not possible.
Assume that state q1∈S1∥S2is an error state. From Definition 11 of the error
state it follows that ∃d1∈R≥0:q1Xd1− −→ ∧∀ d2∈R≥0∀o!∈Acto∀q2∈Q:q1d2− −→
q2⇒q2Xo!− −→. From Definition 15 of the parallel composition for TIOTS it follows
that (1) q1= (q1
1, q2
1)with q1
1∈Q1andq2
1∈Q2, and that either q1Xd1− −→1orq2Xd2− −→2
(or both); (2) that q2= (q1
2, q2
2)with q1
2∈Q1andq2
2∈Q2, and that q1
1d2− −→1q1
2and
q2
1d2− −→2q2
2; and (3) that o!∈Act1oand possibly o?∈Act2
i, oro!∈Act2oand possibly
o?∈Act1
i. In the next step we assume that o!∈Act1oand possibly o?∈Act2
i, as the
other case is symmetrical. Consider two cases and Definition 15:
•o?∈Act2
i. AsS2is a specification, it is input-enabled. Therefore, q1d2− −→q2⇒
q2Xo!− −→implies that q1
1d2− −→q1
2⇒q1
2Xo!− −→.
•o?/∈Act2
i. This directly results in that q1d2− −→ q2⇒q2Xo!− −→implies that
q1
1d2− −→q1
2⇒q1
2Xo!− −→.
Applying the above reasoning for all output actions and knowing that Acto=Act1o∪
Act2ofrom Definition 15, it follows that ∀o!∈Act1o:q1
1d2− −→1q1
2=⇒q1
2Xo!− −→and
∀o!∈Act2o:q2
1d2− −→2q2
2=⇒q2
2Xo!− −→. As this is independent of the actual value of
d2, it holds for all d2.
Finally, since either q1Xd1− −→1orq2Xd2− −→2(or both), it follows that either ∃d1∈
R≥0:q1
1Xd1− −→1∧ ∀d2∈R≥0∀o!∈Act1o∀q1
2∈Q1:q1
1d2− −→1q1
2⇒q1
2Xo!− −→1or
∃d1∈R≥0:q2
1Xd1− −→2∧ ∀d2∈R≥0∀o!∈Act2o∀q2
2∈Q1:q2
1d2− −→2q2
2⇒q2
2Xo!− −→2(or
both). Therefore, either q1
1orq2
1(or both) is an error state, which contradicts with
the antecedent stating that S1andS2are consistent. □
Lemma 8 Refinement is a pre-congruence with respect to parallel composition: for
any specifications S1,S2, and Tsuch that S1≤S2andS1is composable with T,
we have that S2is composable with TandS1∥T≤S2∥T.
Proof S1≤S2implies that ActS2
o⊆ActS2
o(see Definition 6), and S1is composable
with Timplies that ActS1
o∩ActTo=∅. Combining this results immediately in that
ActS2
o∩ActTo=∅, thus S2is composable with T. Furthermore, since S1≤S2,
there exists a relation R∈Q1×Q2with the properties given in Definition 6 of
the refinement. Construct relation R′={((q1, qT),(q2, qT))∈QS1∥T×QS2∥T|
(q1, q2)∈R}. We show that R′witnesses S1∥T≤S2∥T. Consider the five cases
of refinement for a state pair ((q1
1, qT
1),(q2
1, qT
1))∈R′.

--- Page 54 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
54Timed I/O Automata
1.(q2
1, qT
1)i?− −→S2∥T(q2
2, qT
2)for some (q2
2, qT
2)∈QS2∥Tandi?∈ActS2∥T
i∩
ActS1∥T
i. Consider the five feasible combinations for input action i?using
Definition 15 such that i?∈ActS2∥T
i∩ActS1∥T
i.
•i?∈ActS1
i,i?∈ActS2
i, and i?∈ActT
i. In this case, it follows from Defini-
tion 15 that q2
1i?− −→S2q2
2andqT
1i?− −→TqT
2. Now, using Rand Definition 6,
it follows that q1
1i?− −→S1q1
2and(q1
2, q2
2)∈R. Thus, following Definition 15
again, we have that (q1
1, qT
1)i?− −→S1∥T(q1
2, qT
2). From the construction of R′
we confirm that ((q1
2, qT
2),(q2
2, qT
2))∈R′.
•i?∈ActS1
i,i?∈ActS2
i, and i?/∈ActT. In this case, it follows from
Definition 15 that q2
1i?− −→S2q2
2andqT
1=qT
2. Now, using Rand Definition 6,
it follows that q1
1i?− −→S1q1
2and(q1
2, q2
2)∈R. Thus, following Definition 15
again, we have that (q1
1, qT
1)i?− −→S1∥T(q1
2, qT
2)with qT
1=qT
2. From the
construction of R′we confirm that ((q1
2, qT
2),(q2
2, qT
2))∈R′.
•i?∈ActS1
i,i /∈ActS2,and i?∈ActT
i.Thiscaseisinfeasible,asDefinition6
of refinement requires that ActS1
i⊆ActS2
i.
•i?/∈ActS1,i?∈ActS2
i, and i?∈ActT
i. In this case, it follows from Defini-
tion 15 that q2
1i?− −→S2q2
2andqT
1i?− −→TqT
2. Now, using Rand Definition 6, it
follows that (q1
2, q2
2)∈Randq1
1=q1
2. Thus, following Definition 15 again,
we have that (q1
1, qT
1)i?− −→S1∥T(q1
2, qT
2)andq1
1=q1
2. From the construction
ofR′we confirm that ((q1
2, qT
2),(q2
2, qT
2))∈R′.
•i?/∈ActS1,i?/∈ActS2, and i?∈ActT
i. In this case, it follows from
Definition 15 that qT
1i?− −→TqT
2andq2
1=q2
2. Following Definition 15 again,
we have that (q1
1, qT
1)i?− −→S1∥T(q1
2, qT
2)andq1
1=q1
2. From the construction
ofR′we confirm that ((q1
2, qT
2),(q2
2, qT
2))∈R′.
So, in all feasible cases we can show that (q1
1, qT
1)i?− −→S1∥T(q1
2, qT
2)and
((q1
2, qT
2),(q2
2, qT
2))∈R′.
2.(q2
1, qT
1)i?− −→S2∥T(q2
2, qT
2)for some (q2
2, qT
2)∈QS2∥Tandi?∈ActS2∥T
i\
ActS1∥T
i. In this case it follows from Definition 6 and 15 that i?∈ActS2
i,
i?/∈ActS1
i, and i?/∈ActT
i. Therefore, from the same definitions, we have
that q2
1i?− −→S2q2
2andqT
1=qT
2. Now, using Rand Definition 6, it follows
that (q1
2, q2
2)∈Randq1
1=q1
2. From the construction of R′we confirm that
((q1
2, qT
2),(q2
2, qT
2))∈R′.
3.(q1
1, qT
1)o!− −→S1∥T(q1
2, qT
2)for some (q1
2, qT
2)∈QS1∥Tando!∈ActS1∥T
o∩
ActS2∥T
o. Consider the eight feasible combinations for output action o!using
Definition 15 such that o!∈ActS2∥T
o∩ActS1∥T
o, already taking into account
that if o∈ActS1ando∈ActS2then o!∈ActS1
oando!∈ActS2
ooro?∈ActS1
i
ando?∈ActS2
i(see Definition 6).
•o!∈ActS1
o,o!∈ActS2
o, and o∈ActT13. In this case, it follows from Defi-
nition 15 that q1
1o!− −→S1q1
2andqT
1o− −→TqT
2. Now, using Rand Definition 6,
13With this notation, we indicate that it does not matter whether o!∈ActT
ooro?∈ActT
i.

--- Page 55 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
Timed I/O Automata 55
it follows that q2
1o!− −→S2q2
2and(q1
2, q2
2)∈R. Thus, following Definition 15
again, we have that (q2
1, qT
1)o!− −→S2∥T(q2
2, qT
2). From the construction of R′
we confirm that ((q1
2, qT
2),(q2
2, qT
2))∈R′.
•o?∈ActS1
i,o?∈ActS2
i, and o!∈ActTo. In this case, it follows from
Definition 15 that q1
1o?− −→S1q1
2andqT
1o!− −→TqT
2. AsS2is input-enabled, it
follows that q2
1o?− −→S2q2
2for some q2
2∈Q2. Now, using Rand Definition 6,
it follows that (q1
2, q2
2)∈R. Thus, following Definition 15 again, we have
that(q2
1, qT
1)o!− −→S2∥T(q2
2, qT
2). From the construction of R′we confirm that
((q1
2, qT
2),(q2
2, qT
2))∈R′.
•o!∈ActS1
o,o!∈ActS2
o, and o!/∈ActT. In this case, it follows from Defi-
nition 15 that q1
1o!− −→S1q1
2andqT
1=qT
2. Now, using Rand Definition 6,
it follows that q2
1o!− −→S2q2
2and(q1
2, q2
2)∈R. Thus, following Definition 15
again, we have that (q2
1, qT
1)o!− −→S2∥T(q2
2, qT
2)with qT
1=qT
2. From the
construction of R′we confirm that ((q1
2, qT
2),(q2
2, qT
2))∈R′.
•o!∈ActS1
o,o!/∈ActS2, and o!∈ActTo. In this case, it follows from Defini-
tion 15 that q1
1o!− −→S1q1
2andqT
1o!− −→TqT
2. Now, using Rand Definition 6, it
follows that (q1
2, q2
2)∈Randq2
1=q2
2. Thus, following Definition 15 again,
we have that (q2
1, qT
1)o!− −→S2∥T(q2
2, qT
2)andq2
1=q2
2. From the construction
ofR′we confirm that ((q1
2, qT
2),(q2
2, qT
2))∈R′.
•o?∈ActS1
i,o!/∈ActS2, and o!∈ActTo. This case is infeasible, as
Definition 6 of refinement requires that ActS1
i⊆ActS2
i.
•o!/∈ActS1,o!∈ActS2
o, and o!∈ActTo. This case is infeasible, as
Definition 6 of refinement requires that ActS2
o⊆ActS1
o.
•o!/∈ActS1,o?∈ActS2
i, and o!∈ActTo. In this case, it follows from
Definition 15 that qT
1o!− −→TqT
2andq1
1=q1
2. As S2is input-enabled, it
follows that q2
1o?− −→S2q2
2for some q2
2∈Q2. Now, using Rand Definition 6,
it follows that (q1
2, q2
2)∈R. Thus, following Definition 15 again, we have
that(q2
1, qT
1)o!− −→S2∥T(q2
2, qT
2). From the construction of R′we confirm that
((q1
2, qT
2),(q2
2, qT
2))∈R′.
•o!/∈ActS1,o!/∈ActS2, and o!∈ActT
i. In this case, it follows from Defi-
nition 15 that qT
1o!− −→TqT
2andq1
1=q1
2. Following Definition 15 again, we
have that (q2
1, qT
1)o!− −→S2∥T(q2
2, qT
2)andq2
1=q2
2. From the construction of
R′we confirm that ((q1
2, qT
2),(q2
2, qT
2))∈R′.
So, in all feasible cases we can show that (q2
1, qT
1)o!− −→S2∥T(q2
2, qT
2)and
((q1
2, qT
2),(q2
2, qT
2))∈R′.
4.(q1
1, qT
1)o!− −→S1∥T(q1
2, qT
2)for some (q1
2, qT
2)∈QS1∥Tando!∈ActS1∥T
o\
ActS2∥T
o. In this case it follows from Definitions 6 and 15 that o!∈ActS1
o,
o /∈ActS2, and o /∈ActT. Therefore, from the same definitions, we have
that q1
1o!− −→S1q1
2andqT
1=qT
2. Now, using Rand Definition 6, it follows
that (q1
2, q2
2)∈Randq2
1=q2
2. From the construction of R′we confirm that
((q1
2, qT
2),(q2
2, qT
2))∈R′.

--- Page 56 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
56Timed I/O Automata
5.(q1
1, qT
1)d− −→S1∥T(q1
2, qT
2)for some (q1
2, qT
2)∈QS1∥Tandd∈R≥0. In this
case, it follows from Definition 15 that q2
1d− −→S1q2
2andqT
1d− −→TqT
2. Now,
using Rand Definition 6, it follows that q2
1d− −→S2q2
2and(q1
2, q2
2)∈R. Thus,
following Definition 15 again, we have that (q2
1, qT
1)d− −→S2∥T(q2
2, qT
2). From the
construction of R′we confirm that ((q1
2, qT
2),(q2
2, qT
2))∈R′.
□
Lemma 10 Given a specification S= (QS, s0,ActS,→S)and its cooperatively
pruned subspecification S∀. It holds that S=S∀.
ProofThe idea of pruning is to remove error states and related transitions from
a specification that violate the independent progress property, as all states of any
implementation of that specification need to have independent progress, see Def-
inition 5. So, for a state qimerr∈imerrSofS(see Definition 10), it holds that
(∃d∈R≥0:qimerr Xd− −→)∧ ∀d∈R≥0∀o!∈ActSo∀q′∈QS:qimerrd− −→q′⇒q′Xo!− −→.
Now, consider a specification T= (t, t,ActT,→T)with a single state t,ActT=
ActTo=ActS
i∪ {τ}with τ /∈ActS, and→T={(t, a, t)|a∈ActT} ∪ {(t, d, t)|d∈
R≥0}. The unique event τis present to ensure that the following argument holds
in case Sdoes not have any input actions. In the composition S∥T, it still holds
that (qimerr, t)d− −→(q′, t)(see Definition 15). Since a specification is input enabled,
Definition 4, we know that in the composition S∥Tthere exist an output action
o!∈ActTsuch that (q′, t)o!− −→. Thus, in the composition S∥T, the state (qimerr, t)is
no longer an immediate error state. As this holds for all qimerr∈imerrS, we have that
imerrS∥T=∅. And once imerrS∥T=∅, we have that errS∥T(∅) =∅and therefore
inconsS∥T=∅(using the fixed-point operator π). Thus for this Twe need to keep
all states of SinS∀to ensure that JS∥TKmod=JS∀∥TKmod. □
A.4 Omitted proofs of Section 6
Lemma 17 For any two specifications SandTsuch that the quotient T\\Sis
defined, and for any implementation Xover the same alphabet as T\\S, we have that
S∥Xis defined, ActS∥X
i=ActT
iandActS∥X
0=ActSo∪ActTo∪ActS
i\ActT
i.
ProofWe will first show that S∥Xis defined. This boils down to show that SandX
are composable., i.e., ActSo∩ActXo=∅. From Definition 18 and the assumption that
Xhas the same alphabet as T\\S, it follows that ActXo=ActTo\ActSo∪ActS
i\ActT
i.
Thus it holds that ActSo∩ActXo=∅.
To show that ActS∥X
i=ActT
i, we follow Definition 15 of the parallel composition
and Definition 18 of the quotient and use careful rewriting to get to this conclusion.
ActS∥X
i=ActS
i\ActX
o∪ActX
i\ActS
o
=ActS
i\(ActT
o\ActS
o∪ActS
i\ActT
i)∪(ActT
i∪ActS
o)\ActS
o
=ActS
i\(ActT
o\ActS
o∪ActS
i\ActT
i)∪ActT
i\ActS
o∪ActS
o\ActS
o

--- Page 57 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
Timed I/O Automata 57
=ActS
i\(ActT
o\ActS
o∪ActS
i\ActT
i)∪ActT
i
=
ActS
i\(ActT
o\ActS
o)∩ActS
i\(ActS
i\ActT
i)
∪ActT
i
=
ActS
i\(ActT
o\ActS
o)∩ActS
i∩ActT
i
∪ActT
i
=
(ActS
i∩ActS
o)∪(ActS
i\ActT
o)
∩ActS
i∩ActT
i
∪ActT
i
=
ActS
i\ActT
o∩ActS
i∩ActT
i
∪ActT
i
=
ActS
i∩ActS
i∩ActT
i
\ActT
o∪ActT
i
=
ActS
i∩ActT
i
\ActT
o∪ActT
i
=
ActS
i∩(ActT
i\ActT
o)
∪ActT
i
=
ActS
i∩ActT
i
∪ActT
i
=ActT
i
To show that ActS∥X
0=ActSo∪ActTo∪ActS
i\ActT
i, we follow again Definition 15
of the parallel composition and Definition 18 of the quotient and use careful rewriting
to get to this conclusion.
ActS∥X
0=ActS
o∪ActX
o
=ActS
o∪(ActT
o\ActS
o∪ActS
i\ActT)
=ActS
o∪ActT
o∪ActS
i\ActT
i
□
Lemma 10 For any two specifications SandTsuch that the quotient T\\Sis
defined, and for any implementation Xover the same alphabet as T\\S, we have that
S∥Xis defined and S∥X≤TiffX≤T\\S.
ProofIt is shown in Lemma 17 that S∥Xis defined. The alphabet pre-condition of
Definition 6 is satisfied for X≤T\\Sby definition of X; using Lemma 17 we can see
that this is also the case for S∥X≤T. So we only have to show that S∥X≤Tiff
X≤T\\S.
(S∥X≤T⇒X≤T\\S) Since S∥X≤T, it follows from Definition 6 of
refinement that there exists a relation R∈QS∥X×QTthat witness the refinement.
Note that QS∥X=QS×QXaccording to Definition 15. Construct relation R′=
{(qX
1,(qT
1, qS
1))∈QX×QT\\S|((qS
1, qX
1), qT
1)∈R} ∪ { (qX
1, u)∈QX×QT\\S|
qX
1∈QX}. We will show that R′witnesses X≤T\\S. First consider the five cases
of Definition 6 for a state pair (qX
1,(qT
1, qS
1))∈R′.
1.(qT
1, qS
1)i?− −→T\\S(qT
2, qS
2)for some (qT
2, qS
2)∈QT\\Sandi?∈ActT\\S
i∩ActX
i.
By definition of Xit follows that ActT\\S
i=ActX
i. Consider the following
five possible cases from Definition 18 of the quotient that might result in i?∈
ActT\\S
i(=ActT
i∪ActSo).

--- Page 58 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
58Timed I/O Automata
•i?∈ActT
iand i!∈ActSo. This case is actually not feasible, since
Definition 18 also requires that ActSo∩ActT
i=∅.
•i?∈ActT
iandi?∈ActS
i. In this case, it follows from Definition 18 that
qT
1i?− −→TqT
2andqS
1i?− −→SqS
2. Now, using R, the first case of Definition 6 of
refinement, and the fact that ActS∥X
i=ActT
i(Lemma 17) it follows that
(qS
1, qX
1)i?− −→S∥X(qS
2, qX
2)and((qS
2, qX
2), qT
2)∈R. From Definition 15 of
parallel composition it follows that qX
1i?− −→XqX
2. From the construction of
R′we confirm that (qX
2,(qT
2, qS
2))∈R′.
•i?∈ActT
iandi?/∈ActS. In this case, it follows from Definition 18 that
qT
1i?− −→TqT
2andqS
1=qS
2. Now, using R, the first case of Definition 6 of
refinement, and the fact that ActS∥X
i=ActT
i(Lemma 17) it follows that
(qS
1, qX
1)i?− −→S∥X(qS
2, qX
2)and((qS
2, qX
2), qT
2)∈R. From Definition 15 of
parallel composition it follows that qX
1i?− −→XqX
2. From the construction of
R′we confirm that (qX
2,(qT
2, qS
2))∈R′.
•i!∈ActToandi!∈ActSo. In this case, there are three possible options from
Definition 18.
–qT
1i!− −→TqT
2and qS
1i!− −→SqS
2. Since Xis an implementation and
i?∈ActX
i, it follows that qX
1i?− −→XqX
2for some qX
2∈QX(any imple-
mentation is a specification, see Definition 5, which is input-enabled,
see Definition 4). Now, using Definition 15 of parallel composition it
follows that (qS
1, qX
1)i!− −→S∥X(qS
2, qX
2). Using Rand the third case of
Definition 6 of refinement, it follows that ((qS
2, qX
2), qT
2)∈R. Thus
from the construction of R′we confirm that (qX
2,(qT
2, qS
2))∈R′.
–qS
1Xi!− −→S. In this case, (qT
2, qS
2) =u. Again, since Xis an implementa-
tion and i?∈ActX
i, it follows that qX
1i?− −→XqX
2for some qX
2∈QX.
By construction of R′it follows that (qX
2,(qT
2, qS
2)) = ( qX
2, u)∈R′.
–qT
1Xi!− −→TandqS
1i!− −→SqS
2. Since S∥X≤Tholds and (qX
1,(qT
1, qS
1))∈
R′implies, by construction R′, that ((qS
1, qX
1), qT
1)∈R, we can con-
clude that qT
1Xi!− −→Timplies (qS
1, qX
1)Xi!− −→S∥Xfrom Definition 6 of
refinement. Since Xis an implementation and i?∈ActX
i, it follows
thatqX
1i?− −→X.Therefore,fromDefinition15ofparallelcompositionit
follows that qS
1Xi!− −→S. This contradicts with qS
1i!− −→SqS
2, so this option
is infeasible.
•i!/∈ActTandi!∈ActSo. In this case, there are two possible options from
Definition 18.
–qS
1i!− −→SqS
2and qT
1=qT
2. Since Xis an implementation and
i?∈ActX
i, it follows that qX
1i?− −→XqX
2for some qX
2∈QX(any imple-
mentation is a specification, see Definition 5, which is input-enabled,
see Definition 4). Now, using Definition 15 of parallel composition it
follows that (qS
1, qX
1)i!− −→S∥X(qS
2, qX
2). Using Rand the forth case of
Definition 6 of refinement, it follows that ((qS
2, qX
2), qT
2)∈R. Thus
from the construction of R′we confirm that (qX
2,(qT
2, qS
2))∈R′.

--- Page 59 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
Timed I/O Automata 59
–qS
1Xi!− −→S. In this case, (qT
2, qS
2) =u. Again, since Xis an implementa-
tion and i?∈ActX
i, it follows that qX
1i?− −→XqX
2for some qX
2∈QX.
By construction of R′it follows that (qX
2,(qT
2, qS
2)) = ( qX
2, u)∈R′.
So, in all feasible cases we can show that qX
1i?− −→XqX
2and(qX
2,(qT
2, qS
2))∈R′.
2.(qT
1, qS
1)i?− −→T\\S(qT
2, qS
2)for some (qT
2, qS
2)∈QT\\Sandi?∈ActT\\S
i\ActX
i.
By definition of Xit follows that ActT\\S
i\ActX
i=∅, so this case can be
ignored.
3.qX
1o!− −→XqX
2for some qX
2∈QXando!∈ActXo∩ActT\\S
o. By definition
ofXit follows that ActXo=ActT\\S
o. Consider the following five possible
cases from Definition 18 of the quotient that might result in o!∈ActT\\S
o(=
ActTo\ActSo∪ActS
i\ActT
i).
•o!∈ActTo\ActSoando?∈ActS
i\ActT
i. It follows from Definition 4 of a
specificationthat Sisinput-enabled.Therefore,thereisatransition qS
1o?− −→
SqS
2for some qS
2∈QS. Now, from Definition 15 of parallel composition it
follows that there is a transition (qS
1, qX
1)o!− −→S∥X(qS
2, qX
2). Using Rand
the third case of Definition 6 of refinement, it follows that qT
1o!− −→TqT
2and
((qS
2, qX
2), qT
2)∈R. Now, using Definition 18 of the quotient, it follows that
(qT
1, qS
1)o!− −→T\\S(qT
2, qS
2). And from the construction of R′we confirm that
(qX
2,(qT
2, qS
2))∈R′.
•o!∈ActTo\ActSoando?∈ActS
i∩ActT
i. This case is not feasible, as an
action cannot be both an output and input in T.
•o!∈ActTo\ActSoando?/∈ActS
i. In this case, it follows that o /∈ActSat all.
Then from Definition 15 it follows that there is a transition (qS
1, qX
1)i?− −→
S∥X(qS
2, qX
2)andqS
1=qS
2. Using Rand the third case of Definition 6 of
refinement, it follows that qT
1o!− −→TqT
2and((qS
2, qX
2), qT
2)∈R. Now, using
Definition 18 of the quotient, it follows that (qT
1, qS
1)o!− −→T\\S(qT
2, qS
2). And
from the construction of R′we confirm that (qX
2,(qT
2, qS
2))∈R′.
•o!∈ActTo∩ActSoando?∈ActS
i\ActT
i. This case is not feasible, as an
action cannot be both an output and input in S.
•o!/∈ActToando?∈ActS
i\ActT
i. It follows from Definition 4 of a specifi-
cation that Sis input-enabled. Therefore, there is a transition qS
1o?− −→SqS
2
for some qS
2∈QS. Now, from Definition 15 of parallel composition it fol-
lows that there is a transition (qS
1, qX
1)i?− −→S∥X(qS
2, qX
2). Using Rand
the forth case of Definition 6 of refinement, it follows that qT
1=qT
2and
((qS
2, qX
2), qT
2)∈R. Now, using Definition 18 of the quotient, it follows that
(qT
1, qS
1)o!− −→T\\S(qT
2, qS
2). And from the construction of R′we confirm that
(qX
2,(qT
2, qS
2))∈R′.
So, in all feasible cases we can show that (qT
1, qS
1)o!− −→T\\S(qT
2, qS
2)and
(qX
2,(qT
2, qS
2))∈R′.
4.qX
1o!− −→XqX
2for some qX
2∈QXando!∈ActXo\ActT\\S
o. By definition of Xit
follows that ActXo\ActT\\S
o =∅, so this case can be ignored.
5.qX
1d− −→XqX
2for some qX
2∈QXandd∈R≥0. Consider two cases in S.

--- Page 60 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
60Timed I/O Automata
•qS
1d− −→S. In this case, there exists some qS
2∈QSsuch that qS
1d− −→
SqS
2. Now, from Definition 15 of parallel composition it follows that
there is a transition (qS
1, qX
1)d− −→S∥X(qS
2, qX
2). Using Rand the fifth
case of Definition 6 of refinement, it follows that qT
1d− −→TqT
2and
((qS
2, qX
2), qT
2)∈R. Now, using Definition 18 of the quotient, it follows that
(qT
1, qS
1)d− −→T\\S(qT
2, qS
2). And from the construction of R′we confirm that
(qX
2,(qT
2, qS
2))∈R′.
•qS
1Xd− −→S. In this case, it follows from Definition 15 of parallel composition
that there is no transition in S∥X, i.e., (qS
1, qX
1)Xd− −→S∥X. Further-
more, from Definition 18 it follows that (qT
1, qS
1)d− −→T\\Su. And from the
construction of R′we confirm that (qX
2, u)∈R′.
So, in both cases we can show that (qT
1, qS
1)d− −→T\\S(qX
2, qT\\S)and
(qX
2, qT\\S)∈R′with qT\\S= (qT
2, qS
2)orqT\\S=u.
So for all state pairs (qX
1,(qT
1, qS
1))∈R′we have shown that R′witnesses the
refinement X≤T\\S. Now consider the five cases of Definition 6 for a state pair
(qX
1, u)∈R′.
1.ui?− −→T\\Sufor some i?∈ActT\\S
i∩ActX
i. By definition of Xit follows that
ActT\\S
i=ActX
i. Since Xis an implementation and i?∈ActX
i, it follows that
qX
1i?− −→XqX
2for some qX
2∈QX(any implementation is a specification, see
Definition 5, which is input-enabled, see Definition 4). By construction of R′it
follows that (qX
2, u)∈R′.
2.ui?− −→T\\Sufor some i?∈ActT\\S
i\ActX
i. By definition of Xit follows that
ActT\\S
i\ActX
i=∅, so this case can be ignored.
3.qX
1o!− −→XqX
2for some qX
2∈QXando!∈ActXo∩ActT\\S
o. By definition of X
it follows that ActXo=ActT\\S
o. From Definition 18 of the quotient it follows
thatuo!− −→T\\Su. By construction of R′it also follows that (qX
2, u)∈R′.
4.qX
1o!− −→XqX
2for some qX
2∈QXando!∈ActXo\ActT\\S
o. By definition of Xit
follows that ActXo\ActT\\S
o =∅, so this case can be ignored.
5.qX
1d− −→XqX
2for some qX
2∈QXandd∈R≥0. From Definition 18 of the
quotient it follows that ud− −→T\\Su. By construction of R′it also follows that
(qX
2, u)∈R′.
So for all state pairs (qX
1, u)∈R′we have shown that R′witnesses the refinement
X≤T\\S. Finally, since Rwitnesses S∥X≤Tit holds that ((qS
0, qXo), qT
0)∈R
(see Definition 6). Thus by construction of R′it holds that (qX
0,(qT
0, qS
0))∈R′.
Therefore, we can now conclude that R′witnesses X≤T\\X.
(S∥X≤T⇐X≤T\\S) Since X≤T\\S, it follows from Definition 6 of
refinement that there exists a relation R∈QX×QT\\Sthat witness the refine-
ment. Note that QS∥X=QS×QXaccording to Definition 15. Construct relation
R′={((qS
1, qX
1), qT
1)∈QX×QT\\S|(qX
1,(qT
1, qS
1))∈R}. We will show that R′
witnesses S∥X≤T. First consider the five cases of Definition 6 for a state pair
((qS
1, qX
1), qT
1)∈R′.

--- Page 61 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
Timed I/O Automata 61
1.qT
1i?− −→TqT
2for some qT
2∈QTandi?∈ActT
i∩ActS∥X
i. From Lemma 17 it
follows that ActT
i=ActS∥X
i. Consider the following five possible cases from
Definition 15 of the parallel composition that might result in i?∈ActS∥X
i(=
ActS
i\ActXo∪ActX
i\ActSo).
•i?∈ActS
i\ActXoandi?∈ActX
i\ActSo. Since SandXare specifications
andi?∈ActS
i∩ActX
i, it follows that qS
1i?− −→SqS
2for some qS
2∈QS
andqX
1i?− −→XqX
2for some qX
2∈QX(any specification is input-enabled,
see Definition 4). Therefore, using Definition 15 of parallel composition,
it follows that (qS
1, qX
1)i?− −→S∥X(qS
2, qX
2). Also, using Definition 18 of the
quotient it follows that (qT
1, qS
1)i?− −→T\\S(qT
2, qS
2). Now, using R, the first
case of Definition 6 of refinement, and ActX=ActT\\Sby construction,
it follows that (qX
2,(qT
2, qS
2))∈R. And from the construction of R′we
confirm that ((qS
2, qX
2), qT
2)∈R′.
•i?∈ActS
i\ActXoandi?∈ActX
i∩ActSo. This case is infeasible, as an
action cannot be both an output and input in S.
•i?∈ActS
i\ActXoandi?/∈ActX
i.Thiscaseisinfeasible,as i?∈ActS
i\ActXo
andi?/∈ActX
iimpliesthat i /∈ActX,butfromDefinition18ofthequotient
it follows that i?∈ActS
iimplies that i∈ActT\\S(=ActX).
•i?∈ActS
i∩ActXoandi?∈ActX
i\ActSo. This case is infeasible, as an
action cannot be both an output and input in X.
•i?/∈ActS
iandi?∈ActX
i\ActSo. Since i?∈ActX
i\ActSoimplies that
i!/∈ActSo, it follows that i /∈ActS. From Definition 18 of quotient if
follows that (qT
1, qS
1)i?− −→T\\S(qT
2, qS
2)andqS
1=qS
2. Now, using R, the first
case of Definition 6 of refinement, and ActX=ActT\\Sby construction,
it follows that qX
1i?− −→XqX
2and(qX
2,(qT
2, qS
2))∈R. Using Definition 15
of the parallel composition, it follows that (qS
1, qX
1)i?− −→S∥X(qS
2, qX
2). And
from the construction of R′we confirm that ((qS
2, qX
2), qT
2)∈R′.
So, in all feasible cases we can show that (qS
1, qX
1)i?− −→S∥X(qS
2, qX
2)and
((qS
2, qX
2), qT
2)∈R′.
2.qT
1i?− −→TqT
2for some qT
2∈QTandi?∈ActT
i\ActS∥X
i. From Lemma 17 it
follows that ActT
i\ActS∥X
i=∅, so this case can be ignored.
3.(qS
1, qX
1)o!− −→S∥X(qS
2, qX
2)for some (qS
2, qX
2)∈QS∥Xando!∈ActS∥X
o∩ActTo.
From Lemma 17 we have that ActS∥X
o=ActSo∪ActTo∪ActS
i\ActT
i. Consider
the following three cases that might result in o!∈ActS∥X
oando!∈ActTo.
•o!∈ActSoando!∈ActTo. In this case we have that o?∈ActT\\S
iby
Definition 18, and thus by construction of Xthat o?∈ActX
i. Now, using
Definition 15 of the parallel composition, it follows that qS
1o!− −→SqS
2and
qX
1o?− −→XqX
2. Consider the following two cases for T.
–qT
1o!− −→TqT
2. In this case it follows that from Definition 18 of the
quotient that (qT
1, qS
1)o?− −→T\\S(qT
2, qS
2). Using R, the first case of
Definition 6 of refinement, and ActX=ActT\\Sby construction, it
follows that (qX
2,(qT
2, qS
2))∈R. And from the construction of R′we
confirm that ((qS
2, qX
2), qT
2)∈R′.

--- Page 62 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
62Timed I/O Automata
–qT
1Xo!− −→T. In this case it follows from Definition 18 of the quotient
that (qT
1, qS
1)o?− −→T\\Se. By construction of e, it does not allow inde-
pendent progress. But, since Xis an implementation, all states in X
allow independent progress, see Definition 514. Therefore, either X
can delay indefinitely from state qX
2or there exists a delay after which
Xcan perform an output action. Neither of these options can be sim-
ulated by T\\Swhen in state e. Thus (qX
2, e)/∈R, i.e., X≰T\\S.
This contradicts with the assumption, thus this is not a feasible case.
•o?∈ActS
iando!∈ActTo. In this case we have that o!∈ActT\\S
oby
Definition 18, and thus by construction of Xthat o!∈ActXo. Now, using
Definition 15 of the parallel composition, it follows that qS
1o?− −→SqS
2and
qX
1o!− −→XqX
2. Using R, the third case of Definition 6 of refinement, and
ActX=ActT\\Sby construction, it follows that (qT
1, qS
1)o!− −→T\\S(qT
2, qS
2)
and(qX
2,(qT
2, qS
2))∈R. Now, using Definition 18 of quotient again, it
follows that qT
1o!− −→TqT
2. And from the construction of R′we confirm that
((qS
2, qX
2), qT
2)∈R′.
•o /∈ActSando!∈ActTo. In this case we have that o!∈ActT\\S
oby Def-
inition 18, and thus by construction of Xthat o!∈ActXo. Now, using
Definition 15 of the parallel composition, it follows that qX
1o!− −→XqX
2
andqS
1=qS
2. Using R, the third case of Definition 6 of refinement, and
ActX=ActT\\Sby construction, it follows that (qT
1, qS
1)o!− −→T\\S(qT
2, qS
2)
and(qX
2,(qT
2, qS
2))∈R. Now, using Definition 18 of quotient again, it fol-
lows that qT
1o!− −→TqT
2. And from the construction of R′we confirm that
((qS
2, qX
2), qT
2)∈R′.
So, in all feasible cases we can show that qT
1o!− −→TqT
2and((qS
2, qX
2), qT
2)∈R′.
4.(qS
1, qX
1)o!− −→S∥X(qS
2, qX
2)for some (qS
2, qX
2)∈QS∥Xando!∈ActS∥X
o\ActTo.
From Lemma 17 we have that ActS∥X
o =ActSo∪ActTo∪ActS
i\ActT
i. So
ActS∥X
o\ActTo= (ActSo∪ActS
i\ActT
i)\ActTo=ActSo\ActTo∪(ActS
i\ActT
i)\
ActTo=ActSo\ActTo∪ActS
i\ActT. Consider the following five cases that might
result in o!∈ActS∥X
o\ActTo.
•o!∈ActSo\ActToando?∈ActS
i\ActT. This case is infeasible, as an action
cannot be both an output and input in S.
•o!∈ActSo\ActToando?∈ActS
i∩ActT. This case is infeasible, as an action
cannot be both an output and input in S.
•o!∈ActSo\ActToando?/∈ActS
i. In this case, we have that o?∈ActT\\S
i
from Definition 18 of the quotient. Therefore, o?∈ActX
iby construction
ofX. Now, using Definition 15 of the parallel composition, it follows that
qS
1o!− −→SqS
2andqX
1o?− −→XqX
2. Since Definition 18 also requires that ActSo∩
ActT
i=∅, it follows that in this case o /∈ActT. Thus, from Definition 18
it follows that (qT
1, qS
1)o?− −→T\\S(qT
2, qS
2)andqT
1=qT
2. Using R, the first
case of Definition 6 of refinement, and ActX=ActT\\Sby construction,
it follows that (qX
2,(qT
2, qS
2))∈R. And from the construction of R′we
confirm that ((qS
2, qX
2), qT
2)∈R′.
14This is the reason why Xis assumed to be an implementation and not just a specification.

--- Page 63 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
Timed I/O Automata 63
•o!∈ActSo∩ActToando?∈ActS
i\ActT. This case is infeasible, as an action
cannot be both an output and input in S.
•o!/∈ActSoando?∈ActS
i\ActT. In this case, we have that o!∈ActT\\S
o
from Definition 18 of the quotient. Therefore, o!∈ActXoby construction
ofX. Now, using Definition 15 of the parallel composition, it follows that
qS
1o!− −→SqS
2andqX
1o?− −→XqX
2. Using R, the fourth case of Definition 6
of refinement, ActX=ActT\\Sby construction, and o /∈ActT, it follows
that (qX
2,(qT
2, qS
2))∈RandqT
1=qT
2. And from the construction of R′we
confirm that ((qS
2, qX
2), qT
2)∈R′.
So, in all feasible cases we can show that o /∈ActT,qT
1=qT
2, and
((qS
2, qX
2), qT
2)∈R′.
5.(qS
1, qX
1)d− −→S∥X(qS
2, qX
2)for some (qS
2, qX
2)∈QS∥Xandd∈R≥0. It follows
from Definition 15 of the parallel composition that qS
1d− −→SqS
2andqX
1d− −→
XqX
2. Using Rand the fifth case of Definition 6 of refinement it follows that
(qT
1, qS
1)d− −→T\\Sq2for some qT\\S
2∈QT\\Sand(qX
2, qT\\S
2))∈R. Now, by
Definition 18 of the quotient it follows that qT
1d− −→TqT
2(and qS
1d− −→SqS
2). And
from the construction of R′we confirm that ((qS
2, qX
2), qT
2)∈R′.
So for all state pairs ((qS
1, qX
1), qT
1)∈R′we have shown that R′witnesses the
refinement S∥X≤T. Finally, since Rwitnesses X≤T\\Sit holds that
(qX
0,(qT
0, qS
0))∈R(see Definition 6). Thus by construction of R′it holds that
((qS
0, qXo), qT
0)∈R′. Therefore, we can now conclude that R′witnesses S∥X≤T.
□
Definition 21 Given a TIOTS S= (Q, q0,Act,→)and equivalence relation ∼
on the set of states Q. The ∼-quotient S, denoted by S/∼, is a specification
([Q]∼,[q0]∼,Act,→/∼)where [Q]∼is the set of all equivalence classes of Q15and
→/∼being defined as ([q1], a,[q2])∈ →/∼if(q1, a, q 2)∈→for some q1∈[q1]and
q2∈[q2].
Lemma 18 Given specification automata S= (LocS, lS
0,ActS,ClkS, ES,InvS)and
T= (LocT, lT
0,ActT,ClkT, ET,InvT)where ActSo∩ActT
i=∅. Let V0={v∈
[ClkT\\S7→R≥0]|v(xnew) = 0},V>0= [ClkT\\S7→R≥0]\V0, and∼={(q1, q2)|
q1, q2∈ {le} ×V0} ∪ {(q, q)|q∈ {le} ×V>0} ∪ {(q1, q2)|q1, q2∈ {lu} ×[ClkT\\S7→
R≥0]} ∪ { ((l, v1),(l, v2))|l∈LocT\\S\ {le, lu}, v1, v2∈[ClkT\\S7→R≥0],∀c∈
ClkT\\S\ {xnew}, v1(c) =v2(c)}. Then JT\\SKsem≃JT\\SKsem/∼.
ProofIt follows directly from the definition of ∼that it is reflexive, symmetric, and
transitive, thus it is an equivalence relation. Now, observe from Definition 21 that an
equivalence quotient of a TIOTS does not alter the action set, i.e., ActJT\\SKsem=
ActJT\\SKsem/∼. Let R={(q,[q]∼)|q∈QJT\\SKsem}. We will show that Ris
a bisimulation relation. First, observe that (q0,[q0]∼)∈R. Consider a state pair
(q1,[r1]∼)∈R. We have to check whether the six cases from Definition 20 of
bisimulation hold.
15Recall that an equivalent class is defined as [q]∼={r∈Q|q∼r}.

--- Page 64 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
64Timed I/O Automata
1.q1a− −→JT\\SKsemq2,q2∈QJT\\SKsem, and a∈ActJT\\SKsem∩ActJT\\SKsem/∼.
By the definition of an equivalence class and Definition 21 it follows imme-
diately that [q1]∼a− −→JT\\SKsem/∼[q2]∼. By construction of Rit follows that
(q2,[q2]∼)∈R.
2.q1a− −→JT\\SKsemq2,q2∈QJT\\SKsem, and a∈ActJT\\SKsem\ActJT\\SKsem/∼.
This case is infeasible, since ActJT\\SKsem=ActJT\\SKsem/∼.
3.[r1]∼a− −→JT\\SKsem/∼[r2]∼,[r2]∼∈QJT\\SKsem/∼, and a∈ActJT\\SKsem/∼∩
ActJT\\SKsem. By construction of R, we have to show that ∀q1∈[r1]∼∃q2∈
QJT\\SKsem:q1a− −→JT\\SKsemq2,q2∈[r2]∼, and (q2,[r2]∼)∈R. Consider the
following four cases based on the construction of ∼:
•[r1]∼={q|q∈ {le} ×V0}. In this case, let q1= (le, v1)∈[r1]∼for
some v1∈V0. From Definition 3 of the semantic of a TIOA it follows that
JT\\SKsemisinlocation le.FromDefinition19ofthequotientitfollowsthat
the only possible transition in T\\Sis(le, a, x new= 0,∅, le). Furthermore,
since [r1]∼a− −→JT\\SKsem/∼[r2]∼,itholdsthat ∃r1, r2∈QJT\\SKsem:r1a− −→
JT\\SKsemr2. Following Definition 3 and the above observation, it holds that
r1= (le, v′
1)andr2= (le, v′
2)for some v′
1, v′
2∈[ClkT\\S7→R≥0],v′
1|=
xnew= 0, and v′
1=v′
2. From v′
1|=xnew= 0it follows that v′
1(xnew) = 0
andv′
1, v′
2∈V0,andfrom v′
1=v′
2that[r2]∼= [r1]∼.Thuswecanconclude
that q1a− −→JT\\SKsemq2with q2∈[r2]∼. By construction of Rit follows
that (q2,[r2]∼)∈R.
•[r1]∼={q|q∈ {le} ×V>0}. This case is trivial, since [r1]∼={r1}=
{q1}. Therefore, if [r1]∼a− −→JT\\SKsem/∼[r2]∼,∃q2∈[r2]∼such that q1a− −→
JT\\SKsemq2.
•[r1]∼={q|q∈ {lu} ×[ClkT\\S7→R≥0]}. In this case, let q1= (lu, v1)∈
[r1]∼for some v1∈[ClkT\\S7→R≥0]. From Definition 3 of the semantic
of a TIOA it follows that JT\\SKsemis in location lu. From Definition 19
of the quotient it follows that the only possible transition in T\\Sis
(lu, a,T,∅, lu). Furthermore, since [r1]∼a− −→JT\\SKsem/∼[r2]∼, it holds that
∃r1, r2∈QJT\\SKsem:r1a− −→JT\\SKsemr2. Following Definition 3 and the
above observation, it holds that r1= (lu, v′
1)andr2= (lu, v′
2)for some
v′
1, v′
2∈[ClkT\\S7→R≥0],v′
1|=T, and v′
1=v′
2. From v′
1=v′
2it follows
that [r2]∼= [r1]∼. Thus we can conclude that q1a− −→JT\\SKsemq2with
q2∈[r2]∼. By construction of Rit follows that (q2,[r2]∼)∈R.
•In this case, since [r1]∼a− −→JT\\SKsem/∼[r2]∼, it holds that ∃r1, r2∈
QJT\\SKsem:r1a− −→JT\\SKsemr2. Following Definition 3 of the seman-
tic of a TIOA, it holds that (l1, a, φ, c, l 2)∈ET\\S,r1= (l1, v1),
r2= (l2, v2),l1, l2∈LocT\\S,v1, v2∈[ClkT\\S7→R≥0],v1|=φ,
v2=v1[r7→0]r∈c, and v2|=Inv(l2). From the construction of ∼, it fol-
lows that for any state (l′
1, v′
1)∈[r1]∼it holds that l′
1=l1,l1̸=le, and
∀c∈ClkT\\S\ {xnew}:v′
1(c) =v1(c). Since xnew /∈ClkT∪ClkSand
none of the possible rules for this location from Definition 19 of the quo-
tient for TIOA use xnewin its guard, it follows that v′
1|=φ. Furthermore,
no matter whether xnew∈cor not, we have for v′
2=v′
1[r7→0]r∈cthat
∀c∈ClkT\\S\ {xnew}:v′
2(c) =v2(c). Now consider the following three
options for the target location l2.

--- Page 65 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
Timed I/O Automata 65
– Ifl2= (lT, lS)with lT∈LocTandlS∈LocS, then Inv(l2) =T.
Thus v′
2|=Inv(l2).
– Ifl2=lu, then Inv(l2) =T. Thus v′
2|=Inv(l2).
– If l2=le, then Inv(l2) = xnew = 0. Also, c={xnew}, thus
v2(xnew) =v′
2(xnew) = 0. Thus v′
2|=Inv(l2).
Therefore, we can conclude that (l′
1, v′
1)a− −→JT\\SKsem(l2, v′
2),(l2, v′
2)∈
[r2]∼, and by construction of Rthat ((l2, v′
2),[r2]∼)∈R. Since we picked
any state (l′
1, v′
1)∈[r1]∼, the conclusion holds for all states q1∈[r1]∼.
4.[r1]∼a− −→JT\\SKsem/∼[r2]∼,[r2]∼∈QJT\\SKsem/∼, and a∈ActJT\\SKsem/∼\
ActJT\\SKsem. This case is infeasible, since ActJT\\SKsem=ActJT\\SKsem/∼.
5.q1d− −→JT\\SKsemq2,q2∈QJT\\SKsem, and d∈R≥0. By the definition of
an equivalence class and Definition 21 it follows immediately that [q1]∼a− −→
JT\\SKsem/∼[q2]∼. By construction of Rit follows that (q2,[q2]∼)∈R.
6.[r1]∼d− −→JT\\SKsem/∼[r2]∼,[r2]∼∈QJT\\SKsem/∼, and d∈R≥0. By con-
struction of R, we have to show that ∀q1∈[r1]∼∃q2∈QJT\\SKsem:q1a− −→
JT\\SKsemq2,q2∈[r2]∼, and (q2,[r2]∼)∈R. Consider the following three cases
based on the construction of ∼:
•[r1]∼={q|q∈ {le} ×V0}. In this case, let q1= (le, v1)∈[r1]∼for
some v1∈V0. From Definition 3 of the semantic of a TIOA it follows that
JT\\SKsemis in location le. From Definition 19 of the quotient it follows
that Inv(le) =xnew= 0. Furthermore, since [r1]∼d− −→JT\\SKsem/∼[r2]∼, it
holds that ∃r1, r2∈QJT\\SKsem:r1d− −→JT\\SKsemr2. Following Definition 3
and the above observation, it holds that r1= (le, v′
1)andr2= (le, v′
2)
for some v′
1, v′
2∈[ClkT\\S7→R≥0],v′
2=v′
1+dandv′
2|=Inv(le). From
v′
2|=Inv(le)it follows that v′
2(xnew) = 0, thus d= 0,v′
1=v′
2,v′
1, v′
2∈V0,
and[r2]∼= [r1]∼. Thus we can conclude that q1d− −→JT\\SKsemq2with
q2∈[r2]∼. By construction of Rit follows that (q2,[r2]∼)∈R.
•[r1]∼={q|q∈ {le}×V>0}. This case is trivial, since [r1]∼={r1}={q1}.
Therefore, if [r1]∼d− −→JT\\SKsem/∼[r2]∼,∃q2∈[r2]∼such that q1d− −→
JT\\SKsemq2.
•[r1]∼={q|q∈ {lu} ×[ClkT\\S7→R≥0]}. In this case, let q1= (lu, v1)∈
[r1]∼for some v1∈V0. From Definition 3 of the semantic of a TIOA it fol-
lows that JT\\SKsemis in location lu. From Definition 19 of the quotient it
follows that Inv(lu) =T. Furthermore, since [r1]∼d− −→JT\\SKsem/∼[r2]∼, it
holds that ∃r1, r2∈QJT\\SKsem:r1d− −→JT\\SKsemr2. Following Definition 3
and the above observation, it holds that r1= (lu, v′
1)andr2= (lu, v′
2)for
some v′
1, v′
2∈[ClkT\\S7→R≥0],v′
2=v′
1+dandv′
2|=Inv(lu). Now it fol-
lows that (lu, v′
2)∈[r1]∼, thus [r2]∼= [r1]∼. Therefore, we can conclude
thatq1d− −→JT\\SKsemq2with q2∈[r2]∼and by construction of Rit follows
that (q2,[r2]∼)∈R.
•In this case, since [r1]∼d− −→JT\\SKsem/∼[r2]∼, it holds that ∃r1, r2∈
QJT\\SKsem:r1d− −→JT\\SKsemr2. Following Definition 3 of the seman-
tic of a TIOA, it holds that r1= (l, v1),r2= (l, v2),l∈LocT\\S,
v1, v2∈[ClkT\\S7→R≥0],v2=v1+d,v2|=Inv(l), and ∀d′∈

--- Page 66 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
66Timed I/O Automata
R≥0, d′< d :v1+d′|=Inv(l). From the construction of ∼, it follows
that for any state (l′
1, v′
1)∈[r1]∼it holds that l′
1=l1,l1̸=le, and
∀c∈ClkT\\S\ {xnew}:v′
1(c) =v1(c). Therefore, we have for v′
2=v′
1+d
that∀c∈ClkT\\S\ {xnew}:v′
2(c) = v2(c); similarly, for v′
1+d′we
have that ∀c∈ClkT\\S\ {xnew}:v′
1+d′(c) =v1+d′(c). From Defini-
tion 19 of the quotient for TIOA it follows that Inv(l) =Inv(l′) =T. Thus
v′
2|=Inv(l′)andv′
1+d′|=Inv(l′). Therefore, from Definition 3 again we
have that (l′
1, v′
1)d− −→JT\\SKsem(l′
1, v′
2),(l2, v′
2)∈[r2]∼, and by construction
ofRthat ((l2, v′
2),[r2]∼)∈R. Since we picked any state (l′
1, v′
1)∈[r1]∼,
the conclusion holds for all states q1∈[r1]∼.
□
The following definition defines the TIOTS of the ∼-quotient of JT\\SKsem
where all states consisting of the error location and a valuation where
u(xnew)>0are removed, as these states are never reachable.
Definition 22 Given specification automata S= (LocS, lS
0,ActS,ClkS, ES,InvS)
andT= (LocT, lT
0,ActT,ClkT, ET,InvT)where ActSo∩ActT
i=∅. Let V0={u∈
[ClkT\\S7→R≥0]|u(xnew) = 0},V>0= [ClkT\\S7→R≥0]\V0, and∼={(q1, q2)|
q1, q2∈ {le} ×V0} ∪ {(q, q)|q∈ {le} ×V>0} ∪ {(q1, q2)|q1, q2∈ {lu} ×[ClkT\\S7→
R≥0]} ∪ { ((l, v1),(l, v2))|l∈LocT\\S\ {le, lu}, v1, v2∈[ClkT\\S7→R≥0],∀c∈
ClkT\\S\ {xnew}, v1(c) =v2(c)}. Thereduced ∼-quotient of JT\\SKsem, denoted by
JT\\SKρ
sem, is defined as TIOTS (Qρ, qρ
0,ActT\\S,→ρ)where Qρ=QJT\\SKsem/∼\
{[q]|q∈ {le} ×V>0},qρ
0=qJT\\SKsem/∼
0, and →ρ=→JT\\SKsem/∼∩{(q1, a, q 2)|
q1, q2∈Q, a∈ActT\\S}.
Lemma 19 Given specification automata S= (LocS, lS
0,ActS,ClkS, ES,InvS)and
T= (LocT, lT
0,ActT,ClkT, ET,InvT)where ActSo∩ActT
i=∅. Then JT\\SKsem≃
JT\\SKρ
sem.
ProofSincebisimulationrelationisanequivalencerelation,itfollowsfromLemma18
that it suffice to show that JT\\SKsem/∼ ≃ JT\\SKρ
sem. Let R={(q, q)|q∈
QJT\\SKρ
sem}. We will show that Ris a bisimulation relation. First, observe that
(q0, q0)∈Rby definition of JT\\SKρ
sem. Instead of checking all six cases of bisimula-
tion(Definition20),wewillshowthat q1Xa− −→JT\\SKsem/∼q2forany a∈ActT\\S∪R≥0
where q1∈QJT\\SKρ
semandq2∈ {le} ×V>0(i.e., q2/∈QJT\\SKρ
sem). Only rules 5, 7,
and 11 of Definition 19 of the quotient for TIOA have target location le, and thus
could become q2in the semantic of it. But notice that all three cases have clock reset
c={xnew}. Therefore, any state (le, u)reached after taking a transition matching
one of these three rules has a valuation u(xnew) = 0. Thus (le, u)/∈ {le} ×V>0and
q1Xa− −→JT\\SKsem/∼q2. Therefore, all reachable state pairs by bisimulation remains
within R. □

--- Page 67 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
Timed I/O Automata 67
Lemma 20 Given specification automata S= (LocS, lS
0,ActS,ClkS, ES,InvS)and
T= (LocT, lT
0,ActT,ClkT, ET,InvT)where ActSo∩ActT
i=∅. Let f:QJT\\SKρ
sem→
QJTKsem\\JSKsembe defined as
•f([((lT, lS), v)]∼) = (( lT, vT),(lS, vS))for any v∈(ClkJT\\SKsem×R≥0),lT∈
LocT,vT∈(ClkT×R≥0),lS∈LocS, and vS∈(ClkS×R≥0)such that
∀x∈ClkT:v(x) =vT(x)and∀x∈ClkS:v(x) =vS(x).
•f([(lu, v)]∼) =ufor any v∈(ClkJT\\SKsem×R≥0).
•f([(le, v)]∼) =efor any v∈V0.
Then fis a bijective function.
ProofIt follows directly from the definition that fis injective. We only have to
show that fis surjective, where the last two cases are again trivial by definition
off. Thus we only have to show that any state ((lT, vT),(lS, vS))maps to only
a single state [((lT, lS), v)]∼inJT\\SKρ
sem. For this, note that ∼in Definition 22
contains {((l, v1),(l, v2))|l∈LocT\\S\ {le, lu}, v1, v2∈[ClkT\\S7→R≥0],∀c∈
ClkT\\S\ {xnew}, v1(c) =v2(c)}. Now we will show that state ((lT, vT),(lS, vS))
maps to only a single state [((lT, lS), v)]∼using contradiction. Assume that state
((lT, vT),(lS, vS))maps to two (or more) states [((lT
1, lS
1), v1)]∼and[((lT
2, lS
2), v1)]∼.
From∼it follows that either lT
1̸=lT
2,lS
1̸=lS
2, or∃c∈ClkT\\S\ {xnew}:v1(c)̸=
v2(c). But since we only consider a single state ((lT, vT),(lS, vS)), none of these
options can hold. Thus our assumption does not hold, which concludes the proof.
□
Since we now have a bijective function frelating states in JT\\SKρ
semand
JTKsem\\JSKsemtogether, we can effectively relabel the states in JT\\SKρ
sem
from [((lT, lS), v)]∼to((lT, lS), vT,S)in all proofs below, where vT,S∈[ClkT∪
ClkS7→R≥0]with∀c∈ClkT∪ClkS:vT,S(c) =v(c). Notice that we remove
the clock xnewfrom the state label, as this clock is not present in the state
labels in JTKsem\\JSKsem. Thus QJT\\SKρ
sem={((lT, lS), v)|lT∈LocT, lS∈
LocS, v∈[ClkT∪ClkS7→R≥0]} ∪ {u, e}.
Lemma 21 Given specification automata S= (LocS, lS
0,ActS,ClkS, ES,InvS)
andT= (LocT, lT
0,ActT,ClkT, ET,InvT)where ActSo∩ActT
i=∅. Then ∀[q]∈
QJT\\SKρ
sem,∀q∈[q]∼:q∈consJT\\SKsemiff[q]∈consJT\\SKρ
sem.
ProofFrom Lemmas 18 and 19 it follows that JT\\SKsem≃JT\\SKρ
sem. With
R1={(q,[q]∼)|q∈QJT\\SKsem}being the bisimulation relation for JT\\SKsem≃
JT\\SKsem/∼andR2={(q, q)|q∈QJT\\SKρ
sem}the bisimulation relation for
JT\\SKsem/∼ ≃ JT\\SKρ
sem, we have that R={(q,[q]∼)|[q]∼∈QJT\\SKρ
sem}is a
bisimulation relation for JT\\SKsem≃JT\\SKρ
sem. Using this bisimulation relation,
we can easily see that qis an error state iff [q]∼is an error state.
We will now proof q∈consJT\\SKsemiff[q]∈consJT\\SKρ
semby contradiction.
First, assume that [q]∈consJT\\SKρ
sem, but∃q′∈[q]∼such that q′/∈consJT\\SKsem.

--- Page 68 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
68Timed I/O Automata
That means that there exists a path from q′to an error state q′′. But since
JT\\SKsem≃JT\\SKρ
sem, it follows that JT\\SKρ
semcan simulate the same path from
[q]∼, and using Rwe have that JT\\SKρ
semreaches state [q′′]∼. But since we assume
that [q]∈consJT\\SKρ
sem, it must hold that [q′′]∼is not an error state. But this con-
tradicts with the previous observation on error states. Showing the contradiction
the other way around follows the same argument. Therefore, we can conclude that
q∈consJT\\SKsemiff[q]∈consJT\\SKρ
sem. □
Lemma 22 Given specification automata S= (LocS, lS
0,ActS,ClkS, ES,InvS)and
T= (LocT, lT
0,ActT,ClkT, ET,InvT)where ActSo∩ActT
i=∅. Then (JT\\SKsem)∆≃
(JT\\SKρ
sem)∆.
ProofFirst, observe from Definition 12 that adversarial pruning does not alter the
action set. Therefore, together with Definition 22 of the reduced quotient it follows
that (JT\\SKsem)∆and(JT\\SKρ
sem)∆have the same action set. From the proof of
Lemma 21 it follows that R={(q,[q]∼)|q∈Q(JT\\SKsem)∆}is a bisimulation
relation showing JT\\SKsem≃JT\\SKρ
sem. Finally, using the result of Lemma 21 that
∀[q]∈QJT\\SKρ
sem,∀q∈[q]∼:q∈consJT\\SKsemiff[q]∈consJT\\SKρ
semtogether with
Definition 12, we can immediately conclude that R={(q,[q]∼)|q∈Q(JT\\SKsem)∆}
is also a bisimulation relation showing (JT\\SKsem)∆≃(JT\\SKρ
sem)∆. □
Lemma 23 Given specification automata S= (LocS, lS
0,ActS,ClkS, ES,InvS)
and T= (LocT, lT
0,ActT,ClkT, ET,InvT)where ActSo∩ActT
i=∅. Then
imerrJT\\SKρ
sem⊆imerrJTKsem\\JSKsemandimerrJTKsem\\JSKsem⊆inconsJT\\SKρ
sem.
ProofFirst, observe that the semantic of a TIOA and the reduced quotient do not
alter the action set. Therefore, it follows directly that JT\\SKρ
semandJTKsem\\JSKsem
have the same action set and partitioning into input and output actions, except
thatJT\\SKρ
semhas an additional input event inew, i.e., ActJT\\SKρ
sem∪ {inew}=
ActJTKsem\\JSKsem.
It follows from Lemma 20 that there is a bijective function frelating states from
JT\\SKρ
semandJTKsem\\JSKsemtogether. Therefore, we can effectively say that they
have the same state set (up to relabeling), i.e., QJT\\SKρ
sem=QJT\\SKsem. For brevity,
in the rest of this proof we write we write X=JT\\SKρ
sem,Y=JTKsem\\JSKsem,
Clk=ClkT⊎ClkS, and vSandvTto indicate the part of a valuation vof only the
clocks of SandT, respectively. Note that xnew/∈Clk, but xnew∈ClkX.
imerrJT\\SKρ
sem⊆imerrJTKsem\\JSKsem. From Definition 19 of the quotient for
TIOA and Definition 22 of the reduced ∼-quotient of JT\\SKsem, it follows that
states in {(le, v)∈QJT\\SKρ
sem|v(xnew) = 0 }= imerrJT\\SKρ
semare immediate
error states, as only states with location lehave an invariant other than T. From
Lemma 20, we have that ∀q∈f(q) =ewith e∈QJTKsem\\JSKsem. From Definition 18
of the quotient for TIOTS, it follows immediately that eis an error state, since only
d= 0time delay is possible without any transition labeled with output actions. Thus
e∈imerrJTKsem\\JSKsem. This shows that imerrJT\\SKρ
sem⊆imerrJTKsem\\JSKsem.

--- Page 69 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
Timed I/O Automata 69
imerrJTKsem\\JSKsem⊆inconsJT\\SKρ
sem. From Definition 18 of the quotient for
TIOTS, it follows that state eis an immediate error state and that states in
{(qT, qS)∈QJTKsem\\JSKsem|qTXd− −→JTKsem∧qSd− −→JSKsem}are potentially
error states, as these states have no outgoing delay transition, i.e., (qT, qS)Xd− −→
JTKsem\\JSKsem. Some states of this set are actual immediate error states if ∄o!∈
ActJTKsem\\JSKsemo s.t.(qT, qS)Xo!− −→JTKsem\\JSKsem. By Definition 18 we have that
ActJTKsem\\JSKsemo =ActTo\ActSo∪ActS
i\ActT
i. Consider the following two cases.
•o!∈ActTo\ActSo. Assume that (qT, qS)Xo!− −→JTKsem\\JSKsem, such that (qT, qS)
is actually an error state. It follows from Definition 3 of the semantic that
qJTKsem= (lT, vT)andvT+d̸|=Inv(lT); similarly we have that qJSKsem=
(lS, vS)andvS+d|=Inv(lS). Since TIOTSs are time additive, see Definition 1,
we can assume that for ∀d′< d:vT+d′̸|=Inv(lT)16. Thus vT+ 0̸|=Inv(lT),
which simplifies to vT̸|=Inv(lT). Again, using time additivity of TIOTS and
vS+d|=Inv(lS), we have that vS+ 0|=Inv(lS). Combining this information,
wehavethat v|=¬Inv(lT)∧Inv(lS),whereweusedthefactthat ClkT∩ClkS=
∅. Now, using Definition 19 of the quotient for TIOA and Definition 3 of the
semantics, we have that (lT, lS, v)inew− − −→JT\\SKsem(le, v). Since the target state
(le, v)is an immediate error state and inewis an input action, it follows the
controllable predecessor operator that (lT, lS, v)∈inconsJT\\SKρ
sem.
•o?∈ActS
i\ActT
i. Since Sis a specification, it is input-enabled, see Definition 4.
Therefore, qSo?− −→JSKsem. From the second rule of Definition 18 of the quotient
for TIOTS, it follows that (qT, qS)o!− −→JTKsem\\JSKsem. Therefore, in this case
state (qT, qS)is not an error state in JTKsem\\JSKsem.
□
Lemma 24 Given specification automata S= (LocS, lS
0,ActS,ClkS, ES,InvS)
andT= (LocT, lT
0,ActT,ClkT, ET,InvT)where ActSo∩ActT
i=∅. Denote X=
JT\\SKρ
semandY=JTKsem\\JSKsem, and let d∈R≥0andq1, q2∈QX∩QYwith
q1= (lT, lS, v)for some v∈(ClkT⊎ClkS→R≥0). Ifv̸|=¬Inv(lT)∧Inv(lS), then
q1d− −→Xq2if and only if q1d− −→Yq2.
ProofIt follows from Lemma 20 that there is a bijective function frelating states
from JT\\SKρ
semandJTKsem\\JSKsemtogether. Therefore, we can effectively say that
they have the same state set (up to relabeling), i.e., QJT\\SKρ
sem=QJT\\SKsem. For
brevity, in the rest of this proof we write we write Clk=ClkT⊎ClkS, and vSand
vTto indicate the part of a valuation vof only the clocks of SandT, respectively.
Note that xnew/∈Clk, but xnew∈ClkX.
From Definition 19 of the quotient for TIOA it follows that Inv((lT, lS)) =T.
Therefore, with Definition 3 of the semantic and Definition 22 of the ∼-reduced
quotient of JT\\SKsemit follows that q1d− −→Xq2is possible for any d∈R≥0and any
valuation v. Thus q1d− −→Yq2implies q1d− −→Xq2.
16In case there would be a d′< dsuch that vT+d′|=Inv(lT), we can first delay d′in
JTKsem\\JSKsemsuch that the reached state can no longer delay.

--- Page 70 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
70Timed I/O Automata
It remains to show the other way around. Observe from Definition 18 of the
quotient for TIOTS that there are two cases involving a delay (actually three, but we
do not consider the universal location in this lemma). So a delay is only possible from
q1if either qJTKsem
1d− −→JTKsemqJTKsem
2∧qJSKsem
1d− −→JSKsemqJSKsem
2orqJSKsem
1Xd− −→JSKsem.
So a delay is notpossible if qJTKsem
1Xd− −→JTKsem∧qJSKsem
1d− −→JSKsemqJSKsem
2. It follows
from Definition 3 of the semantic that qJTKsem
1= (lT, vT)andvT+d̸|=Inv(lT)or
∃d′∈R≥0, d′< d:vT+d′̸|=Inv(lT); similarly we have that qJSKsem
1= (lS, vS),
vS+d|=Inv(lS), and ∀d′∈R≥0, d′< d :vS+d′|=Inv(lS). Without loss of
generality, we can state that d′= 017, sovT+ 0̸|=Inv(lT), which simplifies to
vT̸|=Inv(lT). We have also that vS+ 0|=Inv(lS). Combining this information, we
have that v|=¬Inv(lT)∧Inv(lS), where we used the fact that ClkT∩ClkS=∅.
But this contradicts with the assumption in the lemma. Thus we can conclude that
ifv̸|=¬Inv(lT)∧Inv(lS), then q1d− −→Xq2implies q1d− −→Yq2. □
Lemma 25 Given specification automata S= (LocS, lS
0,ActS,ClkS, ES,InvS)and
T= (LocT, lT
0,ActT,ClkT, ET,InvT)where ActSo∩ActT
i=∅. Then consJT\\SKρ
sem=
consJTKsem\\JSKsem.
ProofWe will proof this by using the Θoperator. First, observe that the semantic
of a TIOA and the reduced quotient do not alter the action set. Therefore, it follows
directly that JT\\SKρ
semandJTKsem\\JSKsemhave the same action set and partition-
ing into input and output actions, except that JT\\SKρ
semhas an additional input
event inew, i.e., ActJT\\SKρ
sem∪ {inew}=ActJTKsem\\JSKsem.
It follows from Lemma 20 that there is a bijective function frelating states from
JT\\SKρ
semandJTKsem\\JSKsemtogether. Therefore, we can effectively say that they
have the same state set (up to relabeling), i.e., QJT\\SKρ
sem=QJT\\SKsem. For brevity,
in the rest of this proof we write we write X=JT\\SKρ
sem,Y=JTKsem\\JSKsem,
Clk=ClkT⊎ClkS, and vSandvTto indicate the part of a valuation vof only the
clocks of SandT, respectively. Note that xnew/∈Clk, but xnew∈ClkX.
We will show for any postfixed point PofΘthat ΘJT\\SKρ
sem(P)⊆
ΘJTKsem\\JSKsem(P)andΘJTKsem\\JSKsem(P)⊆ΘJT\\SKρ
sem(P).
(ΘX(P)⊆ΘY(P)) Consider a state qX∈P. Because Pis a postfixed point of
ΘX, it follows that qX∈ΘX(P). From the definition of Θ, it follows that qX∈
errX(P)andqX∈ {q1∈QX| ∀d≥0 : [∀q2∈QX:q1d− −→Xq2⇒q2∈P∧ ∀i?∈
ActX
i:∃q3∈P:q2i?− −→Xq3]∨[∃d′≤d∧ ∃q2, q3∈P∧ ∃o!∈ActXo:q1d′
− −→
Xq2∧q2o!− −→Xq3∧ ∀i?∈ActX
i:∃q4∈P:q2i?− −→Xq4]}. We will focus on the second
part of the definition of Θ.
Consider a d∈R≥0. Then the left-hand side or the right-hand side of the
disjunction is true (or both).
17In case there would be a d′>0such that vT+d′|=Inv(lT), we can first delay d′in
JTKsem\\JSKsemsuch that the reached state can no longer delay.

--- Page 71 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
Timed I/O Automata 71
•Assume the left-hand side is true, i.e., ∀q2∈QX:qXd− −→Xq2⇒q2∈P∧∀i?∈
ActX
i:∃q3∈P:q2i?− −→Xq3. Pick a q2∈QX. The implication is true when
qXXd− −→Xq2orqXd− −→Xq2∧q2∈P∧ ∀i?∈ActX
i:∃q3∈P:q2i?− −→Xq3.
– Consider the first case. This case is only applicable if qX= (le, v), since
in Definition 19 of the quotient for TIOA only location lehas an invariant
other than T. But then qX∈imerrX. This contradicts with the fact that
qX∈Θ(P)implies that qX∈errX(P). Thus this case is infeasible.
– Consider the second case. From Definition 3 of the semantic of a TIOA
and Definition 22 of the ∼-reduced quotient of JT\\SKsemit follows that
v1+d|=InvT\\S(l1)forqX= (l1, v1),q2= (l1, v1+d),l1∈LocT\\S,
andv1∈[Clk7→R≥0]. Since qX∈errX(P), we have that l1̸=le, thus
InvT\\S(l1) =T. Now, pick i?∈ActX
iandq3∈QXsuch that q2i?− −→Xq3
andq3∈P. From Definition 3 of the semantic of a TIOA it follows that
(l1, i?, φ, c, l 3)∈ET\\S,q3= (l3, v3),v1+d|=φ,v3=v1+d[r7→0]r∈c,
andv3|=InvT\\S(l3).
From Lemma 24 it follows that qXd− −→Yq2ifv̸|=¬Inv(lT)∧Inv(lS). In
case that v|=¬Inv(lT)∧Inv(lS), we have from Definitions 19, 3, and 22
thatqXinew− − −→Xe. But since e∈errX(P), it follows that e /∈P. Therefore,
this case is infeasible. Thus we have that qXd− −→Yq2inY.
Now, consider the ten cases from Definition 19 of quotient of TIOAs.
Remember that ActX
i=ActT\\S
i=ActT
i∪ActSo∪ {inew}.
1.i?∈ActS∩ActT,l1= (lT
1, lS
1),l3= (lT
3, lS
3),φ=φT∧
Inv(lT
3)[r7→0]r∈cT∧φS∧Inv(lS
1)∧Inv(lS
3)[r7→0]r∈cS,c=cT∪cS,
(lT
1, i, φT, cT, lT
3)∈ET, and (lS
1, i, φS, cS, lS
3)∈ES. Since v1+d|=φ,
it holds that v1+d|=φT,v1+d|=Inv(lT
3)[r7→0]r∈cT,v1+d|=φS,
v1+d|=Inv(lS
1), and v1+d|=Inv(lS
3)[r7→0]r∈cS. Because ClkS∩
ClkT=∅, it holds that vT
1+d|=φT,vT
1+d|=Inv(lT
3)[r7→0]r∈cT,
vS
1+d|=φS,vS
1+d|=Inv(lS
1), and vS
1+d|=Inv(lS
3)[r7→0]r∈cS.
Since v3=v1+d[r7→0]r∈c, it holds that vT
3=vT
1+d[r7→0]r∈cT
andvS
3=vS
1+d[r7→0]r∈cS. Therefore, vT
3+d|=Inv(lT
3)and
vS
3+d|=Inv(lS
3).
Combining all information about T, we have that
(lT
1, i, φT, cT, lT
2)∈ET,vT
1+d|=φT,vT
3=vT
1+d[r7→0]r∈cT,
and vT
3|=Inv(lT
3). Therefore, from Definition 3 it follows that
(lT
1, vT
1+d)i− −→ (lT
3, vT
3)inJTKsem. Combining all information
about S, we have that (lS
1, i, φS, cS, lS
2)∈ES,vS
1+d|=φS,
vS
3=vS
1+d[r7→0]r∈cS, and vS
3|=Inv(lS
3). Therefore, from
Definition 3 it follows that (lS
1, vS
1+d)i− −→(lS
3, vS
3)inJSKsem.
Now, from Definition 18 it follows that ((lT
1, vT
1+d),(lS
1, vS
1+d)) =
(lT
1, lS
1, v1+d) =qY
2i?− −→Y((lT
3, vT
3),(lS
3, vS
3)) = ( lT
3, lS
3, v3) =qY
3in
Y. Thus, we can simulate a transition in Y. Also, observe now that
q2=qY
2andq3=qY
3.
2.i?∈ActS\ActT,l1= (lT, lS
1),l3= (lT, lS
3),φ=φS∧Inv(lS
1)∧
Inv(lS
3)[r7→0]r∈cS,c=cS,lT∈LocT, and (lS
1, i!, φS, cS, lS
3)∈ES.
Since v1+d|=φandClkS∩ClkT=∅, it holds that vS
1+d|=φS,

--- Page 72 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
72Timed I/O Automata
vS
1+d|=Inv(lS
1), and vS
1+d|=Inv(lS
3)[r7→0]r∈cS. Since v3=
v1+d[r7→0]r∈candc=cS, it holds that vS
3=vS
1+d[r7→0]r∈cS,
vT
3=vT
1+d, and vS
3|=Inv(lS
3). Combining all information above
about S, it follows from Definition 3 that (lS
1, vS
1+d)i!− −→(lS
3, vS
3)in
JSKsem. From Definition 3 it also follows that (lT, vT
1+d)∈QJTKsem.
Therefore,followingDefinition18itfollowsthat ((lT, vT
1+d),(lS
1, vS
1+
d)) = ( lT, lS
1, v1+d) =qY
2i!− −→Y((lT, vT
1+d),(lS
3, vS
3)) = ( lT, lS
3, v3) =
qY
3inY. Thus, we can simulate a transition in Y. Also, observe now
thatq2=qY
2andq3=qY
3.
3.i!∈ActSo,l1= (lT, lS
1),l3=lu,φ=¬GS,c=∅,lT∈LocTand
GS=W{φS∧Inv(lS
3)[r7→0]r∈cS|(lS
1, a, φS, cS, lS
3)∈ES}. Since
v1+d|=φandClkS∩ClkT=∅, it holds that vS
1+d|=¬GS.
Therefore, vS
1+d̸|=GS, which indicates that ∀(lS
1, a, φS, cS, lS
3)∈
ES:vS
1+d̸|=φS∧Inv(lS
3)[r7→0]r∈cS. This means that vS
1+d̸|=φS
orvS
1+d̸|=Inv(lS
3)[r7→0]r∈cSor both, where the second option is
equivalent to vS
1+d[r7→0]r∈cS̸|=Inv(lS
3). Following Definition 3, we
canconcludethat (lS
1, vS
1+d)Xa− −→inJSKsem.FromDefinition3italso
follows that (lT, vT
1+d)∈QJTKsem. Now, following Definition 18, we
have transition ((lT, vT
1+d),(lS
1, vS
1+d)) = ( lT, lS
1, v1+d) =qY
2a− −→
Yu=qY
3inY. Thus we can simulate a transition in Y. Also, observe
now that q2=qY
2andq3=qY
3(where (lu, v3)is mapped into ubyf
from Lemma 20).
4.i?∈ActS∪ActT,l1= (lT, lS),l3=lu,φ=¬Inv(lS),c=∅,
lT∈LocT, and lS∈LocS.(Ifi? =inew, this case is trivial, see item
8 and 10 below.) Since v1+d|=φandClkS∩ClkT=∅, it holds that
vS
1+d|=¬Inv(lS). Therefore, vS
1+d̸|=Inv(lS). Since we delayed
into state qY
2, it must hold that the delay was according to rule 6 of
Definition18ofthequotientforTIOTS.Therefore, qY
2=u∈P.From
Definition 18 it also follows that u=qY
2i?− −→Yu=qY
3inY. Thus
we can simulate a transition in Y. Also, observe now that q3=qY
3
(where (lu, v3)is mapped into ubyffrom Lemma 20).
5.i!∈ActSo∩ActTo,l1= (lT
1, lS
1),l3=le,φ=φS∧InvlS
1∧Inv(lS
3)[r7→
0]r∈cS∧ ¬GT,c={xnew},(lS
1, a, φS, cS, lS
3)∈ES, and GT=W{φT∧Inv(lT
3)[r7→0]r∈cT|(lT
1, a, φT, cT, lT
3)∈ET}. Since the tar-
get location is the error location, it holds that q3/∈P. Thus this case
is not feasible.
6.a=inew,l1= (lT, lS),l3=le,φ=¬Inv(lT)∧Inv(lS),c={xnew},
lT∈LocT, and qS∈LocS. Since the target location is the error
location, it holds that q3/∈P. Thus this case is not feasible.
7.a=inew,l1=l3= (lT
1, lS
1),φ=Inv(lT)∨ ¬Inv(lS)andc=∅. First
note that inew/∈ActY. Now, since c=∅, it follows that v3=v1+d.
Therefore, q2=q3. Since q3∈P, it follows q2∈P. Since q2=qY
2, it
follows that qY
2∈P.
8.i?∈ActT\ActS,l1= (lT
1, lS),l3= (lT
3, lS),φ=φT∧Inv(lT
3)[r7→
0]r∈cT∧Inv(lS),c=cT,lS∈LocS, and (lT
1, i?, φT, cT, lT
3)∈ET.
Since v1+d|=φandClkS∩ClkT=∅, it holds that vT
1+d|=φT
andvT
1+d|=Inv(lT
3)[r7→0]r∈cT. Since v3=v1+d[r7→0]r∈cand

--- Page 73 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
Timed I/O Automata 73
c=cT, it holds that vT
3=vT
1+d[r7→0]r∈cT,vS
3=vS
1+d, and
vT
3|=Inv(lT
3). Combining all information above about T, it follows
from Definition 3 that (lT
1, vT
1+d)i?− −→ (lT
3, vT
3)inJTKsem. From
Definition 3 it also follows that (lS, vS
1+d)∈QJSKsem. Therefore,
following Definition 18 it follows that ((lT
1, vT
1+d),(lS, vS
1+d)) =
(lT
1, lS, v1+d) =qY
2i?− −→Y((lT
3, vT
3),(lS, vS
1+d)) = ( lT
3, lS, v3) =qY
3
inY. Thus, we can simulate a transition in Y. Also, observe now that
q2=qY
2andq3=qY
3.
9.i?∈ActS∪ActT,l1=lu,l3=lu,φ=T,c=∅. Since qX=qY, it
follows from Definition 18 of the quotient for TIOTS that Ydelayed
within state uas well, i.e., qX
2=qY
2. Therefore, using Definition 18
again, we have that there exists a transition qY
2=ui?− −→Yu=qY
3in
Y. Thus, we can simulate a transition in Y. Also, observe now that
q2=qY
2andq3=qY
3.
10.a∈ActS
i∪ActT
i,l1=le,l3=le,φ=xnew= 0,c=∅. Since the
target location is the error location, it holds that qX
3/∈P. Thus this
case is not feasible.
So, in all feasible cases we have that qY
2i?− →qY
3is a transition in Yif
i?̸=inew. When i? =inew, we have shown explicitly that qY
2∈P. As the
analysis above is independent of the particular i?,qY
2i?− →qY
3is a transition
inYfor all i?∈ActY
i. Furthermore, all feasible cases show that qY
2, qY
3∈P
directly, or because qY
2=q2orqY
3=q3.
So, in both cases we have that for qXd− −→YqY
2⇒qY
2∈P∧∀i?∈ActY
i:∃qY
3∈
P:qY
2i?− −→YqY
3. As q2is chosen arbitrarily, it holds for all q2∈QX=QY.
Therefore, the left-hand side is true.
•Assume the right-hand side is true, i.e., ∃d′≤d∧ ∃q2, q3∈P∧ ∃o!∈ActXo:
qXd′
− −→Xq2∧q2o!− −→Xq3∧ ∀i?∈ActX
i:∃q4∈P:q2i?− −→Xq4.
Following Definition 3 of the semantic of a TIOA and Definition 22 of the ∼-
reduced quotient of JT\\SKsem, we have that qX= (l1, v1),q2= (l1, v1+d′),
q3= (l3, v3),q4= (l4, v4),l1, l3, l4∈LocT\\S,v1, v3, v4∈[Clk7→R≥0],
v1+d′|=InvT\\S(l1),∃(l1, o!, φ, c, l 3)∈ET\\S,v1+d′|=φ,v3=v1+d′[r7→
0]r∈c, and v3|=InvT\\S(l3). First, focus on the delay transition.
From Lemma 24 it follows that qX d− −→Yq2ifv̸|=¬Inv(lT)∧Inv(lS). In
case that v|=¬Inv(lT)∧Inv(lS), we have from Definitions 19, 3, and 22 that
qXinew− − −→Xe.Butsince e∈errX(P),itfollowsthat e /∈P.Since inewisaninput
action, it must hold that q2/∈P(see analysis above in the proof). Therefore,
this case is infeasible. Thus we have that qXd− −→Yq2inY.
Now consider the output transition labeled with o!. Remember that ActT\\S
o =
ActTo\ActSo∪ActS
i\ActT
i. We have to consider the ten cases from Definition 19
of the quotient for TIOA. We can use the exact same argument as before (where
now rules 3 and 5 have become infeasible) to show that q2o!− →q3is a transition
inYfor all feasible cases. As the analysis is independent of the particular o!,
we can conclude that qXd′
− −→Yq2∧q2o!− −→Yq3with q2, q3∈P.

--- Page 74 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
74Timed I/O Automata
Finally, consider the input transitions labeled with i?. Using the same argument
as before, we can show that q2i?− →q4inXis also a transition in Y, and q4∈P.
Therefore, we can conclude that qXd′
− −→Yq2∧q2o!− −→Yq3∧ ∀i?∈ActY
i:∃q4∈
P:q2i?− −→Yq4with q2, q3, q4∈P. Thus, the right-hand side is true.
Thus, we have shown that when the left-hand side is true for qXinX, it is also
true for qXinY; and that when the right-hand side is true for qXinX, it is also
true for qXinY. Thus, qX∈ΘY(P). Since qX∈Pwas chosen arbitrarily, it holds
for all states in P. Once we choose Pto be the fixed-point of ΘX, we have that
ΘX(P)⊆ΘY(P).
(ΘY(P)⊆ΘX(P)) Consider a state qY∈P. Because Pis a postfixed point of
ΘY,itfollowsthat p∈ΘX(Y).Fromthedefinitionof Θ,itfollowsthat qY∈errY(P)
andqY∈ {q∈QY| ∀d≥0 : [∀q2∈QY:qd− −→Yq2⇒q2∈P∧ ∀i?∈ActY
i:∃q3∈
P:q2i?− −→Yq3]∨[∃d′≤d∧∃q2, q3∈P∧∃o!∈ActYo:qd′
− −→Yq2∧q2o!− −→Yq3∧∀i?∈
ActY
i:∃q4∈P:q2i?− −→Yq4]}. Now we focus on the second part of the definition of
Θ.
Consider a d∈R≥0. Then the left-hand side or the right-hand side of the
disjunction is true (or both).
•Assume the left-hand side is true, i.e., ∀q2∈QY:qYd− −→Yq2⇒q2∈P∧∀i?∈
ActY
i:∃q3∈P:q2i?− −→Yq3. Pick a q2∈QY. The implication is true when
qYXd− −→Yq2orqYd− −→Yq2∧q2∈P∧ ∀i?∈ActY
i:∃q3∈P:q2i?− −→Yq3.
– Consider the first case. From Lemma 24 it follows that qYXd− −→Yifv|=
¬Inv(lT)∧Inv(lS)with qY= (l1, v1). Now we have from Definitions 19, 3,
and22that qYinew− − −→Xe.Butsince e∈errY(P),itfollowsthat e /∈P.Since
inewisaninputaction,itmustholdthat (l1, v)/∈Pforanyvaluation v(see
analysis above in the proof). Therefore, qYXd− −→X. Thus the implication
also holds for q2inX.
– Consider the second case. From Definition 19 of the quotient for TIOA it
follows that Inv((lT, lS)) =T. Therefore, with Definition 3 of the semantic
and Definition 22 of the ∼-reduced quotient of JT\\SKsemit follows that
qYd− −→Xq2. Now, pick an i?∈ActY
iwith its corresponding q3according to
the implication. Remember that ActY
i=ActT
i∪ActSo. We have to consider
the nine cases from Definition 18.
1.i?∈ActS∩ActT,qY
2= (qJTKsem
2, qJSKsem
2),qY
3= (qJTKsem
3, qJSKsem
3),
qJTKsem
2i− −→JTKsemqJTKsem
3, and qJSKsem
2i− −→JSKsemqJSKsem
3. From
Definition 3 of semantic it follows that there exists an edge
(lT
2, i, φT, cT, lT
3)∈ETwith qJTKsem
2= (lT
2, vT
2),qJTKsem
3= (lT
3, vT
3),
lT
2, lT
3∈LocT,vT
2, vT
3∈[ClkT7→R≥0],vT
2|=φT,vT
3=vT
2[r7→
0]r∈cT, and vT
3|=InvT(lT
3). Similarly, it follows from the same defi-
nition that there exists an edge (lS
2, i, φS, cS, lS
3)∈ESwith qJSKsem
2=
(lS
2, vS
2),qJSKsem
3= (lS
3, vS
3),lS
2, lS
3∈LocS,vS
2, vS
3∈[ClkS7→R≥0],
vS
2|=φS,vS
3=vS
2[r7→0]r∈cS, and vS
3|=InvS(lS
3). Based on Defi-
nition 19 of the quotient for TIOA, we need to consider the following
two cases.

--- Page 75 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
Timed I/O Automata 75
∗vS
2|=Inv(lS
2). In this case, there exists an edge ((lT
2, lS
2), i, φT∧
Inv(lT
3)[r7→0]r∈cT∧φS∧Inv(lS
2)∧Inv(lS
3)[r7→0]r∈cS, cT∪
cS,(lT
3, lS
3))inT\\S. Let vi, i= 1,2be the valuations that com-
bines the one from Twith the one from S, i.e.∀r∈ClkT:
vi(r) =vT
i(r)and∀r∈ClkS:vi(r) =vS
i(r). Because ClkT∩
ClkS=∅, it holds that v2|=φT,v2|=φS, and vS
2|=Inv(lS
2),
thus v2|=φT∧φS∧Inv(lS
2);v3=v2[r7→0]r∈cT∪cS; and v3|=
InvT(lT
3)andv3|=InvS(lS
3), thus v3|=InvT(lT
3)∧InvS(lS
3).
From Definition 3 it now follows that ((lT
2, lS
2), v2)i− →
((lT
3, lS
3), v3)is a transition in JT\\SKsem. Because
ClkT∩ClkS=∅, we can rearrange the states into
((lT
2, lS
2), v2) = (( lT
2, vS
2),(lT
2, vS
2)) = qY
2and((lT
3, lS
3), v3) =
((lT
3, vT
3),(lS
3, vS
3)) = qY
3. Thus, qY
2a− →qY
3is a transition in
JT\\SKsem=Y. Also, observe now that qX
2=qY
2andqX
3=qY
3.
∗vS
2̸|=Inv(lS
2). In this case, state q2= (lT
2, vT
2, lS
2, vS
2)cannot
be reached by delaying into it, since vS
2̸|=Inv(lS
2)implies with
Definition 3 of the semantic that ∀qJSKsem∈QJSKsemwe have
qJSKsemXd− −→JSKsemqJSKsem
2. From Definition 18 we have that in
this case qYd− −→Yu, and qY
2̸=u. Thus this case is infeasible.
2.i!∈ActS\ActT,qY
2= (qJTKsem, qJSKsem
2),qY
3= (qJTKsem, qJSKsem
3),
qJTKsem∈QJTKsem, and qJSKsem
2i!− −→JSKsemqJSKsem
3. From Definition 3
of semantic it follows that there exists an edge (lS
2, i!, φS, cS, lS
3)∈ES
with qJSKsem
2= (lS
2, vS
2),qJSKsem
3= (lS
3, vS
3),lS
2, lS
3∈LocS,vS
2, vS
3∈
[ClkS7→R≥0],vS
2|=φS,vS
3=vS
2[r7→0]r∈cS, and vS
3|=InvS(lS
3).
From the same definition, it follows that qJTKsem= (lT, vT)for some
lT∈LocTandvT∈[ClkT7→R≥0]. Based on Definition 19 of the
quotient for TIOA, we need to consider the following two cases.
∗vS
2|=Inv(lS
2). In this case, there exists an edge ((lT, lS
2), a, φS∧
Inv(lS
2)∧Inv(lS
3)[r7→0]r∈cS, cS,(lT, lS
3))inT\\S. Let vi, i=
1,2be the valuations that combines the one from Twith the
one from S, i.e.∀r∈ClkT:vi(r) =vT
i(r)and∀r∈ClkS:
vi(r) =vS
i(r). Because ClkT∩ClkS=∅, it holds that v2|=φS,
andv2|=Inv(lS
2), thus v2|=φS∧Inv(lS
2);v3=v2[r7→0]r∈cS;
andv3|=InvS(lS
3).
Since Inv((lT, lS
3)) = Tby definition T\\S, we have
that v3|=Inv((lT, lS
3)). From Definition 3 it now fol-
lows that ((lT, lS
2), v2)i?− → ((lT, lS
3), v3)is a transition in
JT\\SKsem. Using Definition 22 of the reduced ∼-quotient of
JT\\SKsemand Lemma 20, we can rearrange the states into
((lT, lS
2), v2) = (( lT, vT
2),(lS
2, vS
2)) = qY
2and((lT, lS
3), v3) =
((lT, vT
3),(lS
3, vS
3)) = qY
3, and we can show that qY
2i?− →qY
3is a
transition in JT\\SKρ
sem=X. Also, observe now that qX
2=qY
2
andqX
3=qY
3.
∗vS
2̸|=Inv(lS
2). In this case, state q2= (lT
2, vT
2, lS
2, vS
2)cannot
be reached by delaying into it, since vS
2̸|=Inv(lS
2)implies with
Definition 3 of the semantic that ∀qJSKsem∈QJSKsemwe have

--- Page 76 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
76Timed I/O Automata
qJSKsemXd− −→JSKsemqJSKsem
2. From Definition 18 we have that in
this case qYd− −→Yu, and qY
2̸=u. Thus this case is infeasible.
3.i?∈ActT\ActS,qY
2= (qJTKsem
2, qJSKsem),qY
3= (qJTKsem
3, qJSKsem),
qJSKsem∈QJSKsem,and qJTKsem
2i?− −→JTKsemqJTKsem
3.FromDefinition3of
semantic it follows that there exists an edge (lT
2, i?, φT, cT, lT
3)∈ET
with qJTKsem
2= (lT
2, vT
2),qJTKsem
3= (lT
3, vT
3),lT
2, lT
3∈LocT,vT
2, vT
3∈
[ClkT7→R≥0],vT
2|=φT,vT
3=vT
2[r7→0]r∈cT, and vT
3|=InvT(lT
3).
From the same definition, it follows that qJSKsem= (lS, vS)for some
lS∈LocSandvS∈[ClkS7→R≥0]. Based on Definition 19 of the
quotient for TIOA, we need to consider the following two cases.
∗vS
2|=Inv(lS
2). In this case, there exists an edge ((lT
2, lS), i?, φT∧
Inv(lT
3)[r7→0]r∈cT∧Inv(lS), cT,(lT
3, lS))inT\\S. Let vi, i=
1,2be the valuations that combines the one from Twith the
one from S, i.e.∀r∈ClkT:vi(r) =vT
i(r)and∀r∈ClkS:
vi(r) =vS
i(r). Because ClkT∩ClkS=∅, it holds that v2|=φT,
andv2|=Inv(lS), thus v2|=φT∧Inv(lS);v3=v2[r7→0]r∈cT;
andv3|=InvT(lT
3).
Since Inv((lT
3, lS)) = Tby definition T\\S, we have
that v3|=Inv((lT
3, lS)). From Definition 3 it now fol-
lows that ((lT
2, lS), v2)i?− → ((lT
3, lS), v3)is a transition in
JT\\SKsem. Using Definition 22 of the reduced ∼-quotient of
JT\\SKsemand Lemma 20, we can rearrange the states into
((lT
2, lS), v2) = (( lT
2, vT
2),(lS, vS
2)) = qY
2and((lT
3, lS), v3) =
((lT
3, vT
3),(lS, vS
3)) = qY
3, and we can show that qY
2i?− →qY
3is a
transition in JT\\SKρ
sem=X. Also, observe now that qX
2=qY
2
andqX
3=qY
3.
∗vS
2̸|=Inv(lS
2). In this case, state q2= (lT
2, vT
2, lS
2, vS
2)cannot
be reached by delaying into it, since vS
2̸|=Inv(lS
2)implies with
Definition 3 of the semantic that ∀qJSKsem∈QJSKsemwe have
qJSKsemXd− −→JSKsemqJSKsem
2. From Definition 18 we have that in
this case qYd− −→Yu, and qY
2̸=u. Thus this case is infeasible.
4.d∈R≥0,qY
2= (qJTKsem
2, qJSKsem
2),qY
3= (qJTKsem
3, qJSKsem
3),
qJTKsem
2d− −→JTKsemqJTKsem
3, and qJSKsem
2d− −→JSKsemqJSKsem
3. This case is
infeasible, since i?̸=d.
5.i!∈ActSo,qY
2= (qJTKsem, qJSKsem),qY
3=u,qJTKsem∈QJTKsem,
andqJSKsemXi!− −→JSKsem. From Definition 3 of semantic it follows that
qJTKsem= (lT, vT)andqJSKsem= (lS, vS). There are two reasons why
qJSKsemXi!− −→JSKsem: there might be no edge in ESlabeled with action
i!from location lSor none of the edges labeled with i!from lSare
enabled. An edge (lS, i!, φ, c, lS′)∈ESis not enabled if vS̸|=φor
vS[r7→0]r∈c̸|=Inv(lS′)(or both), which can also be written as vS̸|=
φ∧Inv(lS′)[r7→0]r∈c. Looking at the third rule in Definition 19 of
the quotient for TIOA, we have that ((lT, lS), i?,¬GS,∅, lu)∈ET\\S
andvS̸|=GS, orvS|=¬GS. Because ClkT∩ClkS=∅, it holds that
v|=¬GS.

--- Page 77 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
Timed I/O Automata 77
Now, since Inv(lu) =Tand no clocks are reset, it holds that
v[r7→0]r∈∅=v|=Inv(lu). From Definition 3 it now follows
that ((lT, lS), v)i?− →(lu, v3)is a transition in JT\\SKsem. From
the state label renaming function ffrom Lemma 20 we have that
qX
3=f((lu, v3)) = u=qY
3andqX
2=qY
2. And from Definition 22
of the reduced ∼-quotient of JT\\SKsemwe have that qY
2i?− →qY
3is a
transition in JT\\SKρ
sem=X.
6.d∈R≥0,qY
2= (qJTKsem, qJSKsem),qY
3=u,qJTKsem∈QJTKsem, and
qJSKsemXd− −→JSKsem. This case is infeasible, since i?̸=d.
7.i!∈ActSo∩ActTo,qY
2= (qJTKsem, qJSKsem),qY
3=e,qJTKsemXa− −→JTKsem,
andqJSKsema− −→JSKsem. Since the target location is the error location,
it holds that q3/∈P. Thus this case is not feasible.
8.i∈ActT∪ActS∪R≥0,qY
2=u,qY
3=u. There are two cases how
qY
2=ucould have been reached by a delay.
∗qY=u. In this case, it follows directly from Definition 19 that
(lu, i?,T,∅, lu)∈ET\\S. Since any valuation satisfies a true
guard and by definition of T\\SthatInv(lu) =T, we have with
Definition 3 of semantic that (lu, v)i?− →(lu, v)is a transition
inJT\\SKsem. From the state label renaming function ffrom
Lemma20wehavethat qX
2=qY
2andqX
3=f((lu, v)) =u=qY
3.
And from Definition 22 of the reduced ∼-quotient of JT\\SKsem
we have that qY
2i?− →qY
3is a transition in JT\\SKρ
sem=X.
∗qY= (lT, vT, lS, vS)∈QYwith vS+d̸|=Inv(lS). In this case,
it follows from Definitions 19, 3, and 22 that qYd− →(lT, lS, v+d)
inX. Furthermore, it follows directly from Definition 19 that
((lT, lS), i?,¬Inv(lS),∅, lu)∈ET\\S. Since vS+d̸|=Inv(lS),
we have vS+d|=¬Inv(lS). By definition of T\\Swe have
that Inv(lu) =T, thus v+d[r7→0]r∈∅=v+d|=Inv(lu).
Now, with Definition 3 of semantic we it follows that (lu, v+
d)i?− →(lu, v+d)is a transition in JT\\SKsem. From the state
label renaming function ffrom Lemma 20 we have that qX
3=
f((lu, v+d)) =u=qY
3. And from Definition 22 of the reduced
∼-quotient of JT\\SKsemwe have that qY
2i?− →qY
3is a transition
inJT\\SKρ
sem=X.
9.a∈ActT
i∪ActSo,qY
2=e,qY
3=e. Since the target location is the
error location, it holds that q3/∈P. Thus this case is not feasible.
Thus,inallfeasiblecaseswecanshowthat q2i?− −→Yq3implies q2i?− −→Xq3.
Since we have chosen an arbitrarily i?∈ActY
i, it holds for all i?∈ActY
i.
It remains to be shown that q2inew− − −→Xq3andq3∈P, since inew/∈ActY
i.
We only have to consider five cases from Definition 19 that involve inew
(rule 4, 6, 7, 9, and 10). Using the same arguments as in these cases when
we were considering ΘX(P)⊆ΘY(P)we can conclude that q3∈Pin all
feasible cases for inew. Thus the implication also holds for q2inX.
Thus, in both cases the implication holds. Therefore, we can conclude that
qYd− −→Xq2⇒q2∈P∧ ∀i?∈ActX
i:∃q3∈P:q2i?− −→Xq3. As q2is chosen
arbitrarily, it holds for all q2∈QX=QY. Therefore, the left-hand side is true.

--- Page 78 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
78Timed I/O Automata
•Assume the right-hand side is true, i.e., ∃d′≤d∧ ∃q2, q3∈P∧ ∃o!∈ActYo:
qd′
− −→Yq2∧q2o!− −→Yq3∧ ∀i?∈ActY
i:∃q4∈P:q2i?− −→Yq4. First, focus on the
delay.FromDefinition19ofthequotientforTIOAitfollowsthat Inv((lT, lS)) =
T. Therefore, with Definition 3 of the semantic and Definition 22 of the ∼-
reduced quotient of JT\\SKsemit follows that qYd− −→Xq2.
Now, consider the output transition labeled with o!. Remember that ActYo=
ActXo=ActTo\ActSo∪ActS
i\ActT
i. We have to consider the nine cases from
Definition 18. We can use the exact same argument as before (where now rules
5 and 7 have become infeasible) to show that q2o!− −→Xq3is a transition in X
for all feasible cases. Since we have chosen an arbitrarily o!∈ActYo, it holds for
allo!∈ActYo. Therefore, we can conclude that qYd′
− −→Xq2∧q2o!− −→Xq3with
q2, q3∈P.
Finally, consider the input transitions labeled with i?. Using the same argument
as before, we can show that q2i?− →q4inYis also a transition in X, and q4∈P.
Therefore, we can conclude that qYd′
− −→Xq2∧q2o!− −→Xq3∧ ∀i?∈ActX
i:∃q4∈
P:q2i?− −→Xq4with q2, q3, q4∈P. Thus, the right-hand side is true.
Thus, we have shown that when the left-hand side is true for qYinY, it is also
true for qYinX; and that when the right-hand side is true for qYinY, it is also
true for qYinX. Thus, qY∈ΘX(P). Since qY∈Pwas chosen arbitrarily, it holds
for all states in P. Once we choose Pto be the fixed-point of ΘY, we have that
ΘY(P)⊆ΘX(P). □
Finally, we are ready to proof Theorem 11.
Lemma 11 Given specification automata S= (LocS, lS
0,ActS,ClkS, ES,InvS)and
T= (LocT, lT
0,ActT,ClkT, ET,InvT)where ActSo∩ActT
i=∅. Then (JT\\SKsem)∆≃
(JTKsem\\JSKsem)∆.
Proof of Theorem 11 First, observe that the semantic of a TIOA and adversarial
pruning do not alter the action set. Therefore, it follows directly that (JT\\SKsem)∆
and(JTKsem\\JSKsem)∆have the same action set and partitioning into input and
output actions, except that (JT\\SKsem)∆has an additional input event inew, i.e.,
ActJT\\SKsem∪ {inew}=ActJTKsem\\JSKsem.
Now, it follows from Lemma 22 that it suffice to show that (JT\\SKρ
sem)∆≃
(JTKsem\\JSKsem)∆. It follows from Lemma 20 that there is a bijective function f
relating states from JT\\SKρ
semandJTKsem\\JSKsemtogether. Therefore, we can effec-
tively say that they have the same state set (up to relabeling), i.e., QJT\\SKρ
sem=
QJT\\SKsem. For brevity, in the rest of this proof we write we write X=JT\\SKρ
sem,
Y=JTKsem\\JSKsem,Clk=ClkT⊎ClkS, and vSandvTto indicate the part of a
valuation vof only the clocks of SandT, respectively. Note that xnew/∈Clk, but
xnew∈ClkX.
LetA={q∈QX∆|q= ((lT, lS), v), v̸|=Inv(lS)}. Let R⊆QX∆×QY∆such
thatR={(q, u)|q∈A} ∪ {(qX, qY)∈QX∆\A×QY∆|qX=qY}. We will show
that Ris a bisimulation relation. First, observe that (q0, q0)∈R. Consider a state

--- Page 79 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
Timed I/O Automata 79
pair (qX
1, qY
1)∈R. We have to check whether the six cases from Definition 20 of
bisimulation hold.
•qX
1a− −→X∆qX
2,qX
2∈QX, and a∈ActX∩ActY. Combining Definitions 12, 18
and19itfollowsthat a∈ActS∪ActT.FromDefinition12ofadversarialpruning
we have that qX
1a− −→XqX
2andqX
1, qX
2∈consX. Following Definition 3 of the
semantic and Definition 22 of the reduced ∼-quotient of JT\\SKsem, it follows
that there exists an edge (l1, a, φ, c, l 2)∈ET\\Swith qX
1= (l1, v1),qX
2=
(l2, v2),l1, l2∈LocT\\S,v1, v2∈[Clk7→R≥0],v1|=φ,v2=v1[r7→0]r∈c,
andv2|=Inv(l2). Now, consider the ten cases from Definition 19 of quotient of
TIOAs. We have to show for feasible each case that we can simulate a transition
inY, that the involved states in Yare consistent, and that the resulting state
pair is again in the bisimulation relation R.
1.a∈ActS∩ActT,l1= (lT
1, lS
1),l2= (lT
2, lS
2),φ=φT∧Inv(lT
2)[r7→0]r∈cT∧
φS∧Inv(lS
1)∧Inv(lS
2)[r7→0]r∈cS,c=cT∪cS,(lT
1, a, φT, cT, lT
2)∈ET,
and(lS
1, a, φS, cS, lS
2)∈ES. Since v1|=φ, it holds that v1|=φT,v1|=
Inv(lT
2)[r7→0]r∈cT,v1|=φS,v1|=Inv(lS
1), and v1|=Inv(lS
2)[r7→0]r∈cS.
Because ClkS∩ClkT=∅, it holds that vT
1|=φT,vT
1|=Inv(lT
2)[r7→
0]r∈cT,vS
1|=φS,vS
1|=Inv(lS
1), and vS
1|=Inv(lS
2)[r7→0]r∈cS. Since v2=
v1[r7→0]r∈c, it holds that vT
2=vT
1[r7→0]r∈cTandvS
2=vS
1[r7→0]r∈cS.
Therefore, vT
2|=Inv(lT
2)andvS
2|=Inv(lS
2).
Combining all information about T, we have that (lT
1, a, φT, cT, lT
2)∈
ET,vT
1|=φT,vT
2=vT
1[r7→0]r∈cT, and vT
2|=Inv(lT
2). Therefore, from
Definition 3 it follows that (lT
1, vT
1)a− −→(lT
2, vT
2)inJTKsem. Combining
all information about S, we have that (lS
1, a, φS, cS, lS
2)∈ES,vS
1|=φS,
vS
2=vS
1[r7→0]r∈cS, and vS
2|=Inv(lS
2). Therefore, from Definition 3 it
follows that (lS
1, vS
1)a− −→(lS
2, vS
2)inJSKsem.
Now, from Definition 18 it follows that ((lT
1, vT
1),(lS
1, vS
1)) =
(lT
1, lS
1, v1) =qY
1a− −→Y((lT
2, vT
2),(lS
2, vS
2)) = ( lT
2, lS
2, v2) =qY
2inY. Thus,
we can simulate a transition in Y. Also, observe now that qX
1=qY
1and
qX
2=qY
2.
2.a∈ActS\ActT,l1= (lT, lS
1),l2= (lT, lS
2),φ=φS∧Inv(lS
1)∧Inv(lS
2)[r7→
0]r∈cS,c=cS,lT∈LocT, and (lS
1, a, φS, cS, lS
2)∈ES. Since v1|=φ
andClkS∩ClkT=∅, it holds that vS
1|=φS,vS
1|=Inv(lS
1), and vS
1|=
Inv(lS
2)[r7→0]r∈cS.Since v2=v1[r7→0]r∈candc=cS,itholdsthat vS
2=
vS
1[r7→0]r∈cS,vT
2=vT
1, and vS
2|=Inv(lS
2). Combining all information
above about S, it follows from Definition 3 that (lS
1, vS
1)a− −→(lS
2, vS
2)in
JSKsem.FromDefinition3italsofollowsthat (lT, vT
1)∈QJTKsem.Therefore,
following Definition 18 it follows that ((lT, vT
1),(lS
1, vS
1)) = ( lT, lS
1, v1) =
qY
1a− −→Y((lT, vT
1),(lS
2, vS
2)) = ( lT, lS
2, v2) =qY
2inY.Thus,wecansimulate
a transition in Y. Also, observe now that qX
1=qY
1andqX
2=qY
2.
3.a∈ActSo,l1= (lT, lS
1),l2=lu,φ=¬GS,c=∅,lT∈LocTand
GS=W{φS∧Inv(lS
2)[r7→0]r∈cS|(lS
1, a, φS, cS, lS
2)∈ES}. Since v1|=φ
andClkS∩ClkT=∅, it holds that vS
1|=¬GS. Therefore, vS
1̸|=GS, which
indicates that ∀(lS
1, a, φS, cS, lS
2)∈ES:vS
1̸|=φS∧Inv(lS
2)[r7→0]r∈cS.
This means that vS
1̸|=φSorvS
1̸|=Inv(lS
2)[r7→0]r∈cSor both, where the
second option is equivalent to vS
1[r7→0]r∈cS̸|=Inv(lS
2). Following Defini-
tion 3, we can conclude that (lS
1, vS
1)Xa− −→inJSKsem. From Definition 3 it

--- Page 80 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
80Timed I/O Automata
also follows that (lT, vT
1)∈QJTKsem. Now, following Definition 18, we have
transition ((lT, vT
1),(lS
1, vS
1)) = ( lT, lS
1, v1) =qY
1a− −→Yu=qY
2inY. Thus
we can simulate a transition in Y. Also, observe now that qX
1=qY
1and
qX
2=qY
2(where (lu, v2)is mapped into ubyffrom Lemma 20).
4.a∈ActS∪ActT,l1= (lT, lS),l2=lu,φ=¬Inv(lS),c=∅,lT∈LocT,and
lS∈LocS.Since v1|=φandClkS∩ClkT=∅,itholdsthat vS
1|=¬Inv(lS).
Therefore, vS
1̸|=Inv(lS). Since (qX
1, qY
1)∈RandvS
1̸|=Inv(lS), it follows
thatqY
1=u. From Definition 18 it follows that u=qY
1a− −→Yu=qY
2inY.
Thus we can simulate a transition in Y. Also, observe now that qX
2=qY
2
(where (lu, v2)is mapped into ubyffrom Lemma 20).
5.a∈ActSo∩ActTo,l1= (lT
1, lS
1),l2=le,φ=φS∧Inv(lS
1)∧Inv(lS
2)[r7→
0]r∈cS∧ ¬GT,c={xnew},(lS
1, a, φS, cS, lS
2)∈ES, and GT=W{φT∧
Inv(lT
2)[r7→0]r∈cT|(lT
1, a, φT, cT, lT
2)∈ET}. Since the target location is
the error location, it holds that qX
2/∈consX. Thus this case is not feasible.
6.a=inew,l1= (lT, lS),l2=le,φ=¬Inv(lT)∧Inv(lS),c={xnew},
lT∈LocT, and qS∈LocS. This case is infeasible, since inew/∈ActY, thus
inew/∈ActX∩ActY.
7.a=inew,l1=l2= (lT
1, lS
1),φ=Inv(lT)∨ ¬Inv(lS)andc=∅. This case
is infeasible, since inew/∈ActY, thus inew/∈ActX∩ActY.
8.a∈ActT\ActS,l1= (lT
1, lS),l2= (lT
2, lS),φ=φT∧Inv(lT
2)[r7→0]r∈cT∧
Inv(lS),c=cT,lS∈LocS, and (lT
1, a, φT, cT, lT
2)∈ET. Since v1|=φand
ClkS∩ClkT=∅, it holds that vT
1|=φTandvT
1|=Inv(lT
2)[r7→0]r∈cT.
Since v2=v1[r7→0]r∈candc=cT, it holds that vT
2=vT
1[r7→0]r∈cT,
vS
2=vS
1, and vT
2|=Inv(lT
2). Combining all information above about T,
it follows from Definition 3 that (lT
1, vT
1)a− −→(lT
2, vT
2)inJTKsem. From
Definition 3 it also follows that (lS, vS
1)∈QJSKsem. Therefore, following
Definition 18 it follows that ((lT
1, vT
1),(lS, vS
1)) = ( lT
1, lS, v1) =qY
1a− −→
Y((lT
2, vT
2),(lS, vS
1)) = ( lT
2, lS, v2) = qY
2inY. Thus, we can simulate a
transition in Y. Also, observe now that qX
1=qY
1andqX
2=qY
2.
9.a∈ActS∪ActT,l1=lu,l2=lu,φ=T,c=∅. From the construction
of the bisimulation relation R, we know that if qX
1=f((lu, v1)) = ufor
some valuation v1, then qY
1=u. From Definition 18 it follows directly that
there exists a transition qY
1=ua− −→Yu=qY
2inY. Thus, we can simulate
a transition in Y. Also, observe now that qX
1=qY
1andqX
2=qY
2.
10.a∈ActS
i∪ActT
i,l1=le,l2=le,φ=xnew= 0,c=∅. Since the source
and target locations are the error location, it holds that qX
1, qX
2/∈consX.
Thus this case is not feasible.
In all feasible cases we can show that qY
1=qX
1orqY
1=uandqY
2=qX
2. Since
qX
1, qX
2∈consXandu∈consYby construction of u, it follows from Lemma 25
thatqY
1, qY
2∈consY. Therefore, we can conclude that qY
1a− −→Y∆qY
2. And from
the construction of the bisimulation relation Rit follows that (qX
2, qY
2)∈R.
•qX
1a− −→X∆qX
2,qX
2∈QX, and a=inew. From Definition 12 of adversarial
pruning we have that qX
1a− −→XqX
2andqX
1, qX
2∈consX. Following Definition 3
of the semantic, it follows that there exists an edge (l1, a, φ, c, l 2)∈ET\\Swith
qX
1= (l1, v1),qX
2= (l2, v2),l1, l2∈LocT\\S,v1, v2∈[Clk7→R≥0],v1|=φ,
v2=v1[r7→0]r∈c, and v2|=Inv(l2). There are three cases from Definition 19
of the quotient for TIOA that apply here.

--- Page 81 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
Timed I/O Automata 81
–l1= (lT, lS),l2=le,φ=¬Inv(lT)∧Inv(lS),c={xnew},lT∈LocT,
andqS∈LocS. Since the target location is the error location, it holds that
qX
2/∈consX. Thus this case is not feasible.
–l1=l2= (lT
1, lS
1),φ=Inv(lT)∨ ¬Inv(lS)andc=∅. Since c=∅, it
follows that v2=v1. Therefore, qX
1=qX
2. Following the second case of
Definition 20 and knowing that (qX
1, qY
1)∈R, if follows immediately that
(qX
2, qY
1)∈R. Since qX
1∈consX, it follows from the construction of Rand
Lemma 25 that qy
1=qX
1and thus qY
1∈consY.
–l1=l2,l2=le,φ=xnew, and c=∅. Since the source and target locations
are the error location, it holds that qX
1, qX
2/∈consX. Thus this case is not
feasible.
•qY
1a− −→Y∆qY
2,qY
2∈QY, and a∈ActY∩ActX. Combining Definitions 12, 18
and 19 it follows that a∈ActS∪ActT. From Definition 12 of adversarial
pruning we have that qY
1a− −→YqY
2andqY
1, qY
2∈consY. Now, consider the nine
cases from Definition 18 of the quotient of TIOTS. We have to show for each
feasible case that we can simulate a transition in X, that the involved states in
Xare consistent, and that the resulting state pair is again in the bisimulation
relation R.
1.a∈ActS∩ActT,qY
1= (qJTKsem
1, qJSKsem
1),qY
2= (qJTKsem
2, qJSKsem
2),
qJTKsem
1a− −→JTKsemqJTKsem
2, and qJSKsem
1a− −→JSKsemqJSKsem
2. From Definition 3
of semantic it follows that there exists an edge (lT
1, a, φT, cT, lT
2)∈ET
with qJTKsem
1= (lT
1, vT
1),qJTKsem
2= (lT
2, vT
2),lT
1, lT
2∈LocT,vT
1, vT
2∈
[ClkT7→R≥0],vT
1|=φT,vT
2=vT
1[r7→0]r∈cT, and vT
2|=InvT(lT
2).
Similarly, it follows from the same definition that there exists an edge
(lS
1, a, φS, cS, lS
2)∈ESwith qJSKsem
1= (lS
1, vS
1),qJSKsem
2= (lS
2, vS
2),
lS
1, lS
2∈LocS,vS
1, vS
2∈[ClkS7→R≥0],vS
1|=φS,vS
2=vS
1[r7→0]r∈cS, and
vS
2|=InvS(lS
2). Based on Definition 19 of the quotient for TIOA, we need
to consider the following two cases.
–vS
1|=Inv(lS
1). In this case, there exists an edge ((lT
1, lS
1), a, φT∧
Inv(lT
2)[r7→0]r∈cT∧φS∧Inv(lS
1)∧Inv(lS
2)[r7→0]r∈cS, cT∪
cS,(lT
2, lS
2))inT\\S. Let vi, i= 1,2be the valuations that combines
the one from Twith the one from S, i.e.∀r∈ClkT:vi(r) =vT
i(r)
and∀r∈ClkS:vi(r) =vS
i(r). Because ClkT∩ClkS=∅, it holds that
v1|=φT,v1|=φS, and vS
1|=Inv(lS
1), thus v1|=φT∧φS∧Inv(lS
1);
v2=v1[r7→0]r∈cT∪cS; and v2|=InvT(lT
2)andv2|=InvS(lS
2), thus
v2|=InvT(lT
2)∧InvS(lS
2).
From Definition 3 it now follows that ((lT
1, lS
1), v1)a− →((lT
2, lS
2), v2)
is a transition in JT\\SKsem. Because ClkT∩ClkS=∅, we can rear-
range the states into ((lT
1, lS
1), v1) = (( lT
1, vS
1),(lT
1, vS
1)) = qY
1and
((lT
2, lS
2), v2) = (( lT
2, vT
2),(lS
2, vS
2)) = qY
2. Thus, qY
1a− →qY
2is a tran-
sition in JT\\SKsem=Y. Also, observe now that qX
1=qY
1and
qX
2=qY
2.
–vS
1̸|=Inv(lS
1). From the construction of R, it follows that
((lT
1, lS
1, v1), u)∈R, i.e. qY
1=u. This contradicts with the start of
this case that qY
2= (qJTKsem
2, qJSKsem
2). Thus this case is infeasible.
2.a∈ActS\ActT,qY
1= (qJTKsem, qJSKsem
1),qY
2= (qJTKsem, qJSKsem
2),
qJTKsem∈QJTKsem, and qJSKsem
1a− −→JSKsemqJSKsem
2. From Definition 3 of

--- Page 82 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
82Timed I/O Automata
semantic it follows that there exists an edge (lS
1, a, φS, cS, lS
2)∈ESwith
qJSKsem
1= (lS
1, vS
1),qJSKsem
2= (lS
2, vS
2),lS
1, lS
2∈LocS,vS
1, vS
2∈[ClkS7→
R≥0],vS
1|=φS,vS
2=vS
1[r7→0]r∈cS, and vS
2|=InvS(lS
2). From the
same definition, it follows that qJTKsem= (lT, vT)for some lT∈LocTand
vT∈[ClkT7→R≥0]. Based on Definition 19 of the quotient for TIOA, we
need to consider the following two cases.
–vS
1|=Inv(lS
1). In this case, there exists an edge ((lT, lS
1), a, φS∧
Inv(lS
1)∧Inv(lS
2)[r7→0]r∈cS, cS,(lT, lS
2))inT\\S. Let vi, i= 1,2be
the valuations that combines the one from Twith the one from S, i.e.
∀r∈ClkT:vi(r) =vT
i(r)and∀r∈ClkS:vi(r) =vS
i(r). Because
ClkT∩ClkS=∅, it holds that v1|=φS, and v1|=Inv(lS
1), thus
v1|=φS∧Inv(lS
1);v2=v1[r7→0]r∈cS; and v2|=InvS(lS
2).
Since Inv((lT, lS
2)) =Tby definition T\\S, we have that v2|=
Inv((lT, lS
2)). From Definition 3 it now follows that ((lT, lS
1), v1)a− →
((lT, lS
2), v2)is a transition in JT\\SKsem. Using Definition 22 of
the reduced ∼-quotient of JT\\SKsemand Lemma 20, we can rear-
range the states into ((lT, lS
1), v1) = (( lT, vT
1),(lS
1, vS
1)) = qY
1and
((lT, lS
2), v2) = (( lT, vT
2),(lS
2, vS
2)) = qY
2, and we can show that
qY
1a− →qY
2is a transition in JT\\SKρ
sem=X. Also, observe now that
qX
1=qY
1andqX
2=qY
2.
–vS
1̸|=Inv(lS
1). From the construction of R, it follows that
((lT
1, lS
1, v1), u)∈R, i.e. qY
1=u. This contradicts with the start of
this case that qY
2= (qJTKsem
2, qJSKsem
2). Thus this case is infeasible.
3.a∈ActT\ActS,qY
1= (qJTKsem
1, qJSKsem),qY
2= (qJTKsem
2, qJSKsem),
qJSKsem∈QJSKsem, and qJTKsem
1a− −→JTKsemqJTKsem
2. From Definition 3 of
semantic it follows that there exists an edge (lT
1, a, φT, cT, lT
2)∈ETwith
qJTKsem
1= (lT
1, vT
1),qJTKsem
2= (lT
2, vT
2),lT
1, lT
2∈LocT,vT
1, vT
2∈[ClkT7→
R≥0],vT
1|=φT,vT
2=vT
1[r7→0]r∈cT, and vT
2|=InvT(lT
2). From the
same definition, it follows that qJSKsem= (lS, vS)for some lS∈LocSand
vS∈[ClkS7→R≥0]. Based on Definition 19 of the quotient for TIOA, we
need to consider the following two cases.
–vS
1|=Inv(lS
1). In this case, there exists an edge ((lT
1, lS), a, φT∧
Inv(lT
2)[r7→0]r∈cT∧Inv(lS), cT,(lT
2, lS))inT\\S. Let vi, i= 1,2be
the valuations that combines the one from Twith the one from S, i.e.
∀r∈ClkT:vi(r) =vT
i(r)and∀r∈ClkS:vi(r) =vS
i(r). Because
ClkT∩ClkS=∅, it holds that v1|=φT, and v1|=Inv(lS), thus
v1|=φT∧Inv(lS);v2=v1[r7→0]r∈cT; and v2|=InvT(lT
2).
Since Inv((lT
2, lS)) =Tby definition T\\S, we have that v2|=
Inv((lT
2, lS)). From Definition 3 it now follows that ((lT
1, lS), v1)a− →
((lT
2, lS), v2)is a transition in JT\\SKsem. Using Definition 22 of
the reduced ∼-quotient of JT\\SKsemand Lemma 20, we can rear-
range the states into ((lT
1, lS), v1) = (( lT
1, vT
1),(lS, vS
1)) = qY
1and
((lT
2, lS), v2) = (( lT
2, vT
2),(lS, vS
2)) = qY
2, and we can show that
qY
1a− →qY
2is a transition in JT\\SKρ
sem=X. Also, observe now that
qX
1=qY
1andqX
2=qY
2.

--- Page 83 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
Timed I/O Automata 83
–vS
1̸|=Inv(lS
1). From the construction of R, it follows that
((lT
1, lS, v1), u)∈R, i.e. qY
1=u. This contradicts with the start of
this case that qY
2= (qJTKsem
2, qJSKsem
2). Thus this case is infeasible.
4.d∈R≥0,qY
1= (qJTKsem
1, qJSKsem
1),qY
2= (qJTKsem
2, qJSKsem
2),qJTKsem
1d− −→
JTKsemqJTKsem
2, and qJSKsem
1d− −→JSKsemqJSKsem
2. This case is infeasible, since
a̸=d(delays will be treated later in the proof).
5.a∈ActSo,qY
1= (qJTKsem, qJSKsem),qY
2=u,qJTKsem∈QJTKsem, and
qJSKsemXa− −→JSKsem. From Definition 3 of semantic it follows that qJTKsem=
(lT, vT)andqJSKsem= (lS, vS). There are two reasons why qJSKsemXa− −→
JSKsem: there might be no edge in ESlabeled with action afrom loca-
tionlSor none of the edges labeled with afrom lSare enabled. An edge
(lS, a, φ, c, lS′)∈ESis not enabled if vS̸|=φorvS[r7→0]r∈c̸|=Inv(lS′)
(or both), which can also be written as vS̸|=φ∧Inv(lS′)[r7→0]r∈c. Look-
ing at the third rule in Definition 19 of the quotient for TIOA, we have
that((lT, lS), a,¬GS,∅, lu)∈ET\\SandvS̸|=GS, orvS|=¬GS. Because
ClkT∩ClkS=∅, it holds that v|=¬GS.
Now, since Inv(lu) =Tand no clocks are reset, it holds that v[r7→
0]r∈∅=v|=Inv(lu). From Definition 3 it now follows that ((lT, lS), v)a− →
(lu, v2)isatransitionin JT\\SKsem.Fromthestatelabelrenamingfunction
ffrom Lemma 20 we have that qX
2=f((lu, v2)) =u=qY
2andqX
1=qY
1.
And from Definition 22 of the reduced ∼-quotient of JT\\SKsemwe have
thatqY
1a− →qY
2is a transition in JT\\SKρ
sem=X.
6.d∈R≥0,qY
1= (qJTKsem, qJSKsem),qY
2=u,qJTKsem∈QJTKsem, and
qJSKsemXd− −→JSKsem. Thiscaseisinfeasible,since a̸=d(delays willbetreated
later in the proof).
7.a∈ActSo∩ActTo,qY
1= (qJTKsem, qJSKsem),qY
2=e,qJTKsemXa− −→JTKsem, and
qJSKsema− −→JSKsem. Since the target state is the error state, it holds that
qY
2/∈consY. Thus this case is not feasible.
8.a∈ActT∪ActS∪R≥0,qY
1=u,qY
2=u. From the construction of Rit
follows that there are two options for qX
1for the pair (qX
1, u)∈R.
–qX
1=u(= (lu, v)). In this case, it follows directly from Definition 19
that(lu, a,T,∅, lu)∈ET\\S.Sinceanyvaluationsatisfiesatrueguard
and by definition of T\\SthatInv(lu) =T, we have with Definition 3
of semantic that (lu, v)a− →(lu, v)is a transition in JT\\SKsem. From
the state label renaming function ffrom Lemma 20 we have that
qX
1=qY
1andqX
2=f((lu, v)) = u=qY
2. And from Definition 22
of the reduced ∼-quotient of JT\\SKsemwe have that qY
1a− →qY
2is a
transition in JT\\SKρ
sem=X.
–qX
1= ((lT, lS), v)∈QX∆with v̸|=Inv(lS). In this case, it follows
directly from Definition 19 that ((lT, lS), a,¬Inv(lS),∅, lu)∈ET\\S.
Since v̸|=Inv(lS), we have v|=¬Inv(lS). By definition of T\\S
we have that Inv(lu) =T, thus v[r7→0]r∈∅=v|=Inv(lu). Now,
with Definition 3 of semantic we it follows that (lu, v)a− →(lu, v)is
a transition in JT\\SKsem. From the state label renaming function f
from Lemma 20 we have that qX
2=f((lu, v)) = u=qY
2. And from

--- Page 84 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
84Timed I/O Automata
Definition 22 of the reduced ∼-quotient of JT\\SKsemwe have that
qY
1a− →qY
2is a transition in JT\\SKρ
sem=X.
9.a∈ActT
i∪ActSo,qY
1=e,qY
2=e. Since the source and target states are
the error state, it holds that qY
1, qY
2/∈consY. Thus this case is not feasible.
In all feasible cases we can show that qX
1=qY
1orqX
1= ((lT, lS), v)with
v̸|=Inv(lS)andqX
2=qY
2. Since qY
1, qY
2∈consYand((lT, lS), v)∈QX∆by
constructionof R,itfollowsfromLemma25that qX
1, qX
2∈consX.Therefore,we
can conclude that qX
1a− −→X∆qX
2. And from the construction of the bisimulation
relation Rit follows that (qX
2, qY
2)∈R.
•qY
1a− −→Y∆qY
2,qY
2∈QY, and a∈ActY\ActX. This case is infeasible, as
ActX=ActY∪ {inew}.
•qX
1d− −→X∆qX
2,qX
2∈QX, and d∈R≥0. From Definition 12 of adversarial
pruning we have that qX
1d− −→XqX
2andqX
1, qX
2∈consX. Following Definition 3
of the semantic and Definition 22 of the reduced ∼-quotient of JT\\SKsem, it
follows that qX
1= (l1, v1)andqX
2= (l1, v1+d)with l1∈LocT\\S,v1∈
[Clk7→R≥0],v1+d|=Inv(l1), and ∀d′∈R≥0, d′< d:v1+d′|=Inv(l1).
Since qX
1∈consX, it follows that l1= (lT
1, lS
1)orl1=lu. Therefore, from
Definition 19 of the quotient for TIOA, we have that and Inv(l1) =T. Note
that we do not directly get information about whether the valuation v1+d
satisfy the location invariant in TorS.
Now consider first the simple case where l1=lu. From Definition 18 of the
quotient for TIOTS, it follows directly that ud− −→Yu. And note with Lemma 20
thatqX
2=f((lu, v1+d)) =u=qY
2and thus (qX
2, qY
2)∈R.
Now consider the case where l1= (lT
1, lS
1). We have to consider whether delays
are possible in JTKsemandJSKsemin order to show that Ycan follow the delay
and that the resulting state pair is in the bisimulation relation R.
–qJTKsem
1d− −→JTKsemqJTKsem
2andqJSKsem
1d− −→JSKsemqJSKsem
2. In this case, it
follows from Definition 3 of the semantic that qJTKsem
1= (lT
1, vT
1),∀c∈
ClkT:vT
1(c) =v1(c),qJTKsem
2= (lT
1, vT
1+d),vT
1+d|=Inv(lT
1), and∀d′∈
R≥0, d′< d:vT
1+d′|=Inv(lT
1); similarly we have that qJSKsem
1= (lS
1, vS
1),
∀c∈ClkS:vS
1(c) =v1(c),qJSKsem
2= (lS
1, vS
1+d),vS
1+d|=Inv(lS
1), and
∀d′∈R≥0, d′< d:vS
1+d′|=Inv(lS
1).FromDefinition18ofthequotientfor
TIOTS it follows that (qT
1, qS
1)d− −→Y(qT
2, qS
2). Observe with Lemma 20 that
qY
1= (qJTKsem
1, qJSKsem
1) = ( lT
1, lS
1, v1) =qX
1andqY
2= (qJTKsem
2, qJSKsem
2) =
(lT
1, lS
1, v2) =qX
2. Thus (qX
2, qY
2)∈R.
–qJTKsem
1d− −→JTKsemqJTKsem
2andqJSKsem
1Xd− −→JSKsem. In this case, it follows
from Definition 3 of the semantic that qJTKsem
1= (lT
1, vT
1),∀c∈ClkT:
vT
1(c) = v1(c),qJTKsem
2= (lT
1, vT
1+d),vT
1+d|=Inv(lT
1), and ∀d′∈
R≥0, d′< d:vT
1+d′|=Inv(lT
1); similarly we have that qJSKsem
1= (lS
1, vS
1),
∀c∈ClkS:vS
1(c) =v1(c), and∃d′∈R≥0, d′≤d:vS
1+d′̸|=Inv(lS
1). We
have to consider two cases.
∗vS
1|=Inv(lS
1). Since ClkT∩ClkS=∅,v1|=Inv(lS
1). Since (qX
1, qY
1)∈
RandvS
1|=Inv(lS
1), we have that qY
1=qX
1. From Definition 18 of

--- Page 85 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
Timed I/O Automata 85
the quotient for TIOTS, it follows that qY
1= ((lT
1, vT
1),(lS
1, vS
1))d− −→
Yu=qY
2. From the construction of Rwe have that qX
2∈A, thus we
can confirm that (qT
2, qY
2)∈R.
∗vS
1̸|=Inv(lS
1). Again, since ClkT∩ClkS=∅,v1̸|=Inv(lS
1). Since
(qX
1, qY
1)∈RandvS
1̸|=Inv(lS
1), we have that qX
1∈A, thus qY
1=u.
FromDefinition18ofthequotientforTIOTS,itfollowsthat ud− −→Yu.
And by construction of Rit follows that (qX
2, qY
2)∈R.
–qJTKsem
1Xd− −→JTKsemqJTKsem
2andqJSKsem
1Xd− −→JSKsem. This case follows the
exact same reasoning as the one above, since Definition 18 of the quotient
for TIOTS does not care whether a delay dis possible in JTKsemonce it is
not possible in JSKsem.
–qJTKsem
1Xd− −→JTKsemqJTKsem
2andqJSKsem
1d− −→JSKsemqJSKsem
2. In this case, it
follows directly from Definition 18 of the quotient for TIOTS that there is
no delay possible in Y, i.e., (qJTKsem
1, qJSKsem
1)Xd− −→JTKsem\\JSKsem. It follows
from Definition 3 of the semantic that qJTKsem
1= (lT
1, vT
1),∀c∈ClkT:
vT
1(c) =v1(c), and∃d′∈R≥0, d′≤d:vT
1+d′̸|=Inv(lT
1); similarly we have
that qJSKsem
1= (lS
1, vS
1),∀c∈ClkS:vS
1(c) =v1(c),qJSKsem
2= (lS
1, vS
1+d),
vS
1+d|=Inv(lS
1),and∀d′∈R≥0, d′< d:vS
1+d′|=Inv(lS
1).Withoutlossof
generality,wecanassumethat vT
1+0̸|=Inv(lT
1)18,whichsimplifiesto vT
1̸|=
Inv(lT
1).Combiningthisinformation,wehavethat v1|=¬Inv(lT
1)∧Inv(lS
1),
where we used the fact that ClkT∩ClkS=∅. Now, using Definition 19
of the quotient for TIOA and Definition 3 of the semantics, we have that
(lT
1, lS
1, v1)inew− − −→JT\\SKsem(le, v1). Since (le, v1)/∈consXandinewis an
input, it follows that (lT
1, lS
1, v1) =qX
1/∈consX. This contradicts with our
assumption that qX
1∈consX. Therefore, this case is infeasible.
In all feasible cases we can show that (qX
2, qY
2)∈R. Since qX
1, qX
2∈consXand
A⊆QX∆by construction of R, it follows from Lemma 25 that qY
1, qY
2∈consY.
Therefore, we can conclude that qY
1d− −→Y∆qY
2.
•qY
1d− −→Y∆qY
2,qY
2∈QY, and d∈R≥0. From Definition 12 of adversarial
pruning we have that qY
1d− −→YqY
2andqY
1, qY
2∈consY. Consider the following
three cases from Definition 18 of the quotient for TIOTS.
–qY
1= (qJTKsem
1, qJSKsem
1),qY
2= (qJTKsem
2, qJSKsem
2),qJTKsem
1d− −→JTKsemqJTKsem
2,
andqJSKsem
1d− −→JSKsemqJSKsem
2. From Definition 3 of the semantic it follows
that qJTKsem
1= (lT
1, vT
1),qJTKsem
2= (lT
1, vT
1+d),vT
1+d|=Inv(lT
1),∀d′∈
R≥0, d′< d:vT
1+d′|=Inv(lT
1),qJSKsem
1= (lS
1, vS
1),qJSKsem
2= (lS
1, vS
1+d),
vS
1+d|=Inv(lS
1), and∀d′∈R≥0, d′< d:vS
1+d′|=Inv(lS
1). Now, from
Definition 19 of the quotient for TIOA we have that Inv((lS
1, lT
1)) =T
inT\\S, thus using Definitions 3 and 22 we have qX
1= (lS
1, lT
1, v1)d− −→
X(lS
1, lT
1, v1+d) =qX
2. Observe that qX
1=qY
1andqX
2=qY
2, thus qX
2, qY
2∈
R.
18In case there would be a d′< dsuch that vT
1+d′|=Inv(lT
1), we can use the first case to
simulate the delay d′inY.

--- Page 86 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
86Timed I/O Automata
–qY
1= (qJTKsem
1, qJSKsem
1),qY
2=u, and qJSKsem
1Xd− −→JSKsemqJSKsem
2. From Def-
inition 3 of the semantic it follows that qJTKsem
1= (lT
1, vT
1),qJSKsem
1=
(lS
1, vS
1),and∃d′∈R≥0, d′≤d:vS
1+d′̸|=Inv(lS
1).Now,fromDefinition19
ofthequotientforTIOAwehavethat Inv((lS
1, lT
1)) =TinT\\S,thususing
Definitions 3 and 22 we have qX
1= (lS
1, lT
1, v1)d− −→X(lS
1, lT
1, v1+d) =qX
2.
We have to consider two cases to show that (qX
2, qY
2)∈R.
∗vS
1|=Inv(lS
1). In this case qX
1/∈AandqX
2∈A. Therefore, (qX
2, qY
2)∈
R.
∗vS
1̸|=Inv(lS
1). In this case qX
1, qX
2∈A. From the construction of R
it follows that any state from Acan only be related to state uin
Y, but qY
1= (qJTKsem
1, qJSKsem
1). This contradiction renders this case
infeasible.
–qY
1=uandqY
2=u. From Definition 19 of the quotient for TIOA, it
follows directly that (lu, v)d− −→X(lu, v)for any v∈[Clk7→R≥0]. And note
with Lemma 20 that qX
1=qX
2=f((lu, v)) = u=qY
1=qY
2and thus
(qX
2, qY
2)∈R.
In all feasible cases we can show that (qX
2, qY
2)∈R. Since qY
1, qY
2∈consYand
A⊆QX∆byconstructionof R,itfollowsfromLemma25that qX
1, qX
2∈consX.
Therefore, we can conclude that qX
1d− −→X∆qX
2.
We have show for state pair (qX
1, qY
1)∈Rthat all the six cases of bisimulation
hold. Since we have chosen an arbitrary state pair from R, it holds for all state pairs
inR. This concludes the proof. □
References
[1] Henzinger, T.A., Sifakis, J.: The embedded systems design challenge. In:
InternationalSymposiumonFormalMethods.LectureNotesinComputer
Science, vol. 4085, pp. 1–15. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg (2006). https:
//doi.org/10.1007/11813040_1
[2] Benveniste, A., Caillaud, B., Nickovic, D., Passerone, R., Raclet, J.-
B., Reinkemeier, P., Sangiovanni-Vincentelli, A., Damm, W., Henzinger,
T.A., Larsen, K.G.: Contracts for System Design vol. 12, pp. 124–400
(2018). https://doi.org/10.1561/1000000053
[3] de Alfaro, L., Henzinger, T.A.: Interface-based design. In: Engineer-
ing Theories of Software Intensive Systems. NATO Science Series, vol.
195, pp. 83–104. Springer, Dordrecht (2005). https://doi.org/10.1007/
1-4020-3532-2_3
[4] Chakabarti, A., de Alfaro, L., Henzinger, T.A., Stoelinga, M.I.A.:
Resource interfaces. In: Proceedings of the International Workshop on
Embedded Software. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 2855, pp.
117–133. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg (2003). https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-540-45212-6_9

--- Page 87 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
Timed I/O Automata 87
[5] de Alfaro, L., Henzinger, T.A.: Interface automata. In: Proceedings of the
Annual Symposium on Foundations of Software Engineering, pp. 109–
120. ACM Press, New York, NY (2001). https://doi.org/10.1145/503209.
503226
[6] Larsen, K.G.: Modal specifications. In: Automatic Verification Methods
for Finite State Systems. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 407, pp.
232–246. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg (1989). https://doi.org/10.1007/
3-540-52148-8_19
[7] Milner, R.: Communication and Concurrency. Prentice Hall, USA (1989)
[8] Lynch, N.A., Tuttle, M.R.: An introduction to input/output automata.
Technical Report MIT/LCS/TM-373, The MIT Press (1988)
[9] de Alfaro, L., Henzinger, T.A., Stoelinga, M.I.A.: Timed interfaces. In:
Proceedings of the International Workshop on Embedded Software. Lec-
ture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 2491, pp. 108–122. Springer, Berlin,
Heidelberg (2002). https://doi.org/10.1007/3-540-45828-X_9
[10] deAlfaro,L.,Faella,M.:Anacceleratedalgorithmfor3-colorparitygames
with an application to timed games. In: Proceedings of the International
Conference on Computer Aided Verification. Lecture Notes in Computer
Science,vol.4590,pp.108–120.Springer,Berlin,Heidelberg(2007).https:
//doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-73368-3_13
[11] Bertrand, N., Pinchinat, S., Raclet, J.-B.: Refinement and consistency of
timed modal specifications. In: Proceedings of the International Confer-
ence on Language and Automata Theory and Applications. Lecture Notes
in Computer Science, vol. 5457, pp. 152–163. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg
(2009). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-00982-2_13
[12] Bertrand, N., Legay, A., Pinchinat, S., Raclet, J.-B.: A compositional
approach on modal specifications for timed systems. In: Proceedings of
International Conference on Formal Engineering Methods. Lecture Notes
in Computer Science, vol. 5885, pp. 679–697. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg
(2009). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-10373-5_35
[13] Čer¯ ans, K., Godskesen, J.C., Larsen, K.G.: Timed modal specification
- theory and tools. In: Proceedings of the International Conference on
Computer Aided Verification. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol.
697, pp. 253–267. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg (1993). https://doi.org/10.
1007/3-540-56922-7_21
[14] Thiele, L., Wandeler, E., Stoimenov, N.: Real-time interfaces for compos-
ing real-time systems. In: Proceedings of the ACM & IEEE International
ConferenceonEmbeddedSoftware,pp.34–43.ACM,NewYork,NY,USA

--- Page 88 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
88Timed I/O Automata
(2006). https://doi.org/10.1145/1176887.1176894
[15] Lee, I., Leung, J.Y.-T., Son, S.H.: Handbook of Real-Time and Embed-
ded Systems. Chapman, New York, NY, USA (2007). https://doi.org/10.
1201/9781420011746
[16] Hampus, A., Nyberg, M.: Formally verifying decompositions of stochas-
tic specifications. In: Groote, J.F., Huisman, M. (eds.) Formal Meth-
ods for Industrial Critical Systems. Lecture Notes in Computer Sci-
ence, pp. 193–210. Springer, Cham (2022). https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-031-15008-1_13
[17] Kaynar, D.K., Lynch, N.A., Segala, R., Vaandrager, F.W.: Timed i/o
automata: A mathematical framework for modeling and analyzing real-
time systems. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Real-Time Systems Sympo-
sium, pp. 166–177 (2003). https://doi.org/10.1109/REAL.2003.1253264
[18] Bellman, R.: Dynamic Programming. Princeton University Press, New
Jersey (1957)
[19] Dill, D.L.: Timing assumptions and verification of finite-state concurrent
systems. In: Sifakis, J. (ed.) Automatic Verification Methods for Finite
State Systems, pp. 197–212. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg (1990). https:
//doi.org/10.1007/3-540-52148-8_17
[20] Behrmann, G., Bengtsson, J., David, A., Larsen, K.G., Pettersson, P.,
Yi, W.: UppaaL implementation secrets. In: Damm, W., Olderog, E.-
R. (eds.) Formal Techniques in Real-Time and Fault-Tolerant Systems.
LectureNotesinComputerScience,pp.3–22.Springer,Berlin,Heidelberg
(2002). https://doi.org/10.1007/3-540-45739-9_1
[21] Larsen, K.G., Nyman, U., Wasowski, A.: Modal I/O automata for
interface and product line theories. In: Proceedings of the European Sym-
posium on Programming. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 4421,
pp. 64–79. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg (2007). https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-540-71316-6_6
[22] Bulychev, P., Chatain, T., David, A., Larsen, K.G.: Efficient on-the-
fly algorithm for checking alternating timed simulation. In: Proceed-
ings of the International Conference on Formal Modeling and Analysis
of Timed Systems. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 5813,
pp. 73–87. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg (2009). https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-642-04368-0_8
[23] David, A., Larsen, K.G., Legay, A., Nyman, U., Wasowski, A.: Timed
i/o automata: a complete specification theory for real-time systems. In:

--- Page 89 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
Timed I/O Automata 89
Proceedings of the 13th ACM International Conference on Hybrid Sys-
tems: Computation and Control. HSCC ’10, pp. 91–100. Association for
Computing Machinery. https://doi.org/10.1145/1755952.1755967
[24] David,A.,Larsen,K.G.,Legay,A.,Nyman,U.,Wąsowski,A.:Methodolo-
gies for specification of real-time systems using timed i/o automata. In: de
Boer, F.S., Bonsangue, M.M., Hallerstede, S., Leuschel, M. (eds.) Formal
Methods for Components and Objects. Lecture Notes in Computer Sci-
ence,pp.290–310.Springer.https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-17071-3_
15
[25] David, A., Larsen, K.G., Legay, A., Nyman, U., Traonouez, L.-M.,
Wąsowski, A.: Real-time specifications. International Journal on Software
Tools for Technology Transfer 17(1), 17–45 (2015). https://doi.org/10.
1007/s10009-013-0286-x
[26] Henzinger, T.A., Manna, Z., Pnueli, A.: Timed transition systems. In:
REX Workshop. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 600, pp.
226–251. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg (1991). https://doi.org/10.1007/
BFb0031995
[27] Lynch, N.: I/O automata: A model for discrete event systems. In: Annual
Conference on Information Sciences and Systems, Princeton University,
Princeton, N.J., pp. 29–38 (1988)
[28] Garland, S.J., Lynch, N.A.: The IOA language and toolset: Support for
designing, analyzing, and building distributed systems. Technical report,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA (1998)
[29] Stark, E.W., Cleavland, R., Smolka, S.A.: A process-algebraic language
for probabilistic I/O automata. In: Proceedings of the International Con-
ference on Concurrency Theory. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol.
2761, pp. 193–207. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg (2003). https://doi.org/
10.1007/978-3-540-45187-7_13
[30] Vaandrager, F.W.: On the relationship between process algebra and
input/output automata. In: Proceedings Annual IEEE Symposium on
Logic in Computer Science, pp. 387–398 (1991). https://doi.org/10.1109/
LICS.1991.151662
[31] Nicola, R.D., Segala, R.: A process algebraic view of input/output
automata. Theoretical Computer Science 138(2), 391–423 (1995). https:
//doi.org/10.1016/0304-3975(95)92307-J
[32] de Alfaro, L., Faella, M., Henzinger, T.A., Majumdar, R., Stoelinga, M.:
The element of surprise in timed games. In: Amadio, R., Lugiez, D. (eds.)

--- Page 90 ---
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
90Timed I/O Automata
CONCUR 2003 - Concurrency Theory. Lecture Notes in Computer Sci-
ence, pp. 144–158. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg. https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-540-45187-7_9
[33] Alur, R., Henzinger, T.A., Kupferman, O., Vardi, M.: Alternating refine-
ment relations. In: Proceedings of the International Conference on
Concurrency Theory. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 1466, pp.
163–178. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg (1998). https://doi.org/10.1007/
BFb0055622
[34] Caillaud, B., Delahaye, B., Larsen, K.G., Legay, A., Peddersen, M.,
Wasowski, A.: Compositional design methodology with constraint markov
chains. Technical report, Hal-INRIA (2009)
[35] Cassez, F., David, A., Fleury, E., Larsen, K.G., Lime, D.: Efficient on-
the-fly algorithms for the analysis of timed games. In: Proceedings of the
International Conference on Concurrency Theory. Lecture Notes in Com-
puter Science, vol. 3653, pp. 66–80. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg (2005).
https://doi.org/10.1007/11539452_9
[36] de Alfaro, L., Henzinger, T.A., Majumdar, R.: Symbolic algorithms for
infinite-state games. In: Proceedings of the International Conference on
Concurrency Theory. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 2154, pp.
536–550. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg (2001). https://doi.org/10.1007/
3-540-44685-0_36
[37] Maler, O., Pnueli, A., Sifakis, J.: On the synthesis of discrete controllers
for timed systems (an extended abstract). In: Proceedings of the Annual
Symposium on Theoretical Aspects of Computer Science. Lecture Notes
in Computer Science, vol. 900, pp. 229–242. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg
(1995). https://doi.org/10.1007/3-540-59042-0_76
[38] Tarski, A.: A lattice-theoretical fixpoint theorem and its applications.
Pacific Journal of Mathematics 5, 285–309 (1955)
[39] Berendsen, J., Vaandrager, F.W.: Compositional abstraction in real-time
model checking. In: Proceedings of the International Conference on For-
malModelingandAnalysisofTimedSystems.LectureNotesinComputer
Science, vol. 5215, pp. 233–249. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg (2008).
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-85778-5_17
[40] Deng, Z., Liu, J.W.-s.: Scheduling real-time applications in an open envi-
ronment. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Real-Time Systems Symposium,
pp. 308–319 (1997). https://doi.org/10.1109/REAL.1997.641292
