--- Page 1 ---
Using Integer Clocks to Verify the Timing-SyncSensor Network ProtocolXiaowan Huang, Anu Singh, Scott A. SmolkaDepartment of Computer Science, Stony Brook UniversityAbstractWe use the UPPAALmodel checker for Timed Automata to verify the Timing-Sync time-synchron-ization protocol for sensor networks (TPSN). The TPSN protocol seeks to provide network-widesynchronization of the distributed clocks in a sensor network. Clock-synchronization algorithms forsensor networks such as TPSN must be able to perform arithmetic on clock values to calculate clockdrift and network propagation delays. They must be able to read the value of a local clock and as-sign it to another local clock. Such operations are not directly supported by the theory of TimedAutomata. To overcome this formal-modeling obstacle, we augment the UPPAALspeciﬁcation lan-guage with theinteger clockderived type. Integer clocks, which are essentially integer variables thatare periodically incremented by a global pulse generator, greatly facilitate the encoding of the opera-tions required to synchronize clocks as in the TPSN protocol. With this integer-clock-based model ofTPSN in hand, we use UPPAALto verify that the protocol achieves network-wide time synchroniza-tion and is devoid of deadlock. We also use the UPPAALTracer tool to illustrate how integer clockscan be used to capture clock drift and resynchronization during protocol execution.1 IntroductionAsensor networkis a collection of spatially distributed, autonomous sensing devices, used to perform acooperative task. Sensor networks are widely deployed for unmanaged and decentralized operations suchas military operations, surveillance, and health and environmental monitoring. Sensor networks differfrom traditional distributed networks in their stringent resource constraints, network dynamics, nodefailure, and intermittent communication links. Consequently, protocols executing on sensor networksmust be robust and reliable.Many high-level sensor applications depend on an underlyingtime-synchronizationmechanism,which provides network-wide time synchronization. Thus, protocols for time synchronization are criticalfor sensor applications, and ensuring their correctness isof the utmost importance.In this paper, we use the UPPAALmodel checker [7] for Timed Automata to verify the correctness oftheTiming-sync Protocol for Sensor Networks(TPSN) [3]. TPSN is a time-synchronization protocol thatperforms pair-wise node synchronization along the edges ofa network spanning tree. The local clock ofa designated node, typically therootof the spanning tree, serves as the reference clock. Nodes may leaveor join the network. TPSN enjoys several advantages over other sensor network time-synchronizationprotocols, including higher precision (less synchronization error) and the fact that its tree-based schememakes it well-suited for multi-hop networks.Clock-synchronization algorithms for sensor networks such as TPSN must be able to perform arith-metic on clock values in order to calculate clock drift and network propagation delays. They must be ableto read the value of a local clock and assign it to another local clock. Such operations are not directlysupported by the theory of Timed Automata. To overcome this formal-modeling obstacle, we augmentUPPAAL’s input language with theinteger clockderived type. Integer clocks, which are essentially inte-ger variables that are periodically incremented by a globalpulse generator, greatly facilitate the encodingof the operations required to synchronize clocks as in the TPSN protocol.With this integer-clock-based model of TPSN in hand, we use UPPAALto verify that the protocolachieves network-wide time synchronization and is devoid of deadlock. Our model additionally takesProceedings of NFM 2010, April 13-15, 2010, Washington D.C., USA.77

--- Page 2 ---
Using Integer Clocks to Verify the Timing-Sync Protocol X. Huang, A. Singh, S.A. Smolkainto account nodes entering and leaving the network. We alsouse the UPPAALTracer tool to illustratehow integer clocks can be used to capture clock drift and resynchronization during protocol execution.This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 offers a description of the TPSN [3] protocol. Sec-tion 3 introduces the concept of integer clocks. Section 4 presents our UPPAALmodel of TPSN; thecorresponding veriﬁcation and simulation results are given in Section 5. Section 6 considers relatedwork, while Section 7 contains our concluding remarks. An online version of the paper, available fromwww.cs.sunysb.edu/~sas/NFM10-full.pdf, contains an Appendix in which a complete UPPAALsource-code listing of our TPSN model can be found.2 The Timing-Sync Protocol for Sensor NetworksThe Timing-sync Protocol for Sensor Networks (TPSN) aims toprovide network-wide time synchroniza-tion in a sensor network [3]. The TPSN protocol ﬁrst establishes a hierarchical structure in the network.It then achieves pair-wise synchronization along the edgesof this structure such that all local clockssynchronize to a reference node. A more detailed discussionof the two phases of TPSN is now given.•Level-discovery phase:Level discovery occurs when the network is ﬁrst deployed. Inthis phase,a hierarchical structure (spanning tree) is established for the network in which every node is as-signed a level. A distinguished node called theroot nodeis assigned level 0 and initiates thisphase by broadcasting alevel
discoverypacket containing the identity and level of the sender. Theimmediate neighbors of the root node receive this packet andassign themselves a level one greaterthan the level they have received; i.e., level 1. They then broadcast a newlevel
discoverypacketcontaining their own level. This process is continued and eventually every node in the network isassigned a level. After been assigned a level, a node neglects any futurelevel
discoverypackets,thereby ensuring that no ﬂooding congestion takes place during this phase. Ultimately, a spanningtree is created with the root node at level 0.•Synchronization phase:The root node initiates the synchronization phase, during which pair-wise synchronizations involving a level-inode and a level-(i−1)node are carried out using hand-shake (two-way) message exchanges. Eventually, all nodes in the network synchronize their clocksto that of the root node. Consider the synchronization of level-inodeAand level-(i−1)nodeB;i.e.,Ais a child ofBin the spanning tree andAis attempting to synchronize its clock with thatofB. The following sequence of messages comprise the handshake:Aat local timeT1 sends asynchronization
pulsepacket containing its level number and the value ofT1 toB.Breceives thispacket at local timeT2, whereT2=T1+Δ+d,Δis the clock drift between the two nodes, anddis the propagation delay.B, at local timeT3, sends back anacknowledgmentpacket toAcon-taining its level number and the values ofT1,T2, andT3. Finally,Areceives theacknowledgmentpacket at local timeT4. Assuming that the clock drift and the propagation delay donot change inthis small span of time,Acan calculate the clock drift and propagation delay as:Δ=(T2−T1)−(T4−T3)
2;d=(T2−T1)+ (T4−T3)
2Knowing the drift,Acan correct its clock accordingly, so that it synchronizes toB.The root node initiates the synchronization phase by broadcasting atime
syncpacket. Upon receiv-ing this packet, nodes belonging to level 1 wait for a random amount of time before synchronizingwith the root node. Randomization is used to avoid contention at the MAC layer of the communi-cations protocol stack. Upon receiving an acknowledgment,these nodes adjust their clock to theProceedings of NFM 2010, April 13-15, 2010, Washington D.C., USA.78

--- Page 3 ---
Using Integer Clocks to Verify the Timing-Sync Protocol X. Huang, A. Singh, S.A. Smolkaroot node. Given that every level-2 node has at least one level-1 node in its neighbor set, nodes be-longing to level-2 overhear this message exchange, upon which they wait for some random amountof time before initiating the message exchange with level-1nodes. This use of randomization is toensure that level-1 nodes have been synchronized before level-2 nodes begin the synchronizationphase. A node sends back an acknowledgment to asynchronization
pulseonly after it has synchro-nized itself, thereby ensuring that multiple levels of synchronization do not occur in the network.This process is carried out throughout the network, and consequently every node is eventuallysynchronized to the root node.•Special Cases:The TPSN algorithm employs heuristics to handle special cases such as a sensornode joining an already established network, and nodes dying randomly.Node joining:This caseconcerns a sensor node that joins an already-established network (in particular, after the level-discovery phase is over) or that does not receive alevel
discoverypacket owing to MAC-layercollisions. In either case, it will not be assigned a level inthe spanning tree. Every node, however,needs to be a part of the spanning tree so that it can be synchronized with the root. When anew node is deployed, it waits for some time to be assigned a level, failing which it timeouts andbroadcasts alevel
requestmessage. Neighboring nodes reply to this request by sendingtheir ownlevel. On receiving the levels from its neighbors, the new node assigns itself a level one greaterthan the smallest level it has received, thereby joining thehierarchy. This is alocallevel-discoveryphase.Node dying:If a sensor node dies randomly, it may lead to a situation where a level-inode does not possess a level-(i−1)neighbor. In this case, the level-inode would not get backan acknowledgment to itssynchronization
pulsepacket, preventing it from synchronizing to theroot node. As part of collision handling, a node retransmitsitssynchronization
pulseafter somerandom amount of time. After a ﬁxed number of retransmissions of thesynchronization
pulse,a node assumes that it has lost all its neighbors on the upper level, and therefore broadcasts alevel
requestmessage to discover its level. Assuming the network is connected, the node will haveat least one neighboring node and will receive a reply, afterwhich The TPSN protocol considersfour retransmissions to be a heuristic for deciding non-availability of an upper-level neighbor.If the node that dies is the root node, level-1 nodes will not receive an acknowledgment and hencewill timeout. Instead of broadcasting alevel
requestpacket, they run a leader-election algorithmto determine a new root node. The newly elected root node re-initiates the level-discovery phase.3 Integer ClocksUPPAALis an integrated tool environment for the speciﬁcation, simulation and veriﬁcation of real-timesystems modeled as networks of Timed Automata extended withdata types. Primitive data types inUPPAALare: clock, bounded integer, boolean and channel. There arealso two compound types: arrayand structure, as in the C language. Timed Automata in UPPAALare described asprocesses. A processconsists of process parameters, local declarations, states and transitions. Process parameters turn intoprocess-private constants when a process is instantiated.Local declarations describe the set of privatevariables to which a running process has access. States correspond to the vertices of a Timed Automatonin graphical form. Transitions are the edges connecting these vertices. A transition speciﬁes a source anddestination state, a guard condition, a synchronization channel, and updates to private or global data. Asystemin UPPAALis the parallel composition of previously declared processes.Clocks in Timed AutomataA Timed Automaton is equipped with a ﬁnite set ofclocks: variableswhose valuation is a mapping from variable name to a time domain. In the theory of Timed-Automata [1],an assignment to a clockxis restricted tox→R+, whereR+is a non-negative real domain. That is, aProceedings of NFM 2010, April 13-15, 2010, Washington D.C., USA.79

--- Page 4 ---
Using Integer Clocks to Verify the Timing-Sync Protocol X. Huang, A. Singh, S.A. Smolkaclock can only be assigned a constant value.The UPPAALmodel checker, which is based on the theory of Timed Automata, places similar restric-tions on assignments to clocks. In UPPAAL, a clock is variable of typeclockand can only be assignedthe value of an integer expression. Moreover, UPPAALtransition guards are limited to conjunctions ofsimpleclock conditionsordata conditions, where a clock condition is a clock compared to an integerexpression or another clock, and a data condition is a comparison of two integer expressions.Integer ClocksMany real-time systems require more clock manipulations than UPPAALcan provide.For example, it is not possible in UPPAALto read a clock value and send it as a message along a channel,as is required, for example, in time-sychronization protocols such as TPSN and FTSP [8]. The reason isthat in UPPAAL, it is not possible to advance a clock by any arbitrary amount. Instead, when a transitionoccurs, the resulting clock values, with the exception of those that are reset to zero by the transition, areconstrained only to lie within the region (convex polyhedron) formed by the conjunction of the invariantassociated with the transition’s source state and the transition guard. One therefore cannot in generaldetermine the exact value of a clock when a particular transition occurs.To address this problem, we introduce the notion of aninteger clock, which is simply an integervariable whose value advances periodically. To enforce clock advance, we introduce a stand-aloneUni-versal Pulse Generator(UPG) process which, at every time unit, broadcasts a signal(pulse) to all otherUPPAALprocesses in the system. All processes having integer clocks are required to catch this signaland increment their respective integer clocks. Using this mechanism, we mimic discrete-time clocksthat possess an exact desired value when a Timed Automaton transition occurs. Because integer clocksare just integers whose valuations are under the control of the UPG, it is possible to directly performarithmetic operations on them as needed.To improve code readability, we introduce the new derived typeintclockas follows:typedef intintclock;and the UPG process is given by:broadcast chan time_pulse;process universal_pulse_generator(){ clock t;state S { t <= 1 };init S;transS -> S { guard t == 1; sync time_pulse!; assign t = 0; }; }Processes deploying integer clocks must, at every state, specify transitions (one per integer clock)that respond totime_pulseevents. For example, the following transition speciﬁes a perfect (zero-drift)integer clockx:S -> S { sync time_pulse?; assign x = x+1;}In the following example, processAsends out its current clock value to another processBafterwaiting a certain amount of time after initialization. Without using integer clocks,A’s clock cannot beread.chan AtoB;meta int msg;process A(){const int wait = 3;meta intclock x;state INIT, SENT;init INIT;transINIT -> INIT { sync time_pulse?; assign x = x+1; },/* time advance */SENT -> SENT { sync time_pulse?; assign x = x+1; }, /* time advance */INIT -> SENT { guard x >= wait; sync AtoB!; assign msg = x; };}Proceedings of NFM 2010, April 13-15, 2010, Washington D.C., USA.80

--- Page 5 ---
Using Integer Clocks to Verify the Timing-Sync Protocol X. Huang, A. Singh, S.A. SmolkaThe drawback of using integer clocks is an increase (albeit modest) in model complexity, through theaddition of one process (the UPG) and the corresponding time-advance transitions, one for every stateof every process. The additional code needed to implement integer clocks is straightforward, and can beseen as a small price to pay for the beneﬁts integer clocks bring to the speciﬁcation process.Time DriftTime-synchronization protocols such as TPSN are needed in sensor networks due to thephenomenon oftime drift: local clocks advancing at slightly different rates. Time drift can be modeledusing integer clocks by allowing a process to either ignore or double-count a UPG pulse event aftera certain number of pulses determined by thetime-drift rate(TDR). Integer clocks with time drift areused in Section 4 to model a sensor network containing nodes with a positive TDR (pulse events aredouble-counted periodically), a negative TDR (pulse events are ignored periodically), and a TDR ofzero (no time drift) for the root node. As we show in Section 5,the TPSN protocol achieves periodicnetwork-wide resynchronization with the root node.For example, an integer clock having a TDR of 5 means that its value is incremented by 2 every 5time units (and by 1 every other time unit). An integer clock having a TDR of -10 means that its valueremains unchanged every 10 time units. A TDR of 0 means that the integer clock strictly follows theUPPAALunit time-advance rate. The UPPAALcode for implementing integer clocks with TDR-basedtime drift appears in functionlocal_time_advance()of the TPSN speciﬁcation; see Appendix A inthe online version of the paper.4 Uppaal Model of TPSNIn this section, we use integer clocks to model TPSN in UPPAAL. In particular, we use integer clocks foreach node’s local time. We still, however, rely fundamentally on UPPAAL’s built-in clock type for othermodeling purposes, including, for example, the modeling ofmessage channel delays. We consider asensor network whose initial topology is a ring ofNnodes indexed from 0 toN−1. Each node thereforehas exactly two neighbors, and nodes are connected by communication channels. Node 0 is consideredto be the root node. Note that the choice of a ring for the initial topology is not essential. The TPSNprotocol constructs a spanning tree from the network topology, and the synchronization phase operatesover this spanning tree.Nodes and channels are modeled as UPPAALprocesses. A node process maintains information aboutits neighbors, level in the spanning tree, parent, and localclock. Nodes send and receive packets throughthe channels processes. We cannot simply use UPPAAL’s built-inchantype to model channels becausewe need to model the delay in the network, which is required inthe protocol. Upon sending or receivingpackets, a node switches its state and alter its data accordingly.A node process takes three parameters, its id and the id of itstwo neighbors, and is declared in UP-PAALas follows:process node(int[0,N-1] id, int[0,N-1] neighbor1, int[0,N-1] neighbor2)Channels also have ids. Channelkrepresents the communication media surrounding nodek, andtherefore is only accessible to nodekand its neighbors.Using Integer ClocksThe TPSN protocol involves clock-value reading (a parent node sends its localtime to a child node during the synchronization phase) and clock-value arithmetic (calculatingΔandd). We use integer clocks to model these operations. In a node process, we declare an integer clock as:meta intclock local_time;A node process has seven states. There are therefore seven time-advance transitions in its speciﬁca-tion; e.g.initial -> initial { sync time_pulse?; assign local_time = local_time+1; }Level-Discovery PhaseThree UPPAALstates are used to model the level-discovery phase:initial,discovered,discovered-neighbors. When the system starts, all nodes except the root enter theProceedings of NFM 2010, April 13-15, 2010, Washington D.C., USA.81

--- Page 6 ---
Using Integer Clocks to Verify the Timing-Sync Protocol X. Huang, A. Singh, S.A. Smolkainitialstate. The root goes directly to thediscoveredstate, which indicates that a node has ob-tained its level in the hierarchy (zero for the root). After acertain delay, the root initiates the level-discovery phase by broadcasting alevel_discoverymessage to its neighbors and then enters thediscovered-neighborsstate, means it has done the task to discover its neighbors’ level. A node intheinitialstate enters thediscoveredstate upon receiving alevel_discoverymessage, or sim-ply ignores this message if it is already indiscoveredordiscovered-neighborsstate. A node inthediscoveredstate waits for some delay and then emits alevel_discovery, changing its state todiscovered-neighbors. As described in Section 2, this procedure will occur all over the networkuntil eventually all nodes are in thediscovered-neighborsstate, indicating the entire network islevel-discovered.In our model, there are only two level-discovery transitions: frominitialtodiscoveredand fromdiscovered todiscovered-neighbors. Consider, for example, the former, which occurs upon receiptof alevel_discoverymessage:initial -> discovered {select i:int[0,N-1];guard level == UNDEF && neighbors[i];sync lev_recv[i]?;assign level = msg1[i]+1, parent = i;},If a node is not yet discovered (guard level == UNDEF) and thelevel_discoverymessage(through channellev_recv[i]) is sent by its neighbor (guard neighbor[i]), then it sets its levelto one greater than its neighbor’s level (msg1[i]+1); i.e. this neighbor becomes its parent.Synchronization PhaseWe consider statediscovered-neighborsto be the initial state of the syn-chronization phase, and introduce four additional states:sync-ready,sync-sent,sync-receivedandsynchronized. The root, which is the absolute standard of time, broadcastsatime_syncmes-sage to its neighbors, and then goes directly fromdiscovered-neighborstosynchronized. Thetime_syncmessage notiﬁes the root’s children that they can now synchronize with their parent. Theroot’s children then transit fromdiscovered-neighborstosync-ready(see Section 2). A node inthesync-readystate will send asynchronization_pulseto its parent and then entersync-sent.The parent, which must be already synchronized, goes fromsynchronizedtosync-received, whereit will remain for a certain amount of delay. When the delay isover, it returns to thesynchronizedstateand sends anacknowledgmentmessage to the child. The child then adjusts its local clock using theinformation carried in these messages and goes to thesynchronizedstate. All of these messages areactually broadcasted, which allows a child’s child to overhear thesynchronization_pulsemessageand turn itself intosync-ready. The state transition diagram for this phase is depicted in Figure 1.discovered- neighbors sync-ready sync-sent 
synchronized sync-received Figure 1: State Transition Diagram for the SynchronizationPhaseProceedings of NFM 2010, April 13-15, 2010, Washington D.C., USA.82

--- Page 7 ---
Using Integer Clocks to Verify the Timing-Sync Protocol X. Huang, A. Singh, S.A. SmolkaFor example, consider the transition a node makes fromsync-senttosynchronizedupon receiptof anacknowledgmentmessage:sync_sent -> synchronized {select i:int[0,N-1];guard id != ROOT_ID && i == parent;sync ack_recv[i]?;assign adjust_local_time();}This transition occurs if the node is not the root (guard id != ROOT_ID) and the incomingack-nowledgmentmessage is from its parent as determined during level-discovery (guard i==parent).The transition’s affect is to adjust the node’s local time (an integer clock) by calling functionad-just
local
time(), which simply calculates the time driftΔand addsΔtolocal_time.Time DriftTPSN addresses time drift in a sensor network by periodically performing resynchro-nization to ensure that each node’s local clock does not diverge too much from the root. Since we havemodeled local clocks using integer clocks, we cannot use arbitrary rational numbers for the TDR. Rather,we let the root advance its local clock at the pace of the UPG-generated pulse events and non-root nodeseither skip or double-count a pulse after every certain number of pulses determined by an integer TDR.Since the TDR is ﬁxed for each node, time drift appears linearin the long run. Figure 2 illustratesinteger-clock-based time drift in a 5-node sensor network having respective TDRs [0,−8,10,16,−10].
-15-10-5 0 5 10 15
 0 20 40 60 80 100relative clock compared with root
root clockTime Drift Simulationn0n1n2n3n4
Figure 2: Integer-clock-based Time DriftResynchronizationThe resynchronization phase is almost identical to the synchronization phase ex-cept that the root will periodically jump from thesynchronizedstate to thediscovered-neighborstate.As in the synchronization phase, the root will soon re-enterthesynchronizedstate and re-broadcasttime_sync. We also let nodes in thesynchronizedstate return to thesync-readystate on receiv-ingtime_syncorsynchronization_pulse. Thus, anothertime_syncmessage will trigger anotherround of the synchronization phase, which is precisely the intent of resynchronization. The primary issuehere is to set the resynchronization interval long enough toensure synchronization has ﬁrst completed.Proceedings of NFM 2010, April 13-15, 2010, Washington D.C., USA.83

--- Page 8 ---
Using Integer Clocks to Verify the Timing-Sync Protocol X. Huang, A. Singh, S.A. SmolkaSystemThe system-level speciﬁcation consists ofNnodes,Nchannels, and the UPG processes:n0 = node(0,1,2); n1 = node(1,0,3); n2 = node(2,0,4); n3 = node(3,1,4); n4 = node(4,2,3);c0 = channel(0); c1 = channel(1); c2 = channel(2); c3 = channel(3); c4 = channel(4);system n0, n1, n2, n3, n4, c0, c1, c2, c3, c4, universal_pulse_generator;The choice of node-process parameters reﬂects the initial ring topology we are considering for the sys-tem. The system deﬁnition can be easily scaled using the process-parameter mechanism, as long as onecarefully sets the neighbors of each node.5 Simulation and Veriﬁcation ResultsWe veriﬁed our model of the TPSN protocol given in Section 4, including the level-discovery, synchro-nization and periodic-resynchronization phases, using theUPPAALmodel checker. We regard the rootnode as the node with the ideal clock (zero time drift) and allother nodes have (distinct and ﬁxed) pos-itive and negative TDRs. Since nodes are initially unsynchronized, each node is given a different initialclock value. Our model is also parameterized by the minimum and maximum node-response delay (20and 40, respectively), channel delay (4), and minimum and maximum resynchronization interval (10 and20, respectively), for which we have provided appropriate values.Simulation ResultsWe used the UPPAALTRACERtool, and a resynchronization interval of 200 timeunits, to obtain simulation results for our model with periodic resynchronizations of the local clocks ofall nodes. Figure 3 is obtained by extracting the local clockvalues of all nodes from a random simulationtrace. This was accomplished by ﬁrst saving the history of states to a trace ﬁle and then using theexternal program UPPAALTRACERto convert the data in the trace ﬁle into to a readable form. Figure 2of Section 4 was obtained similarly.
-40-30-20-10 0 10 20 30 40
 0 100 200 300 400 500 600relative clock compared with root
root clockTime Driftn0n1n2n3n4
Figure 3: Integer Time Drift with a resynchronization interval of 200 time unitsIn Figure 3, plotting starts at time 30 since the root’s starting clock value is set to 30. Betweentime 30 and 100, the network executes the level-discovery phase. The synchronization phase takes placeProceedings of NFM 2010, April 13-15, 2010, Washington D.C., USA.84

--- Page 9 ---
Using Integer Clocks to Verify the Timing-Sync Protocol X. Huang, A. Singh, S.A. Smolkaapproximately between time 100 and 120. From there, all local clocks advance at their own rate, which,as can be seen, consists of four relative clocks each having adistinct TDR. At time 300, and then again attime 500, the system performs a resynchronization, which brings non-root local-clock values very closeto 0. Notice that different nodes get synchronized at different times. Nodes 1 and 2 are synchronized atthe same time because they are adjacent to the root. Nodes 3 and 4 are synchronized after them becauseof node response time and packet delay.Veriﬁcation ResultsWe used UPPAALto verify the following properties of our model. (Correctnessproperties can be speciﬁed in UPPAALusing a subset of the CTL temporal logic.)No Deadlock:A[]not deadlockAbsence of deadlock.Synchronized:A[](<>ni.state==synchronized)All nodes enter asynchronizedstate at least once. This implies that the level-discovery and syn-chronization phases are correctly implemented.Relative Time Bounded:A[]abs(ni.local
clock−n0.local
clock)<XA node’s local time relative to the root is bounded at all times(X=25), which implies correctrepeated resynchronization.Relative Time Close:A[](<>abs(ni.local
clock−n0.local
clock)<Y)A node’s relative time will always eventually get very closeto 0 (Y=5), another implication ofcorrect repeated resynchronization.We used UPPAALto perform model checking of these properties on networks havingN=3−5nodes. The corresponding veriﬁcation results (CPU time andmemory usage) are given in Table 1. In allcases, UPPAALreported that the four properties are true. (The second and fourth properties, which are“inﬁntiely often” properties, are veriﬁed only up to the time bound determined by the maximum UPPAALinteger value of 32,767.) All results are obtained on a LinuxPC with a 2GHz Intel Pentium CPU and2GB memory. UPPAAL’s default settings were used.
N
No Deadlock
Synchronized
Relative Time Bounded
Relative Time Close
3
0.61sec/21MB
2.06sec/24MB
0.62sec/21MB
2.11sec/24MB
4
6.5sec/22MB
68.0sec/31MB
6.7sec/22MB
70.2sec/31MB
5
6.1min/126MB
214.9min/181MB
6.3min/126MB
236.4min/181MB
Table 1: Veriﬁcation Results: Time and Memory Usage6 Related WorkIn [6], the FTSP ﬂooding-time synchronization protocol) for sensor networks has been veriﬁed usingthe SPIN model checker. Properties considered includesynchronization of all nodes to a common rootnode, andeventually, all nodes get synchronized, for networks consisting of 2-4 nodes. In [4], UPPAALhas been used to verify a time-synchronization protocol fora time-division-multiple-access (TDMA)communication model. The aim of this protocol is to ensure that the clocks of nearby (neighboring) nodesare synchronized. UPPAALhas also been used to demonstrate the correctness of the LMACmediumaccess control protocol for sensor networks [11], and the the minimum-cost forwarding (MCF) routingprotocol [12] for sensor networks [5].Proceedings of NFM 2010, April 13-15, 2010, Washington D.C., USA.85

--- Page 10 ---
Using Integer Clocks to Verify the Timing-Sync Protocol X. Huang, A. Singh, S.A. SmolkaTime-triggered systemsare distributed systems in which the nodes are independently-clocked butmaintain synchrony with one another. In [9], real-time veriﬁcation of time-triggered protocols has beenperformed using a combination of mechanical theorem proving, bounded model-checking and SMT(satisﬁability modulo theories) solving. Calendar automata, which use sparse-time constraints, are usedin [2] for the modeling and veriﬁcation of the fault-tolerant, real-time startup protocol used in the TimedTriggered Architecture [10].7 ConclusionsWe used the UPPAALmodel checker for Timed Automata to obtain a number of critical veriﬁcationresults for the TPSN time-synchronization protocol for sensor networks. Clock-synchronization algo-rithms for sensor networks such as TPSN must be able to perform arithmetic on clock values to calculateclock drift and network propagation delays. They must be able to read the value of a local clock andassign it to another local clock. The introduction of theinteger clock(with time drift) derived UPPAALtype greatly facilitated the encoding of these operations,as they are not directly supported by the theoryof Timed Automata. We also used the UPPAALTRACERtool to illustrate how integer clocks can be usedto capture clock drift and resynchronization during protocol execution.References[1] R. Alur and D. L. Dill. The theory of timed automata.TCS, 126(2), 1994.[2] B. Dutertre and M. Sorea. Modeling and veriﬁcation of a fault-tolerant real-time startup protocol usingcalendar automata. InIn FORMATS/FTRTFT, pages 199–214, 2004.[3] S. Ganeriwal, R. Kumar, and M. B. Srivastava. Timing-sync protocol for sensor networks. InProceedingsof the 1st international conference on Embedded networked sensor systems (SenSys), pages 138–149. ACM,2003.[4] F. Heidarian, J. Schmaltz, and F. W. Vaandrager. Analysis of a clock synchronization protocol for wirelesssensor networks. InFM, pages 516–531, 2009.[5] W. Henderson and S. Tron. Veriﬁcation of the minimum costforwarding protocol for wireless sensor net-works. InIEEE Conference on Emerging Technologies and Factory Automation, pages 194–201. IEEEComputer Society, 2006.[6] B. Kusy and S. Abdelwahed. FTSP protocol veriﬁcation using SPIN. Technical Report ISIS-06-704, Institutefor Software Integrated Systems, May 2006.[7] K. G. Larsen, P. Pettersson, and W. Yi. UPPAAL in a nutshell.International Journal on Software Tools forTechnology Transfer (STTT), 1(1-2):134–152, 1997.[8] M. Mar´ oti, B. Kusy, G. Simon, and A. L´ edeczi. The ﬂooding time synchronization protocol. InProceedingsof the 2nd International Conference on Embedded Networked Sensor Systems (SenSys), pages 39–49. ACM,2004.[9] L. Pike. Modeling time-triggered protocols and verifying their real-time schedules. InProceedings of FormalMethods in Computer Aided Design (FMCAD’07), pages 231–238. IEEE, 2007.[10] W. Steiner and M. Paulitsch. The transition from asynchronous to synchronous system operation: An ap-proach for distributed fault-tolerant systems. InProceedings of the 22nd International Conference on Dis-tributed Computing Systems (ICDCS’02), page 329. IEEE Computer Society, 2002.[11] L. van Hoesel and P. Havinga. A lightweight medium access protocol (LMAC) for wireless sensor networks:Reducing preamble transmissions and transceiver state switches. In1st International Workshop on NetworkedSensing Systems (INSS), pages 205–208, 2004.[12] F. Ye, A. Chen, S. Lu, L. Zhang, and F. Y . A. Chen. A scalable solution to minimum cost forwarding inlarge sensor networks. InIEEE 10th International Conference on Computer Communications and Networks,pages 304–309, 2001.Proceedings of NFM 2010, April 13-15, 2010, Washington D.C., USA.86
