--- Page 1 ---
Safe Failure Fraction Verification and
Optimization in Industrial Drive Systems
Imran Riaz Hasrat1, Eun-Young Kang1, and Christian Uldal Graulund2
1The Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller Institute, Software Engineering Department,
University of Southern Denmark (SDU), Odense, Denmark
{imrh,eyk}@mmmi.sdu.dk
2Danfoss Drives A/S, Ulsnaes 1, DK-6300 Gråsten, Denmark
christian.graulund@danfoss.com
Abstract. Safety and reliability are crucial in industrial drive systems,
where hazardous failures can have severe consequences. Detecting and
mitigating dangerous faults on time is challenging due to the stochastic
and unpredictable nature of fault occurrences, which can lead to lim-
ited diagnostic efficiency and compromise safety. This paper optimizes
the safety and diagnostic performance of a real-world industrial Basic
Drive Module (BDM) using uppaal stratego . We model the BDM’s
functional safety architecture with timed automata and formally ver-
ify its key functional and safety requirements through model checking to
eliminate unwanted behaviours. Considering the formally verified correct
model as a baseline, we leverage the tool’s reinforcement learning facil-
ity to optimize the safe failure fraction to the 90% threshold, improving
fault detection ability. The promising results highlight strong potential
for broader safety applications in industrial automation.
Keywords: Industrial drives systems ·Model checking ·Safety analysis
·Fault detection optimization.
1 Introduction
In the current fast-paced industrial world, industrial drive systems play a crucial
roleinautomatingprocessesindiverseindustrieslikeautomotive,aerospace,and
food and beverage [1]. In recent years, the demand for smooth automation and
precision has steadily increased making these systems the backbone of industrial
manufacturing for controlling speed, torque, and direction in the operations of
machines. Since the drives primarily control the operation of electric motors,
safety and reliability have become the top considerations for flawless and correct
operation. However, the complex architecture (involving power converters and
diagnostic means) of such drives poses challenges in achieving these goals.
Functional safety standards such as IEC 61508 and EN 61800-5-2 require
robust safety-related design techniques to be applied in industrial applications.
Safe Torque Off (STO) is an important concept in shielding motors against
faults—deactivating the motors to avoid situations that can lead to accidentsarXiv:2503.21965v1  [cs.SE]  27 Mar 2025

--- Page 2 ---
2 Hasrat et al.
and ensuring safety. This not only demands solid hardware design but also so-
phisticated diagnostic mechanisms to detect and react to failures in real-time.
Formal verification [6] is a powerful technique for ensuring the functional cor-
rectness of complex real-time industrial systems. The safe failure fraction (SFF)
metric is used to evaluate these systems’ ability to detect failures. However, the
randomness of fault occurrences makes optimizing SFF challenging, emphasizing
the need for advanced techniques. Advancements in artificial intelligence make
reinforcement learning (RL) [27] a strong candidate for optimization problems,
such as enhancing SFF. RL can improve fault detection mechanism and safety
by enabling systems to learn and adapt.
This paper aims to optimize SFF performance in an industrial BDM drive
through a real-world case study. To do so, we use an RL-enabled timed automata
(TA) based tool Uppaal Stratego [9], widely known for formal modelling, ver-
ification (using model checking), and optimization. In the first step, we construct
the model of the BDM architecture as a set of TAs. We selected TA as the formal
modelling technique due to their ability to represent complex systems with dis-
crete states and time-dependent behaviours, making them ideal for the BDM,
where timing and synchronization are critical. Next, we perform formal veri-
fication against the functional and safety properties of the BDM to ensure its
formal model is free from undesired behaviours and operates as intended. Formal
verification ensures that the optimization process gets a correct model. Given
the growing popularity of RL in solving optimization problems, we leverage the
RL (Q-learning) capabilities embedded in Uppaal Stratego to optimize the
SFF performance. The RL based optimization capabilities in Uppaal Strat-
egomake it well-suited for training the diagnostics of the BDM and enhancing
overall safety. The contributions of this study are as follows:
–Formal modelling of the BDM architecture in Uppaal Stratego , capturing
its functional behaviour, safety mechanisms, and timing constraints.
–Formally verifying the functional and safety properties of the BDM, includ-
ing core functionality and timing requirements, and ensuring the absence of
undesired behaviours.
–Optimizing the SFF to achieve the target safety levels using RL in Uppaal
Stratego .
2 Preliminaries
In this section, we provide an overview of reinforcement learning and Uppaal
Stratego , which serve as the essential background for this paper.
2.1 Reinforcement Learning
RL trains a machine how to behave by letting it interact with the environment.
It computes the state-action pair values and collects the scores of the actions
taken by the machine at different states. Q-learning [29] is an RL algorithm

--- Page 3 ---
Safety Verification and Optimization in Industrial Drive Systems 3
that uses the Bellman-optimal equation to calculate the state-action pair values
(called Q-values) by estimating the expected future reward for taking a specific
action in a given state. The Q-learning algorithm can be represented as follows:
Q∗(s, a) =Eh
R(s, a) +γmax
a′Q∗(s′, a′)i
Here, Q∗(s, a)is the expected cumulative reward for taking an action afrom
a state s, while Edenotes the expectation function over possible future states.
R(s, a)is the immediate reward received from the environment when perform-
ing an action afrom state s,γ∈[0,1]is the discount factor that adjusts the
weight/importance of future rewards, and max a′Q∗(s′, a′)is the maximum ex-
pected future reward achievable from the next state s′by taking action a′.
2.2 Uppaal Stratego
Uppaal Stratego [9] is an advanced extension of the Uppaal tool suite [21],
integrating traditional Uppaal capabilities with RL techniques to derive safe
and near-optimal strategies for Stochastic Hybrid Games (SHG) [8]. Uppaal
Stratego is useful to generate strategies that can be used to optimize various
performance metrics, such as minimizing cost or maximizing safety.
To synthesize optimal control strategies within a specified context, Strat-
egoincorporates RL algorithms like Q-learning. When applying Q-learning,
Stratego calculates Q-values by running sample runs, and these computed val-
ues are then used to improve the strategy. This iterative procedure is continually
revised until the performance converges. In the case of continuous state spaces,
Stratego employs an online partition refinement method to discretize the state
space [15]. This technique allows the tool to dynamically enhance its representa-
tion of the state space during exploration. Consequently, effective strategies can
be developed without requiring a comprehensive state analysis. For an in-depth
understanding of the tool’s rich formalism, refer to [5,9,21].
3 Case Study
The case study describes the functional safety (FS) architecture of an industrial
BDM provided by Danfoss [3]. The BDM is an electronic power converter com-
bined with its associated control system, positioned between an electric motor
and power supply. It converts the supplied DC power into a format suitable for
the smooth operation of the motor according to its design specifications.
The BDM is required to integrate the iSM3 (Safety Module), with an em-
phasis on implementing the SIL3 (Safety Integrity Level) STO function, along
with internal diagnostics. To ensure an adequate safety level, the diagnostics in
the iSM3 must achieve a SFF of at least 90% as the threshold. The overview of
the BDM is illustrated in Figure 1. The functional blocks i.e., pulse generator,
signal levelling and processing, switch, power processing and motor express the
core functionality of the BDM. On the other hand, the diagnostic block (DB),

--- Page 4 ---
4 Hasrat et al.
 
VSTOin
Switch (A)
Signal Levelling and      
Processing (B)Switch (B)STO_A
STO_BSTO Ch -A
D_STO_A
STO Ch -BDiagnostic Block
D_STO_BPower
Processing 
(A)
Power
Processing 
(B)Motor ACKAcknowledge
V_STO_BV_STO_A
VSTOinPulse Generator
(A)Signal Levelling and      
Processing (A)
Pulse Generator
(B)D_STO _ACT _A
D_STO _ACT _B
Fig.1: Overview of the functional safety architecture of the BDM
being a non-functional block, implements diagnostic capabilities without directly
contributing to the primary function of the BDM. We will now discuss the func-
tionality of each block in detail.
STO Channels: The BDM comprises two safety channels, STO Ch_A and
STO Ch_B, depicted in green and pink colours, respectively. Each channel con-
sists of three functional blocks identical to those in the other channel. The chan-
nelsoperateindependentlyandprovideredundancyandfaulttolerance,support-
ing high safety integrity levels. Both channels are responsible for implementing
theSTOfunction,whichpreventstheunintendedmotionofthemotor.Theinput
power is supplied to the channels through the STO_A and STO_B terminals.
Whenever the STO function is activated, it ensures the de-energization of STO
inputs which leads to removing the power supply to the motor, eliminating the
risk of hazardous situations.
Pulse Generator: The pulse generator converts DC power supplied from the
STO_A and STO_B terminals into a pulsating AC signal when the input volt-
age is within the normal operating range. Whenever STO is requested, the pulse
generator gets de-energized from the STO_A and STO_B terminals.
Signal Levelling and Processing (SLP): The implementation of STO in
drives is publicly known, with a limited number of available practical methods
detailed in an IFA report [4]. The general methods include main contactor cuts,
pulse blocking, and others. While publicly known, Danfoss does not disclose its
chosen method or the blocks involved. Instead, they are generalized as a single
block, “Signal Levelling and Processing.” The pulsating AC signal passes through
the SLP, enabling failure detection within its sub-blocks, before being converted
back to DC. The DC output then controls the opening and closing of the switch
based on the high/low value of the original signal.

--- Page 5 ---
Safety Verification and Optimization in Industrial Drive Systems 5
Switch: The switches supply power to “Power Processing” blocks. STO follows
the de-energize-to-trip principle, ensuring safety by opening the switches.
Power Processing: The motor stays operational when "Power Processing"
blocks receive continuous power. When the power supply is at logical low, the
blocksturnthemotoroff,ensuringasafestate.Conversely,whenhigh,theblocks
turn the motor on, allowing normal function.
Diagnostic Block (DB): DB continuously monitors channel blocks (through
D_STO_A and D_STO_B) to diagnose faults. When a fault is detected, DB
enforcesasafestatebytriggeringchannelswitches(usingD_STO_ACT_Aand
D_STO_ACT_B outputs) to cut power (V_STO_A and V_STO_B) to the
“Power Processing” blocks. Additionally, DB sends an acknowledgement signal
to the user interface, informing the operator that the motor is off and an STO
request is active. The operator must then inspect, resolve the fault, and confirm
the system is ready for operation again.
4 Methodology
Our methodological approach is divided into three phases: modelling, formal
verification, and SFF optimization.
1. Formal Modelling: In this phase, we formally represent the structural and
behavioural aspects of the BDM architecture in Uppaal Stratego . The struc-
tural mapping is performed by defining semantics of each DBM block as a sep-
arate TA, ensuring a one-to-one correspondence between architectural compo-
nents and their formal representations. Since the identical blocks in STO Ch_A
and Ch_B perform the same tasks, they are grouped together and formally
represented by a single TA with unique IDs. On the other hand, behavioural
mapping is performed by translating each block’s dynamics, interactions, and
synchronization mechanisms into formal semantics. This mapping approach is
inspired by the work presented in [16]. We now discuss the formalism and be-
haviour of single TA and the overall system.
A TA for any block is defined as a tuple A= (L, ℓ 0, C, D, Σ, T, I ). Here, Lis
the finite set of locations, and ℓ0∈L is the initial location. Crepresents real-
valued clocks, while Ddefines the data variables. Σ=Σc∪Σurepresents a finite
set of actions, where Σcare controllable and Σuare uncontrollable. Tis the set
of transitions/edges, where each transition is a tuple (ℓ, g, a, u, ℓ′), with ℓ,ℓ′∈L
as source and destination locations, g∈Guards( C, D) as a condition on clocks
or data variables, a∈Σrepresenting an internal action or synchronization with
other blocks, and u∈Updates( C, D) updating clocks or data variables. Finally,
Iassigns invariants to locations, enforcing timing constraints on staying there.
The complete model comprises several TAs, called a network of TAs. In
the BDM architecture, communication or information sharing between blocks is
represented by arrows (see Figure 1), while in the network of TAs, this happens
throughtransitionsusingsynchronizationchannelsorsharedvariables.Formally,
the network of TAs is defined as:
N= (A1, A2, . . . , A n, V, C h)

--- Page 6 ---
6 Hasrat et al.
where:
–Ai= (Li, l0i, Ci, Di, Σi, Ti, Ii)represents the TA for block i.
–Vis the set of shared variables (and global clocks).
–Chis the set of synchronization channels.
Operational Semantics of Network of TAs: Theexecutionprogressofthenetwork
at any given moment is defined by its global state s:
s= (l1, c1, d1, . . . , l n, cn, dn)
where (li, ci, di)represents the current location, clock valuations, and data vari-
ables of automaton Ai. The progress evolves through two types of transitions:
1. Time Delayed Transitions: Time progresses uniformly across all the TAs while
maintaining location invariants:
(l1, c1, d1, . . . , l n, cn, dn)t− →(l1, c1+t, d1, . . . , l n, cn+t, dn)
where t ≥0 and for each i, the condition ci+t|=Ii(li)must hold.
2. Discrete Transitions: A TA Aitransitions instantaneously when triggered by
synchronization with any other block or when allowed by a guard condition:
(l1, c1, d1, . . . , l i, ci, di, . . . , l n, cn, dn)a− →(l1, c1, d1, . . . , l′
i, c′
i, d′
i, . . . , l n, cn, dn)
if there exists a transition (li, g, a, u, l′
i)∈Eisuch that:
–g(ci, di)holds.
–ais either a synchronization event or an internal action permitted by Ii(li).
For synchronization to occur, another block Ajmust simultaneously execute
a complementary transition: a∈Σi∩Σj, ensuring coordinated execution.
–The update function umodifies clocks and data to c′
i, d′
i.
2. Formal Verification: In the second phase, we utilize Stratego’s verifica-
tion engine to formally verify the correctness of the constructed formal model
of the BDM against a set of functional and safety requirements formulated as
CTL [5] queries. For example, verifying motor deactivation upon fault detection
and the correct sequence of actions in different blocks to ensure correct and safe
operation under both normal and faulty conditions.
3. SFF Optimization: Once the formal verification step is complete, we opti-
mize DB performance to achieve a target SFF of 90% using the formally verified
correct model as a baseline. First, we define an objective function to set the op-
timization criteria. Then controllable and uncontrollable actions are introduced
to allow Stratego understand what actions can be controlled. The network of
TAs, with controllable and uncontrollable transitions, incorporating continuous
clocks and stochastic fault occurrences, collectively forms an SHG. The RL facil-
ity in Stratego needs to solve our SHG model to generate a winning strategy,
which can be defined through the function ρ→Σ′
c⊆Σc. As the strategy ap-
proach presented in this paper is memoryless, we express it as w:s→Σ′
c⊆Σc
where s=last(ρ)is the last state of ρ. Conceptually, wdirects the “system”
player to select controllable actions from the states that help to achieve the
desired objective.

--- Page 7 ---
Safety Verification and Optimization in Industrial Drive Systems 7
5 BDM Formal Modelling, Verification and SFF
Optimization using uppaal stratego
In this section, we describe the formal modelling of BDM, the verification of its
core functionality, and the optimization of SFF performance.
5.1 Modelling the Behaviour of the BDM as Timed Automata
As described in section 4, the formal translation of the overall BDM behaviour
forms a network of TAs, where each block in Figure 1 is represented by a sepa-
rate TA. In addition to BDM blocks, extra TAs are introduced to model the user
interface and fault generation functionality. Since most TAs represent straight-
forward functionalities described in section 3, we present only the complex and
interesting ones in Figure 2. To view the full model, please refer to [2].
In Figure 2, dotted lines represent controllable transitions, which are trig-
gered by the Stratego , while dashed lines represent uncontrollable transitions,
which occur automatically based on the system’s internal conditions or timing
constraints. Double circles represent initial locations, single circles represent reg-
ular locations, and locations marked with “C” are committed, while “U” denotes
urgent locations. Both committed and urgent locations are used for atomic tran-
sitions (no delay occurs), with committed locations having priority when enabled
simultaneously.
The first transition of the DiagnosticBlock can occur only once per minute,
triggered when the guard global _time == 1 is satisfied, representing that di-
agnostics are performed every minute (see Figure 2a). At this point, Diagnos-
ticBlock communicates with the one of the two Faultautomata (depicted in
Figure 2b) via the channel inspect. The Faulttemplate is responsible for gen-
erating faults in both STO Ch_A and STO Ch_B channels. Committed and
urgent locations ensure correct information flow. As the DiagnosticBlock is at
an urgent location and a Faultis at a committed location, the DiagnosticBlock
has to wait for all committed transitions in the Faultto complete. The urgent
location also ensures control returns to the DiagnosticBlock , not some regular
location of any other block. The system is free to select any channel randomly for
fault generation in any of its blocks. We modelled an equal probability (dashed
line transitions from a small circle before the Faultand NoFault locations) for
the system to encounter a fault or remain fault-free in each diagnostic inspection
cycle. If the system opts not to introduce a fault during a cycle, it transitions
back to the initial location via the NoFault location. Conversely, if a fault is
introduced, the system moves to the Faultlocation. From this location, the sys-
tem can introduce a fault in the pulse generator, switch, or SLP blocks (through
Pulse,Switch, orLevelProcess locations)—with equal probability. In the sub-
sequent transition, the fault count for the respective block is incremented, and
the overall faults record is updated through the update _failures() function.
Now, the second transition in the DiagnosticBlock gets enabled, triggering
the function diagnose() to check for new faults in the channels. If no faults

--- Page 8 ---
8 Hasrat et al.
 
(a) Diagnostic block model constructed in Stratego
 
(b) Fault model constructed in Stratego
Fig.2: Overview of the main blocks of the BDM modelled in Stratego
are found in the fault record, the guard fault==0 is validated, and the system
returns to the initial state after resetting global _timevariable. Conversely, if
faults are found in the fault record, the guard fault==1 is satisfied. During the
subsequent transition, the statement i:int[0,1]assigns a temporary variable
ia random value of 0 or 1, which is then used to update the variable found=i.
This approach represents the randomness in ability of DB to either detect or
miss faults. During SFF optimization, Stratego considers the whole system
as an SHG, carefully selecting random values that enhance SFF during strategy
learning.
The guard found == 0 indicates that the DB missed the fault, causing the
system to transition to the undetect location. In the subsequent transition,
global _timeand faultare reset, the undetected counter is incremented, and
the function calculate _coverage() updates the diagnostic coverage (DC). A
detailed description of DC is provided in Section 5.3.
On the other hand, when found==1 gets valid, the system reaches the detect
location, indicating fault detection. In the next transition, the counter detected
increments, and DB synchronizes with Switch(A) via the switch _off[0]chan-

--- Page 9 ---
Safety Verification and Optimization in Industrial Drive Systems 9
Query Result
1 Switch(0).Open - >PowerProcessing(0).Inactive Valid
2 Switch(0).Closed - >PowerProcessing(0).Active Valid
3 PowerProcessing(0).Active and PowerProcessing(1).Active- >Motor.On Valid
4 PowerProcessing(0).Inactive and PowerProcessing(1).Inactive - >Motor.Off Valid
5 DiagnosticBlock.Stopping - >Motor.Off Valid
6 E<>Initializer.STO and STOChannel.Active Invalid
7 E<>Initializer.STO and (PulseGenerator(0).Generate or PulseGenerator(1).Generate) Invalid
8 E<>Initializer.STO and (Switch(0).Closed or Switch(1).Closed) Invalid
9 E<>Initializer.STO and (PowerProcessing(0).Active or PowerProcessing(1).Active) Invalid
10 Initializer.STO and Motor.On Invalid
11A[]((DiagnosticBlock.Stopping and m _status == 1 and z >10 and z <=28) imply Motor.Off) Valid
12 A[]((Motor.Off and m _status == 0 and z >10 and z <=30) imply Initializer.STO) Valid
Table 1: Formal verification results
nel. Similarly, in the following transition, calculate _coverage() updates the
current SFF, and DB synchronizes with Switch(B) viaswitch _off[1].
After a 5ms startup delay, the switches close and send power output signals
toPowerProcessing(A) andPowerProcessing(B) . Then, after another 5ms delay,
both power processing blocks send a power-off signal to the motor. Once both
signals are received, the motor shuts down.
The next transition from Stopping occurs only when done==2 is satisfied,
with doneset by the motor upon shutdown. From Stopping , the DB sends
reporting! signal to the UserInterface andInitializer TAs, reporting the fault.
The operator cuts power to the STO channels through the Initializer , analyzes
and resolves the fault, and then reactivates the STO channels through the Ini-
tializerto resume normal operation.
5.2 Safety Formal Verification Evaluation
We incorporate startup delay requirements for BDM blocks as timing constraints
on locations during formal modelling. Now, we identify key functional and safety
requirements for BDM’s operation and formally verify them using CTL queries.
The formal verification results are shown in Table 1. Queries 1–6 evaluate
liveness in core functionalities, ensuring system progresses as intended. For in-
stance, queries 1 and 2 verify that an open switch deactivates the power pro-
cessing block, while a closed switch activates it. Query 3 checks that the motor
turns on when both power processing blocks are active, while query 4 ensures it
turns off when both are inactive. Query 5 confirms that if the DB reaches the
stopping location after detecting a fault, the motor eventually shuts down.
Queries 6–12 assess the system’s safety properties. Queries 6–10 verify that
unintended states are never reached simultaneously, confirming the absence of
undesired behaviours. None of these queries is satisfied, indicating no violations.
Query 6 ensures that when STO is activated, the STO channels deactivate and
stop sending signals to the pulse generator. Queries 7–10 confirm that in STO

--- Page 10 ---
10 Hasrat et al.
mode, switches remain open, power processing blocks stay inactive, and the
motor keeps turned off.
Query 11 verifies the timing budget requirement, ensuring the motor turns
off within 28ms after the DB detects a fault and initiates the STO call. Similarly,
Query 12 checks that STO activation occurs within 30ms of fault detection and
the STO call.
5.3 SFF Optimization Evaluation
Using the formally verified correct model as a base, we now focus on optimizing
SFF and evaluate BD’s ability to detect failures, as given in Equation 1:
SFF =λS+λDD
λS+λDD+λDU(1)
where λSrepresents the number of detected safe failures, λDDdenotes the num-
ber of detected dangerous failures, and λDUshows the number of undetected
dangerous failures. In this work, we disregard safe failures (i.e., λS= 0) in the
system as they do not compromise safety but cause spurious activation of the
STO. For example, a faulty voltage or temperature sensor may incorrectly detect
an over voltage or over temperature condition, causing the motor to stop.
Recall that the DB randomly determines whether to detect or miss faults.
Without an optimization mechanism, this randomness can compromise SFF,
leading to unpredictable system reliability. In order to achieve 90% SFF, the
DB must detect at least 90% of dangerous failures.
In order to provide Uppaal Stratego with an optimizing criteria, we for-
mulated a fitness function (F, see Equation 2). During the optimization process,
this formula enables Uppaal Stratego to compute F over the period t0totn,
given that the SFF and SFF targetare known throughout this duration.
F(t0, tn) =Ztn
t0abs(SFF(t)−SFF target )dt (2)
In Equation 2, SFF represents the current value at time t, updated each time
the DB detects or misses a fault, while SFF targetis the target value (90 in
this case). The objective is to minimize the absolute difference between them.
The fitness function applies higher penalties as the gap between them increases
and vice versa. In other words, when DB detects more faults, SFF improves
(see Equation 1), reducing the gap. We use the following query to synthesize a
strategy:
strategy S = minE(F)[ <=10000]{}- >{SFF}: <>t==10000 (3)
whichfindsastrategythatconstantlyobservescurrentSFFandtriestominimize
F over a period of 10,000 minutes. Since fault generation and their detection
mechanismoccureveryminute,aperiodof10,000minutesisconsideredsufficient
to generate adequate number of faults and evaluate how effectively the system

--- Page 11 ---
Safety Verification and Optimization in Industrial Drive Systems 11
0 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000
Time (minutes)050100150200250Number of FaultsDetected faults without strategy
Undetected faults without strategy
Detected faults with strategy
Undetected faults with strategy
Fig.3: Fault detection with and without a strategy
detects them. Once the strategy is synthesized, Equations 4-5 compute number
of detected and undetected faults under strategy S.
E[time <=10000; 1] (max:detected) under S (4)
E[time <=10000; 1] (max:undetected) under S (5)
Figure 3 presents experimental results for fault detection performed with
and without a strategy. Without a strategy, only 185 faults are detected, while
196 are missed, yielding unacceptable SFF of 48.5% (185
185+196). In contrast,
with the strategy, DB detects 290 faults, missing only 29, achieving an SFF of
90.9% (290
290+29) and meeting the threshold ( ≥90%). The results highlight how
Q-learning in Stratego helps DB to enhance its fault detection performance
and improve overall system reliability.
6 Related Work
Formal verification provides formal guarantees that a system functions correctly.
Paul et. al. [26] applied it to aerospace applications for addressing their safety-
critical issues through runtime evaluations. Similarly, Guha et. al. [11] applied it
toanairbagsystem,demonstratingitseffectiveroleinidentifyingandmitigating
safety-criticalfaults.Otherstudies[12,24,25]furthervalidateitsimpactonflight-
critical software, networks, and distributed protocols.
Studies [23,28] investigated how RL can optimize varying energy demands in
building controls, smart energy management for heating and hot water use, and
reduce CO 2emissions in smart homes. Uppaal Stratego (with an embedded
RL facility) has been used in various applications for strategy synthesis, perfor-
manceanalysis,andoptimalcontrol.Theseapplicationsincludeoptimalschedul-
ingforbatteries[19],swarmrobotics[7],stormwaterdetentionponds[18],traffic
lightcontrol[10],optimalrailwaysystemcontrol[17],adaptivecruisecontrol[22],
and domestic heating control [13,14,20].
The works mentioned above demonstrate how formal verification and RL op-
timization techniques are individually useful in addressing real-world problems.

--- Page 12 ---
12 Hasrat et al.
However, in our work, we demonstrate how formal verification and RL can be
effective in a combined framework setting.
7 Conclusion and Discussion
In this paper, we present a detailed approach to addressing the safety and di-
agnostic challenges of industrial drive systems through a combination of formal
modelling, verification, and optimization techniques. We demonstrate our ap-
proach using a real-world industrial case provided by Danfoss. A comprehensive
formal model of the system was developed, capturing its functional behaviour,
safety functions, and timing constraints, using Uppaal. Formal verification was
conducted to ensure that the system does not exhibit any undesirable behaviour
and satisfies key safety properties. Additionally, a reinforcement learning tech-
nique from Uppaal Stratego was applied to the diagnostic block to achieve
the target safe failure fraction and diagnostic coverage required by the design
specifications of iSM3 products. The optimization approach adopted in this work
not only seamlessly integrates with formal verification but also achieves a safe
failure fraction of over 90.9%.
To perform SFF optimization on a correct model, we first formally verify it.
However, the model’s continuous nature and large state space make verification
in Section 5.2 challenging. To address this, we introduce a deadlock condition by
applying a guard on the global clock, halting the BDM system at a specific time
point, thereby limiting the state space and making formal verification possible.
This condition is enforced on the STO output transition, cutting off DC power to
the pulse generator when the global time exceeds 100 minutes. BDM completes
one cycle per minute, making the 100-minute limit sufficient to capture system
behaviour and observe fault generation and detection. For SFF optimization, we
modify the formally verified model by removing the deadlock condition, marking
transitions as uncontrollable if they are not directly controlled by Stratego ,
and assigning random weights to locations without invariants or untriggered
transitions, as required by Stratego for the simulations to progress during
strategysynthesis.Inourcurrentexperiments,wesynthesizeastrategyfor10000
minutes, which provides a sufficient learning period for Stratego to achieve a
targeted SFF threshold of 90%. Although we introduced a deadlock condition
for verification, the SFF optimization problem is handled without it.
For future work, we aim to adopt some suitable techniques to address the
state space explosion problem. We also aim to extend our approach to optimize
the energy efficiency and operating costs of the BDM. Energy efficiency can be
improved by minimizing energy waste during low-load or idle conditions while
maintaining safety criteria. Operating costs can be reduced through predictive
maintenance,preventingfaultsbeforetheybecomeseriousandloweringlife-cycle
expenses.

--- Page 13 ---
Safety Verification and Optimization in Industrial Drive Systems 13
References
1. ADVANCEMENTS IN INDUSTRIAL DRIVE SYSTEMS
(2024). https://www.industryemea.com/market-overview/
84535-advancements-in-industrial-drive-systems
2. Complete Models for BDM Safety Optimization . https://github.com/
ImranRiazAAU/BDM_safety_optimization.git
3. Danfoss Drives (2024). https://www.danfoss.com/en/products/dds/
4. Safe drive controls with frequency inverter (2025). https://www.dguv.de/medien/
ifa/en/pub/rep/pdf/reports2018/report-gesamt.pdf
5. Behrmann, G., David, A., Larsen, K.G.: A tutorial on uppaal. Formal methods for
the design of real-time systems pp. 200–236 (2004)
6. Bjesse, P.: What is formal verification? SIGDA Newsl. 35(24), 1–es (Dec
2005). https://doi.org/10.1145/1113792.1113794 ,https://doi.org/10.1145/
1113792.1113794
7. Bøgh, S., Jensen, P.G., Kristjansen, M., Larsen, K.G., Nyman, U.: Distributed fleet
management in noisy environments via model-predictive control. In: Proceedings
of the International Conference on Automated Planning and Scheduling. vol. 32,
pp. 565–573 (2022)
8. Brorholt, A.H., Jensen, P.G., Larsen, K.G., Lorber, F., Schilling, C.: Shielded re-
inforcement learning for hybrid systems. In: Steffen, B. (ed.) Bridging the Gap
Between AI and Reality. pp. 33–54. Springer Nature Switzerland, Cham (2024)
9. David, A., Jensen, P.G., Larsen, K.G., Mikučionis, M., Taankvist, J.H.: Uppaal
stratego. In: Tools and Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis of Systems:
21st International Conference, TACAS 2015, Held as Part of the European Joint
Conferences on Theory and Practice of Software, ETAPS 2015, London, UK, April
11-18, 2015, Proceedings 21. pp. 206–211. Springer (2015)
10. Eriksen, A.B., Lahrmann, H., Larsen, K.G., Taankvist, J.H.: Controlling signalized
intersections using machine learning. Transportation Research Procedia 48, 987–
997 (2020)
11. Guha, S., Nag, A., Karmakar, R.: Formal verification of safety-critical systems:
A case-study in airbag system design. In: Abraham, A., Piuri, V., Gandhi, N.,
Siarry, P., Kaklauskas, A., Madureira, A. (eds.) Intelligent Systems Design and
Applications. pp. 107–116. Springer International Publishing, Cham (2021)
12. Hasrat, I.R., Atif, M., Naeem, M.: Formal specification and analysis of termination
detection by weight-throwing protocol. International Journal of Advanced Com-
puter Science and Applications 9(2018), https://api.semanticscholar.org/
CorpusID:13817289
13. Hasrat, I.R., Jensen, P.G., Larsen, K.G., Srba, J.: Modelling of hot water buffer
tank and mixing loop for an intelligent heat pump control. In: Cimatti, A., Titolo,
L. (eds.) Formal Methods for Industrial Critical Systems. pp. 113–130. Springer
Nature Switzerland, Cham (2023)
14. Hasrat, I.R., Jensen, P.G., Larsen, K.G., Srba, J.: A toolchain for domestic
heat-pump control using uppaal stratego. Science of Computer Program-
ming 230, 102987 (2023). https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
scico.2023.102987 ,https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0167642323000692
15. Jaeger, M., Jensen, P.G., Guldstrand Larsen, K., Legay, A., Sedwards, S.,
Taankvist, J.H.: Teaching stratego to play ball: Optimal synthesis for continuous

--- Page 14 ---
14 Hasrat et al.
space mdps. In: Chen, Y.F., Cheng, C.H., Esparza, J. (eds.) Automated Technol-
ogy for Verification and Analysis. pp. 81–97. Springer International Publishing,
Cham (2019)
16. Kang,E.Y.,Schobbens,P.Y.,Pettersson,P.:Verifyingfunctionalbehaviorsofauto-
motive products in east-adl2 using uppaal-port. In: Flammini, F., Bologna, S., Vit-
torini, V. (eds.) Computer Safety, Reliability, and Security. pp. 243–256. Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg (2011)
17. Karra, S.L., Larsen, K.G., Lorber, F., Srba, J.: Safe and time-optimal control for
railway games. In: Reliability, Safety, and Security of Railway Systems. Modelling,
Analysis, Verification, and Certification: Third International Conference, RSSRail
2019, Lille, France, June 4–6, 2019, Proceedings 3. pp. 106–122. Springer (2019)
18. Kim, E.H., Larsen, K.G., Goorden, M.A., Nielsen, T.D.: Compositional con-
trol synthesis for water management system. In: 2024 European Control Confer-
ence (ECC). pp. 3130–3137 (2024). https://doi.org/10.23919/ECC64448.2024.
10591152
19. Kristjansen, M., Kulkarni, A., Jensen, P.G., Teodorescu, R., Larsen, K.G.: Dual
balancingofsoc/sotinsmartbatteriesusingreinforcementlearninginuppaalstrat-
ego. In: IECON 2023-49th Annual Conference of the IEEE Industrial Electronics
Society. pp. 1–6. IEEE (2023)
20. Larsen, K.G., Mikučionis, M., Muñiz, M., Srba, J., Taankvist, J.H.: Online and
compositional learning of controllers with application to floor heating. In: Chechik,
M., Raskin, J.F. (eds.) Tools and Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis of
Systems. pp. 244–259. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg (2016)
21. Larsen, K.G., Pettersson, P., Yi, W.: Uppaal in a nutshell. International journal
on software tools for technology transfer 1, 134–152 (1997)
22. Larsen, K.G., Mikučionis, M., Taankvist, J.H.: Safe and optimal adaptive cruise
control. In: Correct System Design: Symposium in Honor of Ernst-Rüdiger Olderog
on the Occasion of His 60th Birthday, Oldenburg, Germany, September 8-9, 2015,
Proceedings. pp. 260–277. Springer (2015)
23. Lissa, P., Deane, C., Schukat, M., Seri, F., Keane, M., Barrett, E.: Deep
reinforcement learning for home energy management system control. Energy
and AI 3, 100043 (2021). https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
egyai.2020.100043 ,https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S2666546820300434
24. Miller, S., Anderson, E., Wagner, L., Whalen, M., Heimdahl, M.: Formal veri-
fication of flight critical software. In: AIAA Guidance, Navigation, and Control
Conference and Exhibit. p. 6431 (2005)
25. Naeem, M., Atif, M., Ali, A., Gulzar, M., Hasrat, I.R.: Modeling and analysis
of cooperative packet recovery protocol. IEEE Access 12, 56334–56343 (2024).
https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2024.3389738
26. Paul, S., Cruz, E., Dutta, A., Bhaumik, A., Blasch, E., Agha, G., Patterson,
S., Kopsaftopoulos, F., Varela, C.: Formal verification of safety-critical aerospace
systems. IEEE Aerospace and Electronic Systems Magazine 38(5), 72–88 (2023).
https://doi.org/10.1109/MAES.2023.3238378
27. Sutton, R.S., Barto, A.G.: Reinforcement learning: An introduction. MIT press
(2018)
28. Wang, Z., Hong, T.: Reinforcement learning for building controls: The op-
portunities and challenges. Applied Energy 269, 115036 (2020). https:
//doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2020.115036 ,https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0306261920305481

--- Page 15 ---
Safety Verification and Optimization in Industrial Drive Systems 15
29. Watkins, C.J., Dayan, P.: Q-learning. Machine learning 8, 279–292 (1992)
