--- Page 1 ---
Formal Analysis of Non-functional Properties for a
Cooperative Automotive System
Eun-Young Kang12, Li Huang2and Dongrui Mu2
1PReCISE Research Centre, University of Namur, Belgium
2School of Data and Computer Science,
Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
eykang@fundp.ac.be
fhuangl223, mudrg@mail2.sysu.edu.cnarXiv:1803.06075v2  [cs.SE]  19 Mar 2018

--- Page 2 ---
ABSTRACT
Modeling and analysis of nonfunctional requirements is crucial in automotive sys-
tems. E AST-ADL is an architectural language dedicated to safety-critical automotive
system design. We have previously modiﬁed E AST-ADL to include energy con-
straints and transformed energy-aware timed (ET) behaviors modeled in S IMULINK /
STATEFLOW into U PPAAL models amenable to formal veriﬁcation. Previous work
is extended in this paper by including support for S IMULINK DESIGN VERIFIER
(SDV), i.e., the ET constraints are translated into proof objective models that can be
veriﬁed using SDV. Furthermore, probabilistic extension of E AST-ADL constraints
is deﬁned and the semantics of the extended constraints is translated into veriﬁable
UPPAAL models with stochastic semantics for formal veriﬁcation. A set of mapping
rules are proposed to facilitate the guarantee of translation. Veriﬁcation & Valida-
tion are performed on the extended timing and energy constraints using SDV and
UPPAAL -SMC. Our approach is demonstrated on a cooperative automotive system
case study.
Keywords: EAST-ADL, UPPAAL -SMC, SIMULINK DESIGN VERIFIER

--- Page 3 ---
Contents
1 Introduction 1
2 Preliminary 3
3 Case Study 5
4 Modeling Non-functional Behaviors in S IMULINK & S TATEFLOW 12
4.1 Behavioral Modeling of fps in S IMULINK & S TATEFLOW . . . . . 12
4.2 Modeling Timing and Energy Constraints in Simulink/Stateﬂow . . 18
5 Timing & Energy Requirements Translation in SDV 20
5.1 LTL Properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
5.2 Timing Constraints in SDV . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
5.3 Energy Constraints in SDV . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
6 Modeling Functional Behaviours in U PPAAL -SMC 26
7 (Non)-functional Property Translation in U PPAAL -SMC 44
7.1 Probabilistic Timing Constraints Translation . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
7.2 Energy Constraint Estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
8 Experiment and Veriﬁcation 48
9 Veriﬁcation of Comparison Constraint in U PPAAL -SMC 63
10 Related Work 66
11 Conclusion 67
References 68

--- Page 4 ---
List of Figures
2.1 General veriﬁcation models in SDV . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
2.2 Simulink Blocks used for property modeling . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
3.1 Cooperative Automotive System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
3.2 E AST-ADL Architecture of CAS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
4.1 Top-level diagram of CAS S IMULINK & S TATEFLOW model . . . . 13
4.2 S TATEFLOW chart of v1Controller . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4.3 leader state in v1Controller . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4.4 follower state in v1Controller . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4.5 userCtrl state in v1Controller . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4.6 S IMULINK & S TATEFLOW model of localEnv . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4.7 S IMULINK & S TATEFLOW model of DriverBehavior . . . . . . . 16
4.8 S IMULINK & S TATEFLOW model of VehicleDynamic . . . . . . . 17
4.9 S IMULINK & S TATEFLOW model of ComDevice . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.10 Timing constraints modeling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.11 Cumulative andNoncumulative constraint . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.12 Periodic constraint modeling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
5.1 Bounded Always andEventually property . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
5.2 p Until q:G(F[0;t]q^(:q=)p)) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
5.3 Functional Property: When auto is true and msg is false for 200ms,
userCtrl should become true within 200ms. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
5.4 Property: If the dis12 is smaller than safeDis ,v2dec should be true
within 500ms. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
5.5 Synchronization timing constraint . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
5.6 Timing constraints translation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
5.7 Sporadic timing constraint . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
5.8 R30: if the message transmission is failed ( msgNormal == false )
when the vehicle runs in auto-mode, for the next 20 seconds, the
vehicle should not run automatically, i.e., auto == false . . . . . . . 24
5.9 Cumulative Periodic Timing Constraint . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
5.10 Non-cumulative Periodic Timing Constraint . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
5.11 Energy constraint . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25

--- Page 5 ---
6.1 STA of SignRecognition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
6.2 STA of VehicleDynamic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
6.3 STA for modeling ComDevice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
6.4 STA for modeling DriverBehaviour . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
6.5 STA of Controller . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
6.6 STA of Control state . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
6.7 STA for deciding whether the message is missing . . . . . . . . . . 30
6.8 STA for modeling Communication state . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
6.9 STA for modeling leader state . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
6.10 STA for modeling substates of leader state . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
6.11 STA for modeling substates of leader state . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
6.12 STA of turnLeft state . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
6.13 STA of turnRight state . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
6.14 STA of follower state . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
6.15 STA of follower state . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
6.16 STA for modeling substates of straight state . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
6.17 STA for modeling substates of turn state . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
6.18 STA for modeling userctrl state . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
6.19 STA of UserCtrl state . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
6.20 STA for modeling substates of straight state . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
6.21 STA for modeling substates of turnleft state . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
6.22 STA for modeling substates of turnright state . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
7.1 Probabilistic Extension of Timing Constraints in U PPAAL -SMC . . . 45
7.2 Energy estimation of v1Controller . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
7.3 Energy constraints on sensors in U PPAAL -SMC . . . . . . . . . . . 47
8.1 When v1 runs automatically and if there is no message received
by the vehicle for a certain time, the running mode of the vehicle
should be changed to manual mode within a certain time: G(G[0;200]
v1.Auto==true^v1.msg == false =)F[0;2000]v1.userCtrl == true) 48
8.2 When v1 runs automatically with a constant speed, if it detects a
stop sign, it should start to brake in 500ms: G(v1.Auto == true^
v1.const == true^signType == 5 =)F[0;500]v1.stop == true) . . 48
8.3 When the lead vehicle (v1) runs automatically with a constant speed,
if it detects left turn sign, it should start to turn left in 200ms: G
(v1.auto == true^v1.const == true^signType == 4 =)F[0;200]
v1.turnLeft == true) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
8.4 If v1 is driven by the driver and it is running with a constant speed,
the driver steers to the left, the vehicle will turn left within 200ms:
G(v1.userCtrl == true ^v1.const == true^v1.steerReq == 1 =)
F[0;200]v1.turnLeft == true) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49

--- Page 6 ---
8.5 If v1 is driven by the driver and it is running at a constant speed, the
driver brakes the car, the vehicle will slow down. G: (v1.userCtrl ==
true^v1.const == true^v1.brakeReq == 2 =)F[0;200]v1.brake
== true) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
8.6 When v1 is driven by the driver and it is running at a constant speed,
if the driver gears up, the vehicle will accelerate. G(v1.userCtrl ==
true^v1.const == true^v1.gearReq >v1.gear =)F[0;200]v1.acc
== true) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
8.7 When the vehicles are running horizontally, following vehicle should
not run ahead of lead vehicle. G(v1.dx == 1^v2.dx == 1^v3.dx
== 1 =)v1.x >v2.x) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
8.8 When the lead vehicle detects a stop sign, the three vehicles should
stop in 5s. G(v1.auto == true^signType == 5 =)F[0;5000]
v1.static == true^v2.static == true^v3.static==true) . . . . . . . 50
8.9 Noncumulative Periodic timing constraint: A Periodic acqui-
sition of VehicleDynamic of v1 must be carried out for every 50
ms with a jitter 10 ms. G(v1.velIn == true =)v1.velIn == false
U[40;60]v1.velIn == true) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
8.10 Cumulative Periodic timing constraint of R27 . . . . . . . . . . 50
8.11 Sporadic constraint: After the running mode of the lead vehicle is
changed to manual mode because of the failed message transmis-
sion, the driver should not change it into auto mode within 20 sec-
onds. G(v1.msgNormal == false =)v1.auto == false U[2000 ;¥])
v1.auto == true . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
8.12 An Execution constraint applied on v3Controller , which mea-
sured from the inputs ports Avel to output ports gearReq ,torqueReq ,
andbrake , should be between 100 ms and 300 ms; G(v3.ctrlIn =)
F[100;300]v3.ctrlOut) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
8.13 An Execution constraint applied on v3Controller , which mea-
sured from the inputs ports Avel to output ports gearReq ,torqueReq ,
andbrake , should be between 100 ms and 300 ms; G(v3.ctrlIn =)
F[100;300]v3.ctrlOut) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
8.14 An Execution constraint applied on ComDevice of v1, which mea-
sured from the inputs ports torqueSet ,gearSet andbrake to output
ports wheelSpeed ,direct should be between 100 ms and 150 ms; G
(v1.sdrIn =)F[100;300]v1.sdrOut . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
8.15 Observer STA of R1 and its triggering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
8.16 U PPAAL -SMC STAs for timing constraints veriﬁcation . . . . . . . 54
8.17 U PPAAL -SMC STAs for End-to-End timing constraints veriﬁcation 55
8.18 U PPAAL -SMC STAs for End-to-End timing constraints veriﬁcation 55

--- Page 7 ---
8.19 CE in SDV: In (b), leadVe.y equals to followVe.y ) from 0 to 8s,
which indicates that the two vehicles run in the same lane. In (a),
signType becomes “turn left (4)” at 8s and the lead vehicle begins
to turn left. However, the following vehicle turns left at a different
location ( leadVe.x is not equal to followVe.x at 9s). Hence, the “x”
is unequal after turning, which means that the two vehicles run on
different lanes. Thus R23 and R24 is violated. . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
8.20 CE in SMC: At the beginning, three vehicles run towards direction
(1,0). The three values of posy are the same, which indicates that the
three vehicles are in the same lane. After a left turn sign is detected,
the lead vehicle starts to turn left. Since the ﬁrst follower turns left at
(184, 0) and the second turns left at (157, 0), the three values of posx
are not equal after turning, which indicates the three vehicle are not
running in the same lane. Thus R5 is violated. . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
8.21 Probabilistic distribution of the expected energy consumption . . . . 61
8.22 Total energy consumption estimation of the lead vehicle . . . . . . . 62

--- Page 8 ---
Formal Analysis of Non-functional Properties for a Cooperative Automotive System
Chapter 1
Introduction
Model-driven development is rigorously applied in automotive systems in which
the software controllers interact with physical environments. The continuous time
behaviors (evolved with various energy rates) of those systems often rely on com-
plex dynamics as well as on stochastic behaviors. Formal veriﬁcation and validation
(V&V) technologies are indispensable and highly recommended for development
of safe and reliable automotive systems [1, 2]. Conventional V&V , i.e., testing and
model checking have limitations in terms of assessing the reliability of hybrid sys-
tems due to both the stochastic and non-linear dynamical features. To ensure the re-
liability of safety critical hybrid dynamic systems, statistical model checking (SMC)
techniques have been proposed [3–5]. These techniques for fully stochastic models
validate probabilistic performance properties of given deterministic (or stochastic)
controllers in given stochastic environments.
EAST-ADL [6, 7] is a domain speciﬁc language that provides support for archi-
tectural modeling of automotive embedded systems. A system in E AST-ADL is de-
scribed by Functional Architectures (FA) at different abstraction levels. The
FAare composed of a number of interconnected functionprototypes (fps), and the fps
have ports and connectors for communication. E AST-ADL relies on external tools
for the analysis of speciﬁcations related to requirements. For example, behavioral
description in E AST-ADL is captured in external tools, i.e., S IMULINK /STATEFLOW
[8]. The latest release of E AST-ADL has adopted the time model proposed in the
Timing Augmented Description Language (T ADL2) [9]. T ADL2 allows for the ex-
pression and composition of timing constraints, e.g., periodic, end-to-end delay, and
synchronization constraints on top of E AST-ADL models.
In this paper, we propose a model-driven approach to support formal analysis
of energy and timed (ET) requirements for automotive systems at the design level:
1. The ET constraints in E AST-ADL are interpreted in S IMULINK /STATEFLOW (S/S)
and provide corresponding modeling extensions in S/S; 2. The ET requirements,
speciﬁed in temporal logics, are translated into proof objective models to perform
formal veriﬁcation using SDV; 3. Probabilistic extension of E AST-ADL/TADL con-
straints is deﬁned and the semantics of the extended constraints (X TC) is translated
into veriﬁable U PPAAL -SMC [10] models with stochastic semantics for formal veri-
Technical Report 1

--- Page 9 ---
Formal Analysis of Non-functional Properties for a Cooperative Automotive System
ﬁcation; 4. A set of mapping rules are proposed to facilitate the guarantee of trans-
lation; 5. Simulation and V&V are performed on the X TCand energy constraints
using SDV and U PPAAL -SMC. Our approach is demonstrated on the cooperative
automotive system (CAS) case study.
The paper is organized as follows: Chap. 2 presents an overview of S IMULINK ,
SDV, and U PPAAL -SMC. The CAS is introduced as a running example in Chap. 3.
Chap. 4, 5, 6 and 7 describe a set of translation patterns and how our approaches
provide support for formal analysis at the design level. The applicability of our
method is demonstrated by performing veriﬁcation on the CAS case study in Chap.
8. Chap. 10 and Chap. 11 present related work and conclusion.
2

--- Page 10 ---
Formal Analysis of Non-functional Properties for a Cooperative Automotive System
Chapter 2
Preliminary
In our framework, Simulink and E MBEDDED MATLAB (EML) are utilized for mod-
eling purposes. Veriﬁcation and experiment are performed by SDV and U PPAAL -
SMC.
Simulink and SDV : Simulink [8] is a synchronous data ﬂow language, which pro-
vides different types of blocks , i.e., primitive-, control ﬂow-, and temporal-blocks
with predeﬁned libraries for modeling and simulation of dynamic systems and code
generation. Simulink supports the deﬁnition of custom blocks via Stateﬂow dia-
grams or user-deﬁned function blocks written in EML, C, and C++. SDV is a plug-in
to P ROVER , which is a formal veriﬁcation tool that performs reachability analysis on
Simulink/Stateﬂow model. The satisﬁability of each reachable state is determined by
a SAT solver. A proof objective model is speciﬁed in Simulink/SDV and illustrated
in Fig.2.1. A set of data (predicates) on the input ﬂows of System is constrained via
Proof Assumption blocks during proof construction. A set of proof obligations
is constructed via a function Fblock and the output of Fis speciﬁed as input to
a property Pblock. Ppasses its output signal to an Proof Objective block and
returns truewhen the predicates set on the input data ﬂows of the outline model are
satisﬁed. Whenever Proof Objective (P block) is utilized, SDV veriﬁes whether
the speciﬁed input data ﬂow is always true. The underlying P ROVER engine allows
the formal veriﬁcation of properties for a given model. Any failed proof attempt
ends in the generation of a counterexample representing an execution path to an in-
valid state. A harness model is generated to analyze the counterexample and reﬁne
the model.
Figure 2.1: General veriﬁcation models in SDV
Fig.2.2 shows blocks in SDV that can be employed in properties speciﬁcation.
Technical Report 3

--- Page 11 ---
Formal Analysis of Non-functional Properties for a Cooperative Automotive System
Impliesblock (Fig.2.2.(a)) allows to specify a condition to produce a certain re-
sponse: if A is true and B is false, the output is false; for all other pairs of A and B,
the outputs are true. Within Implies block (Fig.2.2.(b)) veriﬁes the property that
the response occurs within a given duration. This block captures the within implica-
tion by observing whether the Obsinput is true for at least one step within each true
duration of In. IfObsis always false within a particular input true duration of In, the
output becomes false for one time step following the input true duration. As shown
in Fig.2.2.(c), the two blocks always appear in pairs with the same tags. The output
signal from Block A goes to the Gotoblock tagged with A.Gotoblock then
passes that signal to the Fromblock tagged with A. Block B receives the signal
from theFromblock.
(a) Implies
 (b) Within Implies
 (c) From and Goto
Figure 2.2: Simulink Blocks used for property modeling
UPPAAL -SMC provides probabilistic analysis of properties based on statistical es-
timation of system models. By monitoring simulations of an hybrid system and
using the statistic result to determine whether the properties are satisﬁed on top of
the system model, an exhaustive exploration of the state-space of the system can be
avoided. U PPAAL -SMC represents systems via networks of Timed Automata (TA)
whose behaviours depend on both stochastic and non-linear dynamical features. Its
clocks evolve with various rates, such rates can be speciﬁed with ordinary differen-
tial equations. U PPAAL -SMC provides a number of queries related to the stochastic
interpretation of TA (STA) [5]. The following four queries are sufﬁcient to perform
V&V on timing and energy constraints in E AST-ADL, where Nandbound indicate
the number of simulations and the simulation time for each simulation respectively.
1.Probability Estimation estimates the probability that a requirement property f
is satisﬁed for a given STA model within the time bound: Pr[bound ]f;
2.Hypothesis Testing checks if the probability of fis satisﬁed over a given prob-
ability P0:Pr[bound ]fP0;
3.Simulations : UPPAAL -SMC runs multiple simulations on the system model and
thek(state-based) properties/expressions f1;:::;fkare monitored and visual-
ized along the simulations: simulate N [bound ]ff1;:::;fkg;
4.Expected Value evaluates the minimal or maximal value of a clock or an integer
value while U PPAAL -SMC checks the STA model: E[bound ;N](min:f)or
E[bound ;N](max :f).
4

--- Page 12 ---
Formal Analysis of Non-functional Properties for a Cooperative Automotive System
Chapter 3
Case Study
A Cooperative Automotive System (CAS) is adopted as our running example where
sensing and actuation are distributed over a number of vehicles, which is illustrated
in Fig.3.1. A vehicle can be either a lead vehicle ( leadVe ) or a following vehicle ( fol-
lowVe ) depends on its absolute position. We name the ﬁrst vehicle as v1, the vehicle
in the middle as v2 and the last vehicle v3. Communication between vehicles are
realized by the Dedicated Short-Range Communication (DSRC), which is a wireless
communication technology speciﬁcally dedicated for message transmission among
automotive systems. The lead vehicle can either run automatically ( auto mode) by
detecting trafﬁc signs on the road or be driven by the driver ( userCtrl mode). Any
two adjacent vehicles should be distant enough to avoid rear-end collision and close
enough to guarantee the communication quality.
The requested vehicle motion is based on driver’s input, detected environment
(e.g., trafﬁc sign) and running situation. The vehicle movement can be either hori-
zontal or vertical and the position of each vehicle is represented by two-dimension
coordinates (x, y) in Cartesian coordinate system, where x and y are distances mea-
sured from vehicle to two ﬁxed perpendicular directed lines respectively. Ideally, the
following vehicle should maintain the same movement as the vehicle ahead and be-
haves similarly, e.g., when a lead vehicle accelerates, the following vehicles should
be able to accelerate to a similar extent.
Figure 3.1: Cooperative Automotive System
Fig.3.2(a) shows the E AST-ADL model of the CAS, which consists of coop-
erative environment ( CoopEnv ) and local environments, left and middle, and the
software controllers of three vehicles, right. The three LocalEnv fps receive in-
formation of positions and the trafﬁc sign from the CoopEnv . Each lead vehicle
Technical Report 5

--- Page 13 ---
Formal Analysis of Non-functional Properties for a Cooperative Automotive System
sends its own position and velocity to its adjacent following vehicle. The function-
ality of an individual vehicle, augmented with timing/energy constraints and viewed
asFunctionDesignArchitecture (FDA) in 3.2(b), consists of the following fps
(components): ComDevice represents the DSRC device for vehicle to send and re-
ceive messages. SignRecDevice analyzes the detected images and computes de-
sired images (sign types). VeModeDevice reads the driver’s requests by means of
pedals ( brakeReq ), steering wheel ( steerReq ), gear ( gearReq ) and a switch ( driver-
State ) which indicates whether the driver intends to drive. v1Controller deter-
mines how the torque and gear of the vehicle are adjusted based on the received
information. VeDynamicDevice speciﬁes the kinematics behaviors of the vehicle
based on engine torque, brake, steer and gear. The value of signType ranges from 0
to 5, which represents “straight”, “min/max speed limit”, “left/right turn ahead” and
“stop” signs respectively.
We consider the following functional and non-functional properties, which in-
cludes Execution ,End-to-End ,Synchronization ,Periodic ,Sporadic and
Comparison timing and Energy constraints, on top of the CAS EAST-ADL model,
which are sufﬁcient to capture the constraints described in Fig.3.2. Energy con-
straint refers to the battery consumption of an individual vehicle in CAS.
R1. When v1 runs automatically and if there is no message received by the vehicle
for a certain time, the running mode of the vehicle should be changed to manual
mode within a certain time.
R2. When v2 runs automatically and if there is no message received by the vehicle
for a certain time, the running mode of the vehicle should be changed to manual
mode within a certain time.
R3. When v3 runs automatically and if there is no message received by the vehicle
for a certain time, the running mode of the vehicle should be changed to manual
mode within a certain time.
R4. When v1 runs automatically at a constant speed, if it detects a stop sign, it
should start to brake in 500ms.
R5. When v1 runs automatically at a constant speed, if it detects left turn sign, it
should start to turn left in 200ms.
R6. When v1 runs automatically at a constant speed, if it detects right turn sign, it
should start to turn right in 200ms.
R7. If v1 is driven by the driver and it is running with a constant speed, the driver
steers to the left, the vehicle will turn left within 200ms.
R8. If v1 is driven by the driver and it is running at a constant speed, the driver
steers to the right, the vehicle will turn right within 200ms.
6

--- Page 14 ---
Formal Analysis of Non-functional Properties for a Cooperative Automotive System
(a) Architecture of cooperative automotive system model
(b) Function architecture of a vehicle
Figure 3.2: EAST-ADL Architecture of CAS
7

--- Page 15 ---
Formal Analysis of Non-functional Properties for a Cooperative Automotive System
R9. If v1 is driven by the driver and it is running at a constant speed, the driver
brake the car, the vehicle will slow down.
R10. When v1 is driven by the driver and it is running at a constant speed, if the
driver gears up, the vehicle will accelerate.
R11. When v1 is driven by the driver and it is running at a constant speed, if the
driver gears down, the vehicle will decelerate.
R12. v2 should not run ahead of v1.
R13. v3 should not run ahead of v2.
R14. When the lead vehicle detects a stop sign, the three vehicles should stop in 5s.
R15. When the vehicles are running straight with a constant speed, if v2 runs slower
than v1, it should start to accelerate within a certain time.
R16. When the vehicles are running straight with a constant speed, if v3 runs slower
than v2, it should start to accelerate within a certain time.
R17. When the vehicles are running straight with a constant speed, if v2 runs faster
than v1, it should start to decelerate within a certain time.
R18. When the vehicles are running straight with a constant speed, if v3 runs faster
than v2, it should start to decelerate within a certain time.
R19. If the distance between v1 and v2 is larger than 500m, v2 should accelerate
within a certain time, e.g. 200ms.
R20. If the distance between v2 and v3 is larger than 500m, v3 should accelerate
within a certain time, e.g. 200ms.
R21. If the distance between v1 and v2 is smaller than the safety distance, v2 should
decelerate within a certain time, e.g. 500ms.
R22. If the distance between v2 and v3 is smaller than the safety distance, v3 should
decelerate within a certain time, e.g. 500ms.
R23. When v1 starts to turn left, v1 and v2 should ﬁnish turning and run in the
same lane within a given time.
R24. When v2 starts to turn left, v2 and v3 should ﬁnish turning and run in the
same lane within a given time.
R25. When v1 starts to turn right, v1 and v2 should ﬁnish turning and run in the
same lane within a given time.
8

--- Page 16 ---
Formal Analysis of Non-functional Properties for a Cooperative Automotive System
R26. When v2 starts to turn right, v2 and v3 should ﬁnish turning and run in the
same lane within a given time.
R27. A Periodic acquisition of VehicleDynamic of v1 must be carried out for
every 50 ms with a jitter 10 ms.
R28. A Periodic acquisition of VehicleDynamic of v2 must be carried out for
every 50 ms with a jitter 10 ms.
R29. A Periodic acquisition of VehicleDynamic of v3 must be carried out for
every 50 ms with a jitter 10 ms.
R30. Sporadic constraint: After the running mode of v1 is changed to manual
mode because of the failed message transmission, the driver should not change it
intoauto mode within 20 seconds.
R31. Sporadic constraint: After the running mode of v2 is changed to manual
mode because of the failed message transmission, the driver should not change it
intoauto mode within 20 seconds.
R32. Sporadic constraint: After the running mode of v3 is changed to manual
mode because of the failed message transmission, the driver should not change it
intoauto mode within 20 seconds.
R33. An Execution constraint applied on v1Controller , which measured from
the input port Avel to output ports gearReq ,torqueReq andbrake , should be be-
tween 100 ms and 300 ms;
R34. An Execution constraint applied on v2Controller , which measured from
the input port Avel to output ports gearReq ,torqueReq andbrake , should be be-
tween 100 ms and 300 ms;
R35. An Execution constraint applied on v3Controller , which measured from
the input port Avel to output ports gearReq ,torqueReq andbrake , should be be-
tween 100 ms and 300 ms;
R36. An Execution constraint applied on ComDevice of v1, which measured from
the input ports Avel,Apos ,Adirect andposto output ports Avel,Apos ,Adirect and
posshould be between 50 ms and 100 ms;
R37. An Execution constraint applied on ComDevice of v2, which measured from
the input ports Avel,Apos ,Adirect andposto output ports Avel,Apos ,Adirect and
posshould be between 50 ms and 100 ms;
R38. An Execution constraint applied on ComDevice of v3, which measured from
the input ports Avel,Apos ,Adirect andposto output ports Avel,Apos ,Adirect and
posshould be between 50 ms and 100 ms;
9

--- Page 17 ---
Formal Analysis of Non-functional Properties for a Cooperative Automotive System
R39. An End-to-End is measured from v1Controller tov2Controller . The
time interval is bounded with a minimum value of 300 ms and a maximum value of
700 ms;
R40. An End-to-End is measured from v2Controller tov3Controller . The
time interval is bounded with a minimum value of 300 ms and a maximum value of
700 ms;
R41. An End-to-End constraint measured from input port position ofv1LocalEnv
to output ports gearReq ,torqueReq andbrake ofv1Controller should be limited
within [200, 500]ms;
R42. An End-to-End constraint measured from input port position ofv2LocalEnv
to output ports gearReq ,torqueReq andbrake ofv2Controller should be limited
within [200, 500]ms;
R43. An End-to-End constraint measured from input port position ofv3LocalEnv
to output ports gearReq ,torqueReq andbrake ofv3Controller should be limited
within [200, 500]ms;
R44. Synchronization constraint: The position and velocity of the vehicle and its
lead vehicle ( pos, vel, Apos and Avel ports on v1Controller ) must be detected by
v1Controller within a given time window, i.e., the tolerated maximum constraint
= 200 ms;
R45. Synchronization constraint: The position and velocity of the vehicle and its
lead vehicle ( pos, vel, Apos and Avel ports on v2Controller ) must be detected by
v2Controller within a given time window, i.e., the tolerated maximum constraint
= 200 ms;
R46. Synchronization constraint: The position and velocity of the vehicle and its
lead vehicle ( pos, vel, Apos and Avel ports on v3Controller ) must be detected by
v3Controller within a given time window, i.e., the tolerated maximum constraint
= 200 ms;
R47. A Comparison constraint: The execution time interval measured from
v1Controller tov2Controller needs to be larger than or equal to the sum of the
worst-case execution times of the fps.
R48. Energy constraint: The maximum battery energy consumption for the braking
of a vehicle should be less than 30kJ;
R49. Energy constraint: The maximum battery energy consumption for the con-
troller to decide its movement for once should be less than 30J;
R50. Energy constraint: The maximum battery energy consumption for ComDevice
to get/send signals for once should be less than 5J;
10

--- Page 18 ---
Formal Analysis of Non-functional Properties for a Cooperative Automotive System
According to the E AST-ADL meta-model, the timing constraint describes a
design constraint, but has the role of a property, requirement or validation result,
based on its Context [6]. The T ADL meta-model is integrated with the E AST-ADL
meta-model and is supplemented with structural concepts from E AST-ADL. The
EAST-ADL/TADL constraints contain the identiﬁable state changes as Events . The
causality related events are contained as a pair by EventChains . Based on Event and
EventChains , data dependencies, control ﬂows, and critical execution paths are rep-
resented as additional constraints for the E AST-ADL functional architectural model,
and apply timing constraints on these paths.
Sporadic constraint speciﬁes a minimum delay min between any two con-
secutive occurrences of an event. Execution constraint restricts the time interval
between inputs and outputs of a fp, which can be speciﬁed using lower, upper val-
ues given as Execution constraint. End-to-End constraint gives duration bounds
(minimum and maximum) between two events source andtarget . The time inter-
vals between source event and target event should satisfy lower, upper values given
asEnd-to-End constraint. Synchronization constraint describes how tightly the
occurrences of a group of events follow each other. All events must occur within a
sliding window, speciﬁed by the tolerance attribute, i.e., the maximum time interval
allowed between events. Comparison constraint speciﬁes the comparison relation
(including <,,=,and>) among timing expressions. Periodic constraint
states that the period of successive occurrences of a single event must have a length
of at least a lower and at most an upper time interval. The interval is given as
Periodic constraint. There are two types of Periodic timing constraints: cumula-
tive ( Cumu Periodic ) and non-cumulative timing constraints ( Noncumu Periodic ).
Those (non)-functional properties are formally speciﬁed and veriﬁed in the follow-
ing sections.
11

--- Page 19 ---
Formal Analysis of Non-functional Properties for a Cooperative Automotive System
Chapter 4
Modeling Non-functional Behaviors in
SIMULINK & S TATEFLOW
4.1 Behavioral Modeling of fps in S IMULINK & S TATEFLOW
Based on the E AST-ADL architectural model of CAS, the functional and non-functional
behaviours of fps is constructed with Stateﬂow chart and Simulink blocks. The ar-
chitecture of Simulink/Stateﬂow model can be seen in Fig.4.1. v1Controller fpis
modeled as a Stateﬂow chart while localEnv ,CoopEnv are modeled as Simulink
subsystems with a number of mathematical and descriptive blocks provided in Simulink
block library.
The top-level diagram of v1Controller Stateﬂow chart is illustrated in Fig.4.2,
where three Matlab functions blocks are embedded: checkGear() is used to ensure
thatgear is in the reasonable value range; reDirect() adjusts vehicle’s direction when
vehicle turns; checkDis calculates the distance between the vehicle and the vehicle
in front of it. A single Stateﬂow chart, consisting of two parallel states, implements
the control logic of the system in its entirety. In Control state, Auto anduserCtrl
refer two different running modes of a vehicle depend on whether the driver controls
the vehicle.
If the vehicle runs automatically, either leader (shown in Fig.4.3) or follower
(shown in Fig.4.4) will be activated according to the absolute positions of the three
vehicles. Inside the leader state, there are six superstates turn right ,turn left,con-
stSpeed ,acc,decandstop together with their child states. The edges represent
transitions between the states with the conditions on the edges. Initially, The chart
transits to either straight orstop based on the initial speeds of the wheels. The tran-
sitions will be taken according to the current speed of the wheels and the value of
signType , whose various evaluation represents the different trafﬁc sign. For exam-
ple, when the vehicle is in constSpeed state and the detected signType is 5 (stop
sign is encountered), braking andstop will be activated and brake will become 1
indicating that the velocity of vehicle should be decreased steeply. Whenever the
vehicle detects a stop sign, the vehicle will start to brake. If the straight sign is de-
tected ( signType is 0), the vehicle will maintain the current state and speed. If the
Technical Report 12

--- Page 20 ---
Formal Analysis of Non-functional Properties for a Cooperative Automotive System
Figure 4.1: Top-level diagram of CAS S IMULINK & S TATEFLOW model
Figure 4.2: STATEFLOW chart of v1Controller
13

--- Page 21 ---
Formal Analysis of Non-functional Properties for a Cooperative Automotive System
vehicle recognizes a left turn sign, it will ﬁrst decrease its speed to a low level (less
than 30 km/h) and start to turn. After turning left, the vehicle will ﬁnally go straight
and maintain the speed. turnX andturnY specify the location at which the vehicle
turns.
Figure 4.3: leader state in v1Controller
Since a following vehicle should follow the traces and movements of the vehicle
in front of it, in follower state, the transitions will be taken once the safety condition
is violated, e.g., the distance between the two adjacent vehicles is either larger than
500m or less than the safety distance. As illustrated in turn state on the left of
Fig.4.4, when the following vehicle is turning left/right, it will ﬁrst accelerate to
reach to the turning location at which the lead vehicle turns.
If the vehicle is driven by its driver, userCtrl state (as illustrated in Fig.4.5)
will be active. The running mode ( stop,turnLeft ,turnRight andstraight ) of the
vehicle will be changed based on the driver’s operations. steer represents the steering
operation is conducted, i.e., steering to left ( steer = 1), right ( steer = 2) and straight
(steer = 3).
Fig.4.6 illustrates the Simulink and Stateﬂow model of localEnv , whose func-
tionality is captured in three subsystems: ComDevice is responsible for signal prop-
agation and message receiving; DriverBehavior records the value of signals ( gear,
steer, brake and DriverState ) that represent various operations conducted by the
driver; VehicleDynamic speciﬁes the how the velocity and running direction of
the vehicle are changed according to the input torque andgear value. In this ﬁgure,
blocks/entities in green format are employed to model timing constraints, whose
modeling process will be explained detailly in the following section.
Fig.4.7 shows the Simulink and Stateﬂow model of DriverBehavior fp. This
14

--- Page 22 ---
Formal Analysis of Non-functional Properties for a Cooperative Automotive System
Figure 4.4: follower state in v1Controller
Figure 4.5: userCtrl state in v1Controller
15

--- Page 23 ---
Formal Analysis of Non-functional Properties for a Cooperative Automotive System
Figure 4.6: SIMULINK & S TATEFLOW model of localEnv
subsystem obtains inputs from the driver by Manual Switch block, which repre-
sents a toggle switch where one of its two inputs (1 or 0) will be selected to pass
through and become the value of the output.
Figure 4.7: SIMULINK & S TATEFLOW model of DriverBehavior
Fig.4.8 shows the Simulink and Stateﬂow model of VehicleDynamic fp. In
VehicleDynamic subsystem, a Look Up Table block maps inputs ( gear and
torqueSet ) to an output value ( wheelspeed ) by looking up or interpolating the pre-
deﬁned values in a table. DataStoreblock records the energy consumption in the
duration of braking.
16

--- Page 24 ---
Formal Analysis of Non-functional Properties for a Cooperative Automotive System
Figure 4.8: SIMULINK & S TATEFLOW model of VehicleDynamic
Figure 4.9: SIMULINK & S TATEFLOW model of ComDevice
17

--- Page 25 ---
Formal Analysis of Non-functional Properties for a Cooperative Automotive System
4.2 Modeling Timing and Energy Constraints in Simulink/State-
ﬂow
In this section, we investigate how to model timing and energy constraints in S/S. In
our previous work, we have shown how those constraints are interpreted in S/S and
provided corresponding modeling extensions in S/S. However, the previous model-
ing extensions contain blocks that are unsupported in SDV , which leads to incom-
patibility problem. To perform veriﬁcation of timing and energy constraints in SDV ,
the modeling extensions are modiﬁed to ensure the compatibility.
Sporadic timing constraint is modeled using “after(min, msec)” expression,
which returns true after minmilliseconds (msec) have elapsed since activation of
the associated state. Synchronization timing constraint restricts the time duration
among a set of events (i.e., maximum allowed time between the arrival of the event
occurrences). We use In1,In2andIn3(in Fig.4.10(a)) to indicate the arrivals of the
three inputs of fp. To verify Synchronization constraint, we check whether the
interval between occurrences of earliest and latest input event is within tolerance ,
which is described in Chap. 5.
As shown in Fig.4.10(a), to model Execution timing constraint of an fp, a
Stateﬂow chart is used to create a true duration to execute the fp. TheEnable
Subsystem ES(representative of fp) executes when Exe state is active. tis the
Execution constraint applied on the fp.idis a monotonically increased value.
To ensure the one-to-one correspondence of input andoutput event, we use two
variables, rands, to represent the value of input andoutput event respectively.
When input event occurs, fpwill start to execute and rwill be assigned by the value
of current id. After tmilliseconds, fpﬁnishes execution and sbecomes identical with
r, which indicates the occurrence of output event.
Fig.4.10(b) shows an EventChain ofn fps, we model each fpbased on the
pattern of Fig.4.10(a). For each fp,riandsirepresent the values of input and
output event. Hence in this EventChain ,r1is the value of source event and s n
is the value of target event of End-to-End constraint. To identify the one-to-
one correspondence of source andtarget event, r1andsnshould have the same
assigned value.
We consider two types of Periodic timing constraints: cumulative constraint
and noncumulative constraint. Tandjindicate the period and jitter of Periodic
constraint. In Fig.4.11, e(i) denotes the time point of the ithoccurrence of a single
event e. eirepresents the ithoccurrence of event e.Cumulative Periodic con-
straint limits that the time intervals between any two consecutive occurrences of e
(e.g,je(2)-e(1)jandje(3)-e(2)j) should be within [ T-j,T+j].Noncumulative
Periodic constraint limits that e(i) should be within [ i*T-j,i*T+j ].
Fig.4.12(a) shows the model of Cumulative Periodic timing constraint of
fp. The behaviour of fpis modeled in TS(Trigger subsystem) The Stateﬂow chart
18

--- Page 26 ---
Formal Analysis of Non-functional Properties for a Cooperative Automotive System
(a) Execution
 (b) End-to-End
Figure 4.10: Timing constraints modeling
Figure 4.11: Cumulative andNoncumulative constraint
generates a signal Trig to trigger TS.rand is a random number within [0, 2*j]. Once
fpis triggered, it will be triggered again after T-j+rand ms such that the time interval
between any two consecutive triggerings of fpis in [ T-j,T+j]. Fig.4.12(b) shows the
model of Noncumulative Periodic timing constraint of fp(modeled in TS1). A
Pulse Generator (PG) generates square waves based on Period and Phase delay
parameters. Phase delay speciﬁes the delay before the pulse is generated. PG gener-
ates a square wave signal whose Period isTandPhase delay isT-jsuch that the ith
rising edge of the signal arrives at the time point of i*T-j. In the mean time, TSwill
be triggered to pass rand andDelayblock delays the rising edges by rand ms s.t.
the time point of the ithrising edge will be in [i*T-j, i*T+j] .
(a) Cumulative
 (b) Noncumulative
Figure 4.12: Periodic constraint modeling
Energy constraints are modeled with Data Store and integrated M ATLAB
blocks, which calculate and record energy consumption in different modes of a ve-
hicle. According to the various modes of vehicles in CAS, the amount of battery
consumed for the mechanical motion of wheels is calculated: energy =Rt
0av dx
where, t,a, and vdenote running time, coefﬁcient reﬂects an energy rate associated
to the current mode of an individual vehicle, and velocity respectively.
19

--- Page 27 ---
Formal Analysis of Non-functional Properties for a Cooperative Automotive System
Chapter 5
Timing & Energy Requirements Translation
in SDV
To enable the veriﬁcation of the timing and energy requirements illustrated in Chap.
4, we specify timing and energy requirements as LTL formulas and provide the ap-
proach to model linear temporal logic (LTL) [11] formulas into proof objective mod-
els.
5.1 LTL Properties
An LTL formula usually consists of predicates and propositional connectives, to-
gether with temporal operators (e.g. Always ,Eventually andUntil ).
Always p (Gp) states that property palways holds along the execution, which is
modeled as the proof objective model described in Chap. 2.
Always and Eventually within t time steps :Always p within ttime steps, de-
noted by G[0;t]p, is valid if property pholds over the ﬁrst ttime steps during ex-
ecution. Eventually p within ttime steps, denoted as F[0;t]p, holds if poccurs
within the ﬁrst ttime steps during the execution. The model of Always property and
Eventually are illustrated on the left and right of Fig.5.1: duris a signal which is
true within the ﬁrst ttime steps. To checks whether palways holds true within the
true duration, pis connected to Impliesblock.Within Implies block is em-
ployed to verify whether pholds for at least one time step within the true duration
dur. P block is applied to prove whether the property is satisﬁed.
Figure 5.1: Bounded Always andEventually property
p Until q within t time steps . Denoted as pU[0;t]q, this property states that pshould
always hold before qbecomes true within the ﬁrst ttime steps during the execution.
The satisfaction of this property requires j1:qmust hold at least one time step
Technical Report 20

--- Page 28 ---
Formal Analysis of Non-functional Properties for a Cooperative Automotive System
within the ﬁrst ttime steps; j2: before qholds, pmust always be true. This property
can be interpreted as: F[0;t]q^G[0;t](:q=)p). The implementation of this
property is shown in Fig.5.2: durhas a true duration with length t. First, aWithin
Impliesblock check whether j1: F[0;t]qholds. An Extenderblock is applied
to extend the true duration of qtottime steps after qoccurs.Notblock is then
employed to capture the true duration of :q.Impliesblock checks whether “not
qimplies p” holds. Afterwards, AndandProof Objective validate whether “ j1
^j2” is always true.
Figure 5.2: pUntil q:G(F[0;t]q^(:q=)p))
Fig.5.3 illustrates the functional property (R1) which can be speciﬁed by us-
ingAlways andEventually operators: G[0;200](auto == true^msgNormal == false)
=)F[0;200]userCtrl == true. auto (userCtrl ) represents whether the vehicle is run-
ning automatically (driven manually). msgNormal indicates whether the message is
transmitted normally. In Fig.5.3, Detectorconstructs a signal with a 200ms true
duration after “ auto == true and msg== false” becomes true for 200ms. Within this
true duration, “ userCtrl == true” should be satisﬁed at least one time step. To check
this, the output signal from Detectorgoes to the Gotoblock tagged with dur.
Then it is passed to the corresponding durtag on the right of Fig.5.1. Similarly, the
signal that represents “ userCtrl == true” is passed to ptag on the right of Fig.5.1
(the input of Within Imply ) block.
Figure 5.3: Functional Property: When auto is true and msgis false for 200ms, userCtrl should become true
within 200ms.
Fig.5.4 illustrates the model of the functional property (R21), which can be
speciﬁed with UtilandAlways temporal operators: G(dist12 <safeDis =)v2.dec
== false U[0;500]v2.dec == true). dist12 is the distance between the lead vehicle
(v1) and the following vehicle ( v2).safeDis is the required safety distance between
them. v2.dec represents whether v2is decelerating. Detectorcreates a signal with
a 500ms true duration after “ dist12 <safeDis ” becomes true. This signal then goes
to theFromblock tagged with durin Fig.5.2. In this example, prepresents the
property “ v2.dec == false” and qrepresents “ v2.dec == true” as illustrated on the
right of Fig.5.4.
21

--- Page 29 ---
Formal Analysis of Non-functional Properties for a Cooperative Automotive System
Figure 5.4: Property: If the dis12 is smaller than safeDis ,v2dec should be true within 500ms.
5.2 Timing Constraints in SDV
Timing constraints in E AST-ADL are modeled by means of constraints speciﬁed
onEvents andEventChains . A constraint is expressed as a proof objective model
in SDV . To proof the correctness of the timing behaviours of Simulink/Stateﬂow
model, we show how to construct the proof objective models for the design model
based on the timing constraints. We focus on Synchronization, Execution,
End-to-End, Periodic, Sporadic constraints (R27-R46) that are associated to
fps in E AST-ADL.
Synchronization timing constraint can be interpreted as: all the input signals
should be received within tolerance after the ﬁrst (earliest) input signal arrives. The
model of the timing constraint is shown in Fig.5.5: Assume that there are three
input signals of an fp.ﬁrstIn represents whether the ﬁrst (earliest) input signal is re-
ceived. In1,In2andIn3indicate the arrival of three input signals of fprespectively.
Extenderis employed to construct a true duration with length tolerance from the
time step in which ﬁrstIn becomes true. Three Within Implies block are applied
to capture whether In1,In2andIn3becomes true within the true duration. And
block then validates whether In1,In2andIn3all become true within the true dura-
tion and pass the output signal to a Proof Objective block, which proves whether
the constraint is valid.
Figure 5.5: Synchronization timing constraint
Execution timing constraint limits that after the input signals are received, the out-
put data should be sent out within upper time steps. The construct of this timing
constraint is shown on the left of Fig.5.6 (a): dataIn (dataOut ) indicates the input
(output) signal received (sent out). Extenderis applied to construct a true du-
ration with length upper after dataIn becomes true. Afterwards Within Implies 
andProof Objective blocks are used to verify whether the dataOut becomes true
within the true duration.
End-to-End timing constraint restricts that after source event occurs, target event
22

--- Page 30 ---
Formal Analysis of Non-functional Properties for a Cooperative Automotive System
should happen within tolerance . The model of this timing constraint is illustrated on
the right of Fig.5.6 (b): source andtarget indicate the source andtarget event oc-
curs (true) or not (false). Extenderconstructs a true duration with length tolerance
after source becomes true. Afterwards Within Implies andProof Objective 
blocks are used to verify whether the target becomes true within the true duration.
(a) Execution
(b) End-to-end
Figure 5.6: Timing constraints translation
Sporadic timing constraint speciﬁes that after the event occurs, the next occurrence
should not happen within mintime steps. This timing constraint is constructed as the
model in Fig.5.7. event indicates the occurrence of an event. Detectorconstructs
a true duration with length minafter event becomes true. Afterwards, Negation
(Not) and Impliesblocks are employed to validate whether pis false over the
true duration. At last, Proof Objective block checks whether the property is sat-
isﬁed. Fig.5.8 illustrates an example of sporadic timing constraint (R30), where the
constraint is modeled in the dash box. In this example, event is “auto == true”.
Figure 5.7: Sporadic timing constraint
Periodic timing constraint limits a single event fpshould occur periodically with
period Tand jitter j. We consider two types of timing constraints in SDV: 1. Cumulative
Periodic timing constraint is modeled as the proof objective model illustrated in
Fig.5.9. To verify this property, we check whether ti+1 locates in [ ti+T-j,ti+T+j].
As shown on the left of Fig.5.9, a Delayis to add a T-jdelay to the input signal
event . As illustrated on the right of Fig.5.9, an Extenderthen generates a true
duration with length 2*jsuch that the range of true duration is [ ti+T-j,ti+T+j].
Afterwards, Within Implies checks whether event occurs within each true dura-
tion. Take R27 as an example, if event ﬁrstly occurs at 0.01s, a corresponding true
23

--- Page 31 ---
Formal Analysis of Non-functional Properties for a Cooperative Automotive System
Figure 5.8: R30: if the message transmission is failed ( msgNormal == false ) when the vehicle runs in auto-
mode, for the next 20 seconds, the vehicle should not run automatically, i.e., auto == false
duration [0.05, 0.07] is generated, where the existence of the second occurrence is
checked.
2.Noncumulative Periodic timing constraint is constructed with the blocks
illustrated in Fig.5.10: a Pulse Generator is applied to generate signals (square
waves) based on Period, Pulse width, Phase delay parameters (see Fig.5.10). Pulse
width is a duty cycle speciﬁed as a percentage of Period , i.e., Pulse width =Width /Period .
Phase delay speciﬁes the delay before the pulse is generated. Convertblock is
used to transform the signal type from double toboolean . The generated signal and
event signal from the input port, are then passed to Within Implies block.Within
Implieschecks whether event becomes true within each true duration of the gener-
ated signal. Take R27 as an example, the Phase delay is speciﬁed as 0.04s, Period
is 0.05s and Pulse width is 40%, which is illustrated on the right of Fig.5.10. To
satisfy this timing constraint, VehicleDynamic should be triggered within each true
duration of the generated signal.
Figure 5.9: Cumulative Periodic Timing Constraint
Figure 5.10: Non-cumulative Periodic Timing Constraint
5.3 Energy Constraints in SDV
According to the various modes of vehicles in CAS, the amount of battery consumed
for the mechanical motion of wheels is calculated: energy =Rt
0av dx where, t,
24

--- Page 32 ---
Formal Analysis of Non-functional Properties for a Cooperative Automotive System
a, and vdenote running time, coefﬁcient reﬂects an energy rate associated to the
current mode of an individual vehicle, and wheel speed respectively.
Energy constraint demarcates that the energy consumption on different modes
of an individual vehicle is within [lower ;upper ]. It is speciﬁed as G(lower6energy
^energy 6upper )and its POM is depicted in Fig. 5.11, where the value of the
energy consumption is obtained through Data Store Read block and compared
with upper andlower .
Figure 5.11: Energy constraint
25

--- Page 33 ---
Formal Analysis of Non-functional Properties for a Cooperative Automotive System
Chapter 6
Modeling Functional Behaviours in
UPPAAL -SMC
We translate the E AST-ADL architectural model illustrated in Fig.3.2 and Simulink/S-
tateﬂow model in Fig.4.1 into a networks of STAs in U PPAAL -SMC. In the model,
there are three vehicles receiving the information of trafﬁc signs from cooperative
environment CoopEnv fp. The functionality trafﬁc sign recognition is modeled as the
STA shown in Fig.6.1. The type of trafﬁc signs include stop,left/right turn ,straight ,
minimum/maximum speed limit . The dash line in Fig.6.1 indicates the probabilistic
distribution of different trafﬁc signs, i.e., trafﬁc sign occurs randomly with a certain
probability. The lead vehicle (v1) will adjust its speed and running direction accord-
ing to the detected sign types. The two follower vehicles (v2 and v3) will follow the
lead vehicle.
Figure 6.1: STA of SignRecognition
The functionality of the three vehicles are similar. Each vehicle consists of a
localEnv fpand a Controller . Each localEnv consists of three fps:ComDevice ,
VehicleDynamic andDriverBehaviour .ComDevice is modeled in Fig.6.3. The
Technical Report 26

--- Page 34 ---
Formal Analysis of Non-functional Properties for a Cooperative Automotive System
inner behaviour of the vehicle calculating velocity according to the gears and torque
is modeled in Fig.6.2. This fpwill be triggered to execute periodically with period
50ms and jitter 10ms, i.e., STA of VehicleDynamic will be triggered to update the
speed, gear and torque of the vehicle periodically. The computation is implemented
as the function speedCal() , which will be called to update the states and valuation of
variables whenever the corresponding transition is taken.
Figure 6.2: STA of VehicleDynamic
Fig.6.3(a) captures the behaviour of the sensor sending out signals of position,
velocity and direction of vehicle. Fig.6.3(b) models the behaviour of the sensor
receiving signals from other vehicles. It receives information (the position, velocity
and direction) from the lead vehicle, and detects whether the lead vehicle is braking
periodically. The sensor will send out signals/information when the Controller of
the vehicle ﬁnishes execution.
The behaviors of the driver is modeled as the STAs shown in Fig.6.4. Brake
Pedal STA represents the behaviors of braking pedal (Fig.6.4(a)). Control status
button STA records whether the driver intends to drive the vehicle manually (Fig.6.4(b)).
The behaviors of controlling gear and steer is modeled as the STA in Fig.6.4(c) and
Fig.6.4(d) respectively. The driver can take charge of the running state of the vehicle
by switching the running state to userCtrl mode using Control Button. The driver
can control the vehicle by steer (steer the running direction of vehicle), gear (control
the speeds of the wheels) and the brake pedal (to stop the vehicle).
The top view of the Controller modeled in Fig.4.2 is shown in Fig.6.5. The
controller gets information from four different sensors. After receiving all input
signals, the Controller will decide which state should be activated. Fig.6.6 and
Fig.6.8 describe two states that represent auto mode and userCtrl mode of vehicle.
If the driver intends to control the vehicle, the Control Button will transit to userCtrl ,
indicating that the vehicle is driven manually. When Auto location is active, and the
vehicle cannot get the information from the ahead vehicle, then userCtrl will be
activated automatically.
Fig.6.8 describes the behavior that it is of 50% probability that the message
transmission is failed. The message state is modeled by STA in Fig.6.7. When the
message is missed for 2s, userCtrl mode will be activated.
The behaviour of leader state in the Stateﬂow chart is captured by STA illus-
trated in Fig.6.9. The leader gets image information from CoopEnv and changes its
27

--- Page 35 ---
Formal Analysis of Non-functional Properties for a Cooperative Automotive System
(a) Sensor of sending signals
(b) Sensor of receiving signals
Figure 6.3: STA for modeling ComDevice
running mode according to signType , the current running state and velocity. The
substates of leader state is modeled in Fig.6.10.
The inner behaviours of Stop can be captured in Fig.6.10(a). Similarly, Fig.6.10
(b) and Fig.6.10 (c) describe the behaviour of turnLeft ,turnRight . Fig.6.11 (a) and
Fig.6.11 (b) illustrates the STA of accanddecstate respectively. When the leader
vehicle detects a stop sign ( signType == 5) and if it is in Auto mode, Stop state
inleader STA will be activated and the torque will be set to maximum value (the
velocity will be decreased rapidly). When the velocity of the vehicle is less than or
equal to 0, it will stop and static state (shown in Fig.6.10) will be active. When a
minimum speed limit sign is detected or the driver takes control of the vehicle, the
straight state will be active. When the lead vehicle detects a left turn sign and the
straight state is active, turnLeft state will be active. The vehicle will ﬁrst decelerate
by decreasing the value of its gear until its velocity is less than or equal to 30km/h.
Afterwards, the direction of the vehicle will be changed according to its current
direction and the detected trafﬁc sign. After turning, the vehicle will increase its
velocity to the original velocity before turning.
The inner behaviour speedUp andspeedDown is modeled in Fig.6.12. When
the vehicle is decelerating, the torque ( torq) of the vehicle will be increased and
the gear ( gear) will be decreased. Since the velocity of one vehicle is positively
proportional to gear, the velocity will be increased when gear is increased. When
the vehicle ﬁnishes turning, the torque of the vehicle will be decreased and the gear
28

--- Page 36 ---
Formal Analysis of Non-functional Properties for a Cooperative Automotive System
(a) Brake Pedal
(b) Control Status Button
(c) Gear
(d) Steer
Figure 6.4: STA for modeling DriverBehaviour
29

--- Page 37 ---
Formal Analysis of Non-functional Properties for a Cooperative Automotive System
Figure 6.5: STA of Controller
Figure 6.6: STA of Control state
Figure 6.7: STA for deciding whether the message is missing
30

--- Page 38 ---
Formal Analysis of Non-functional Properties for a Cooperative Automotive System
Figure 6.8: STA for modeling Communication state
Figure 6.9: STA for modeling leader state
31

--- Page 39 ---
Formal Analysis of Non-functional Properties for a Cooperative Automotive System
(a) Stop
(b) Turn Left
(c) Turn Right
Figure 6.10: STA for modeling substates of leader state
32

--- Page 40 ---
Formal Analysis of Non-functional Properties for a Cooperative Automotive System
(a) Accelerate
(b) Decelerate
Figure 6.11: STA for modeling substates of leader state
will be increased to resume to the original velocity.
The inner behaviour of turnLeft state is captured in Fig.6.13. Similarly, when
the vehicle detects a turn right sign, it will decelerate until its speed velocity is less
than 30km/h. Afterwards, it will turn (its running directions will be changed) and
increases its velocity. The accanddecstates (Fig.6.10(d), (e)) represent the states
that the vehicle is accelerating or decelerating. When the lead vehicle (v1) detects
a minimum speed limit, and the velocity of the vehicle is less than the limit, acc
state will be active. The torque of the vehicle will be decreased to order to increase
the velocity. In the mean time, the gear of the vehicle will be increased every 40ms
until it reaches the maximum value. When the lead vehicle detects a maximum speed
limit and the velocity is larger than the limit, it will activate decstate and its velocity
will be decreased.
The behaviour of the follower is captured in Fig.6.14. The follow vehicle will
decide its behaviour by three super-states: stop,turn andstraight , which will be
active according to the velocity and running mode of the lead vehicle. It is re-
quired to guarantee the distance between the following vehicle and the lead vehicle
should be limited in order to ensure the safety. When the follower is in straight state
(Fig.6.15(c)), it will always check the distance departing from the leader vehicle by
executing checkDistance() function. If the distance is less than the safety distance,
then it will activate decstate (Fig.6.15(c)) inside straight state. If the following
vehicle is in decstate, which is shown in Fig.6.16(a), it will increase its torque or
decrease its gear every 40ms until it reaches 0. If the distance between the following
33

--- Page 41 ---
Formal Analysis of Non-functional Properties for a Cooperative Automotive System
(a) speedDown
(b) speedUp
Figure 6.12: STA of turnLeft state
34

--- Page 42 ---
Formal Analysis of Non-functional Properties for a Cooperative Automotive System
(a) speedDown
(b) speedUp
Figure 6.13: STA of turnRight state
35

--- Page 43 ---
Formal Analysis of Non-functional Properties for a Cooperative Automotive System
vehicle and the leader vehicle is greater than the safety distance, the vehicle will
stop decelerating. When the distance between the following vehicle and the leader
vehicle is greater than 500m, in this case, the communication between the two vehi-
cles may be lost. Hence the following vehicle should increase its speed in order to
maintain the communication quality.
As presented in Fig.6.16(b), when the vehicle accelerates, it will decrease its
torque and increase its gear every 40ms. If the lead vehicle is braking, the follower
will activate stop state (shown in Fig.6.15(a)). When the follower stops, it will main-
tain the safety distance with the lead vehicle. When the follow vehicle detects that
its running direction and the running direction of the lead vehicle are different, it
will turn left/right in order to keep the same running direction with the lead vehicle.
In this case, the following vehicle will ﬁrst reach the turning point of the lead ve-
hicle (recorded in judgeturnpoint ), which is illustrated in Fig.6.14. Similar to lead
vehicle, the following vehicle will ﬁrst decreases the velocity to turn and increase to
ﬁnish turning. Detailed behaviors of turn state is captured in Fig.6.17.
Figure 6.14: STA of follower state
If the driver takes control of the vehicle, userCtrl (Fig.6.18) state will be active.
The movement of the vehicle will be controlled by the driver. Hence when the driver
pressed the brake pedal, stop state in userCtrl will be active. Detailed behaviours of
stop state is captured in Fig.6.19(a).
However, when the driver increases the velocity of the vehicle, stop state will
transit to straight state. In straight mode,the speed of the vehicle can be increased/de-
creased by changing the gear (gear up or gear down). As shown in Fig.6.16, the vehi-
cle will adjust its velocity according to the operation by the driver. If the driver steer
to left or right, the vehicle will decrease its velocity to turn and increase the velocity
to the original velocity after turning (as illustrated in Fig.6.21 and Fig. 6.22).
36

--- Page 44 ---
Formal Analysis of Non-functional Properties for a Cooperative Automotive System
(a) stop
(b) turn
(c) straight
Figure 6.15: STA of follower state
37

--- Page 45 ---
Formal Analysis of Non-functional Properties for a Cooperative Automotive System
(a) dec
(b) acc
Figure 6.16: STA for modeling substates of straight state
38

--- Page 46 ---
Formal Analysis of Non-functional Properties for a Cooperative Automotive System
(a) speedDown
(b) speedUp
Figure 6.17: STA for modeling substates of turn state
39

--- Page 47 ---
Formal Analysis of Non-functional Properties for a Cooperative Automotive System
Figure 6.18: STA for modeling userctrl state
40

--- Page 48 ---
Formal Analysis of Non-functional Properties for a Cooperative Automotive System
(a) stop
(b) TurnLeft
(c) TurnRight
(d) Straight
Figure 6.19: STA of UserCtrl state
41

--- Page 49 ---
Formal Analysis of Non-functional Properties for a Cooperative Automotive System
(a) gearUp
 (b) gearDown
Figure 6.20: STA for modeling substates of straight state
(a) SpeedDownL
(b) SpeedUpL
Figure 6.21: STA for modeling substates of turnleft state
42

--- Page 50 ---
Formal Analysis of Non-functional Properties for a Cooperative Automotive System
(a) SpeedDownR
(b) SpeedUpR
Figure 6.22: STA for modeling substates of turnright state
43

--- Page 51 ---
Formal Analysis of Non-functional Properties for a Cooperative Automotive System
Chapter 7
(Non)-functional Property Translation in
UPPAAL -SMC
In this section, we discuss semantics of the extended Periodic, Sporadic , and
Comparison timing constraints (X TC) with probabilistic parameters according to
TADL [9]. Afterwards, we provide translation of X TCin U PPAAL -SMC. Finally, we
present how the energy consumption of an individual vehicle in CAS can be modeled
in U PPAAL -SMC.
7.1 Probabilistic Timing Constraints Translation
XTCthat we veriﬁed follow the weakly-hard ( WH) approach [9], which describes
that a bounded number of occurrences among all are allowed to violate the con-
straints. The semantics of the WH(c,m,k) is that a system behavior must satisfy a
given timing constraint cat least mtimes out of kconsecutive occurrences. We use
object-oriented notation to deﬁne the attributes of occurrences of an event except for
Comparison timing constraint, which does not related to any event. fp.erefers to
an event eoffp. we apply eiande(i) to represent the ithoccurrence of fp.eand
the time point of ithoccurrence respectively.
WH(End-to-End,m,k) limits the interval between the occurrences of fp.source
and corresponding fp.target . For any source i2fp.source (ijfp.sourcej),
out of kconsecutive occurrences of fp.source , i.e., source itosource i+k, at least
msatisfy lowerjtarget(i)-source(i) jupper , wherejtarget(i)-source(i) j
denotes the corresponding delay of fp.source . We have previously proposed the
translation pattern of probabilistic End-to-End constraint, which is applicable for
the system where target ialways happens prior to source i+1. To allow the case that
source i+1occurs prior to target i, we model End-to-End constraint as a spawn-
able STA [5]. As shown in Fig.7.1(a), whenever fp.source occurs, Source STA
will activate a spawned STA ( STA sp(i)) from End-to-End STA (in Fig.7.1(b)).
When STA sp(i) is activated, the clock clkstarts to count from 0 until target i
occurs. STA sp(i)will judge whether the time interval from source itotarget i
is within the lower and upper bound. According to the judgment, either success or
Technical Report 44

--- Page 52 ---
Formal Analysis of Non-functional Properties for a Cooperative Automotive System
(a) Source
 (b) End-to-End (e2e)
(c) Noncumulative
 (d) Sporadic
Figure 7.1: Probabilistic Extension of Timing Constraints in U PPAAL -SMC
faillocation will be activated, representing that the End-to-End constraint is satis-
ﬁed or not. Afterwards, STA sp(i)will be inactive. To ensure the correspondence
offp.source andfp.target , iftarget idoesn’t occur, STA sp(i)will be inactive
when target i+1occurs. WH(End-to-End,m,k) is speciﬁed as: Pr[bound ]([ ]8
source i2fp.source (:STA sp(i).f ail))>P.
WH(Periodic,m,k) limits the period of the successive occurrences of an event
including jitter . As our previous work has provide probabilistic extension of Cumu
Periodic and translation rules to STA, we focus on Noncumu Periodic .Noncumu
Periodic : For any e(i)2fp.start , at least mtimes out of koccurrences, e(i)
satisﬁes: ( i*T-jittere(i)i*T+jitter ). In Fig.7.1(c), the STA enforces the ith
event event to occur within [ i*T-jitter ,i*T+jitter ]. Initially, STA resets the local
clock clkwhen it counts to jitter , which indicates that the time moves backwards
byjitter time on the time line. When event happen, STA will judge if clkis within
[T-2*jitter ,T] and changes its current state to either ( success orfail) based on the
judgment. Afterwards, the STA will wait at reset till period Tand reset clk. Fi-
nally the STA repeats the calculation. WH(Noncumu Periodic,m,k) is speciﬁed as:
Pr[bound ]([ ]:STA Noncumu Periodic :f ail)P.
WH(Sporadic,m,k) describes a single event fpthat occurs sporadically. For
anye(i)2fp.start s.t. its successive occurrence e’(i) starts at e(i) , out of
kconsecutive occurrences e(i) , i.e., e(i) toe(i+k) , at least msequences satisfy
(je’(i)-e(i)jmin), where mindenotes the minimum time interval between con-
secutive occurrences.In Fig.7.1(d), initially, STA resets the local clock clkwhen
it receives signal event ?, which indicates the ﬁrst occurrence of an event. When
STA receives event ? again, it will judge if clkis larger than minand changes its
current state to either ( success orfail) based on the judgment. Finally STA reset
45

--- Page 53 ---
Formal Analysis of Non-functional Properties for a Cooperative Automotive System
clkand repeat calculation. WH(Sporadic,m,k) is speciﬁed as: Pr[bound ]([ ]:
STA Sporadic :f ail)P.
WH(Comparison,m,k) limits the comparison relation (including <,,==,
and>) among timing expressions, where WH(Comparison,m,k) can be expressed
as arithmetic. WH(Comparison,m,k) is deﬁned as: out of kruns, at least mtimes the
comparison relation between TimingExpr1 andTimingExpr2 is satisﬁed.
WH(Comparison,m,k) is interpreted as: Pr[bound ]([]TimingExpr1TimingExpr2 )
P, where2f <,,=,or>g.
7.2 Energy Constraint Estimation
Fig.7.2 shows the stochastic timed automata (STA) that estimates the energy con-
sumption of the Controller of the lead vehicle with extended arithmetic on clocks:
total energy represents the total energy consumption of the Controller of the lead
vehicle. Different modes of the vehicle are corresponded to different locations in
the STA. As the energy consumption rate for turning right and turning left mode
are the same, we combine the two modes into one location in the STA, i.e., turn-
LeftorRight . Similarly, the acceleration and deceleration mode of the Controller are
combined into decoracc . Since the energy consumption rate varies with the running
mode of the vehicle, e.g., the energy consumes faster when the vehicle is in braking
mode than when the vehicle drives in a constant speed, we deﬁne total energy’ (the
rate of total energy ) with ordinary differential equation (ODE) and assign different
values to total energy’ for different locations in the STA. Parameters a,b,cand
dare user-deﬁned coefﬁcients to estimate energy consumption of the lead vehicle
when it drives in a constant speed, brakes, turns or increases (decreases) its speed
respectively. The values of the coefﬁcients indicate the increasing rate of the en-
ergy consumption of the Controller and b>d>c>a. The estimation of energy
consumption requirement of Controller (R48) will be evaluated in Chap.8.
Also, the four sensors in Fig.3.2(b) will consume energy. As VeDynamicDevice
is an imitation of how the velocity of an vehicle can be achieved, its energy con-
sumption is more like the mechanical kinetic energy of the vehicle. While in our
case, the velocity and the energy consumption of the vehicle is strongly related
to the mode of the vehicle, thus we model the mechanical kinetic energy con-
sumption in Controller (Fig.7.2). The energy of the other three fps,ComDevice ,
SignRecDevice andVeModeDevice , are modeled in Fig.7.3. In order to simplify
calculation, we set constants as the increasing rate of energy consumption of each
sensor. When the sensor is working, the energy consumption will increase uni-
formly. And when the sensors don’t work anymore, the energy consumption will
not increase.
46

--- Page 54 ---
Formal Analysis of Non-functional Properties for a Cooperative Automotive System
Figure 7.2: Energy estimation of v1Controller
(a) Energy of ComDevice
 (b) Energy of VeModeDevice
(c) Energy of SignRecDevice
Figure 7.3: Energy constraints on sensors in U PPAAL -SMC
47

--- Page 55 ---
Formal Analysis of Non-functional Properties for a Cooperative Automotive System
Chapter 8
Experiment and Veriﬁcation
Formal veriﬁcation of functional and non-functional properties are conducted by
using SDV and U PPAAL -SMC. Since SDV only supports a sub-set of blocks in
Simulink block library, several blocks need to be replaced from the original model,
e.g., look-up table block and random value generator . The proof objective models
that specify the functional and non-functional properties are constructed, which are
illustrated in the following ﬁgures.
Figure 8.1: When v1 runs automatically and if there is no message received by the vehicle for a certain
time, the running mode of the vehicle should be changed to manual mode within a certain time: G(G[0;200]
v1.Auto==true^v1.msg == false =)F[0;2000]v1.userCtrl == true)
Figure 8.2: When v1 runs automatically with a constant speed, if it detects a stop sign, it should start to brake
in 500ms: G(v1.Auto == true^v1.const == true^signType == 5 =)F[0;500]v1.stop == true)
Functional properties of CAS (R1-R26) can be measured using observer STAs.
Observer STA describes the time delay between two transitions, i.e., two events.
An event can be indicated by a synchronization channel, changes of states or data.
Trigger STA represents the events that are represented by changes of states or data.
Fig.8.15 shows how functional requirements can be modeled in observer STA. For
Technical Report 48

--- Page 56 ---
Formal Analysis of Non-functional Properties for a Cooperative Automotive System
Figure 8.3: When the lead vehicle (v1) runs automatically with a constant speed, if it detects left turn sign,
it should start to turn left in 200ms: G(v1.auto == true^v1.const == true^signType == 4 =)F[0;200]
v1.turnLeft == true)
Figure 8.4: If v1 is driven by the driver and it is running with a constant speed, the driver steers to the left,
the vehicle will turn left within 200ms: G(v1.userCtrl == true ^v1.const == true^v1.steerReq == 1 =)
F[0;200]v1.turnLeft == true)
Figure 8.5: If v1 is driven by the driver and it is running at a constant speed, the driver brakes the car, the
vehicle will slow down. G: (v1.userCtrl == true ^v1.const == true^v1.brakeReq == 2 =)F[0;200]v1.brake
== true)
Figure 8.6: When v1 is driven by the driver and it is running at a constant speed, if the driver gears up, the
vehicle will accelerate. G(v1.userCtrl == true ^v1.const == true^v1.gearReq >v1.gear =)F[0;200]v1.acc
== true)
49

--- Page 57 ---
Formal Analysis of Non-functional Properties for a Cooperative Automotive System
Figure 8.7: When the vehicles are running horizontally, following vehicle should not run ahead of lead vehicle.
G(v1.dx == 1^v2.dx == 1^v3.dx == 1 =)v1.x >v2.x)
Figure 8.8: When the lead vehicle detects a stop sign, the three vehicles should stop in 5s. G(v1.auto == true
^signType == 5 =)F[0;5000]v1.static == true^v2.static == true^v3.static==true)
Figure 8.9: Noncumulative Periodic timing constraint: A Periodic acquisition of VehicleDynamic of
v1 must be carried out for every 50 ms with a jitter 10 ms. G(v1.velIn == true =)v1.velIn == false U[40;60]
v1.velIn == true)
Figure 8.10: Cumulative Periodic timing constraint of R27
50

--- Page 58 ---
Formal Analysis of Non-functional Properties for a Cooperative Automotive System
Figure 8.11: Sporadic constraint: After the running mode of the lead vehicle is changed to manual mode
because of the failed message transmission, the driver should not change it into auto mode within 20 seconds.
G(v1.msgNormal == false =)v1.auto == false U[2000 ;¥]) v1.auto == true
Figure 8.12: AnExecution constraint applied on v3Controller , which measured from the inputs ports Avel
to output ports gearReq ,torqueReq , and brake , should be between 100 ms and 300 ms; G(v3.ctrlIn =)
F[100;300]v3.ctrlOut)
Figure 8.13: AnExecution constraint applied on v3Controller , which measured from the inputs ports Avel
to output ports gearReq ,torqueReq , and brake , should be between 100 ms and 300 ms; G(v3.ctrlIn =)
F[100;300]v3.ctrlOut)
51

--- Page 59 ---
Formal Analysis of Non-functional Properties for a Cooperative Automotive System
(a) Upper bound
(b) Lower bound
Figure 8.14: AnExecution constraint applied on ComDevice of v1, which measured from the inputs ports
torqueSet ,gearSet andbrake to output ports wheelSpeed ,direct should be between 100 ms and 150 ms; G
(v1.sdrIn =)F[100;300]v1.sdrOut
52

--- Page 60 ---
Formal Analysis of Non-functional Properties for a Cooperative Automotive System
R1, the observer STA will start to count the elapsed time when communication fail-
ure occurs. It stops counting when the driver of this vehicle takes control of the
vehicle. An STA is used to indicate the time instant at which the driver takes con-
trol of the car (the manual mode is activated). Whenever the user takes control
(inuc[0]==1), a signal will be sent to the STA in Fig.8.15(a) and time counting will
be ceased.
(a) R1
 (b) Trigger of R1
Figure 8.15: Observer STA of R1 and its triggering
Veriﬁcation of timing properties (R27-R50) are done by adapting observer STAs
in Fig.8.16. R27-R29 are veriﬁed by using the STAs in Fig.8.16(a) and (b), where the
VeDynamicDevice is triggered periodly with jitter 10ms. R30-R32 are Sporadic
constraints: if communication is missing, the driver should take control of the vehi-
cle for at least 2s (Fig.8.16(c)). The Execution timing constraint of Controller
andComDevice are considered in STAs shown in Fig.8.16(d), (e). The End-to-End
constraints measured from the Controller of the lead vehicles to the Controller
of the follow vehicles (R39 and R40) can be checked by employing the STAs in
Fig.8.16(f). R41-R43 measure the time duration from the Controller of each
vehicle receiving signal from the sensors to sendig information to other vehicles
(Fig.8.16(g)). The synchronization of the input ports of the Controller can be
modeled in STA in Fig.8.16(h).
Table.8.1 depicts the veriﬁcation result of a list of functional (R1-R26) and
non-functional (R27-R50) properties. The experiments are performed on a computer
with Intel Core i3 CPU and 4GB of RAM. For Periodic timing constraints (R27-
R29), results are provided in two categories: cumulative (R27.1, R28.1, R29.1) and
non-cumulative (R27.2, R28.2, R29.2). The non-functional properties (R27-R50)
are all satisﬁed in both U PPAAL -SMC and SDV . The functional properties R1-R22,
R25-R26 are established as valid in SDV and are satisﬁed in U PPAAL -SMC with
conﬁdence greater than 95%, while R23-R24 is invalid in both SDV and U PPAAL -
SMC.
The invalid property R23 is identiﬁed using SDV and U PPAAL -SMC. The
counter-examples (CE) generated by SDV is shown in Fig.8.19. We perform the
simulation in U PPAAL -SMC to obtain the error trace of CE, which is illustrated in
53

--- Page 61 ---
Formal Analysis of Non-functional Properties for a Cooperative Automotive System
(a) Cumulative Periodic
 (b) Noncumulative Periodic
(c) Sporadic
(d) Synchronization
Figure 8.16: UPPAAL -SMC STAs for timing constraints veriﬁcation
54

--- Page 62 ---
Formal Analysis of Non-functional Properties for a Cooperative Automotive System
(a) Execution on Controller
 (b) Execution on Sensor
Figure 8.17: UPPAAL -SMC STAs for End-to-End timing constraints veriﬁcation
(a) End-to-End between vehicles
 (b) End-to-End for one vehicle
Figure 8.18: UPPAAL -SMC STAs for End-to-End timing constraints veriﬁcation
55

--- Page 63 ---
Formal Analysis of Non-functional Properties for a Cooperative Automotive SystemTable 8.1: Logic expression and veriﬁcation results of the requirements
Req Type Expression Result Time (min) Memory (Mb) CPU (%))
R1SDV G(G[0;2000]v1.auto==true^v1.msgNormal==false =)F[0;200]
v1.userCtrl==true)valid 14.95 1675.47 0.55
UPPAAL -SMC Pr[63000] ([ ] (:Commufail(0).fail)) [0.902, 1] 7.61 38.48 22.40
R2SDV G(G[0;200]v2.auto==true^v2.msgNormal==false =)F[0;200]
v2.userCtrl==true)valid 18.45 1782.39 0.29
UPPAAL -SMC Pr[63000] ([ ] (:Commufail(1).fail)) [0.902, 1] 6.83 40.49 22.49
R3SDV G(G[0;200]v3.auto==true^v3.msgNormal==false =)F[0;200]
v3.userCtrl==true)valid 26.3 1932.35 0.69
UPPAAL -SMC Pr[63000] ([ ] (:Commufail(2).fail)) [0.902, 1] 7.89 42.88 22.62
R4SDV G(v1.auto==true^v1.const==true^signType==5 =)F[0;500]
v1.brake==true)valid 46.8 1964.57 10.25
UPPAAL -SMC Pr[63000] ([ ] (:R4TR.fail)) >0.95 valid 21.63 39.27 24.75
R5SDV G(v1.auto==true^v1.const==true^signType==4 =)F[0;200]
v1.turnLeft==true)valid 40.08 2072.23 11.21
UPPAAL -SMC Pr[63000] ([ ] (:R5TR.fail)) >0.95 valid 25.33 39.20 24.52
R6SDV G(v1.auto==true^v1.const==true^signType==3 =)F[0;200]
v1.turnRight==true)valid 40.28 2026.57 6.84
UPPAAL -SMC Pr[63000] ([ ] (:R6TR.fail)) >0.95 valid 25.67 39.20 24.78
R7SDV G(v1.userCtrl==true ^v1.const==true^v1.steerReq==1 =)
F[0;200]v1.turnLeft==true)valid 99.95 2144.16 8.64
UPPAAL -SMC Pr[63000] ([ ] (:R7TR.fail)) >0.95 valid 27.6 39.10 24.67
R8SDV G(v1.userCtrl==true ^v1.const==true^v1.steerReq==2 =)
F[0;200]v1.turnRight==true)valid 157.68 1852.91 1.78
UPPAAL -SMC Pr[63000] ([ ] (:R8TR.fail)) >0.95 valid 24.48 39.09 24.65
R9SDV G(v1.userCtrl==true ^v1.const==true^v1.brakeReq==2 =)
F[0;200]v1.brake==true)valid 80.46 1667 1.46
UPPAAL -SMC Pr[63000] ([ ] (:R9TR.fail)) >0.95 valid 28.2 39.26 24.63
R10SDV G(v1.userCtrl==true ^v1.const==true^v1.gearReq >v1.gear
=)F[0;200]v1.acc==true)valid 6.98 1882.97 2.95
UPPAAL -SMC Pr[63000] ([ ] (:R10TR.fail)) >0.95 valid 29.16 38.92 24.52
R11SDV G(v1.userCtrl==true ^v1.const==true^v1.gearReq <v1.gear
=)F[0;200]v1.dec==true)valid 259.98 1430 1.85
UPPAAL -SMC Pr[63000] ([ ] (:R11TR.fail)) >0.95 valid 29.03 39.24 24.57
56

--- Page 64 ---
Formal Analysis of Non-functional Properties for a Cooperative Automotive SystemReq Type Expression Result Time (min) Memory (Mb) CPU (%))
R12SDV G(v1.dx==1^v2.dx==1^v3.dx==1 =)v1.x>v2.x) valid 14.02 1320 3.65
UPPAAL -SMC Pr[63000]([ ] (dx[0]==1 ^dy[0]==0^dx[1]==1^dy[1]==0
^(inStr[0]_indec[0]_instr[0]_inacc[0]_inconstSpeed[0])^
(inStr[1]_instr[1]) =)x[0]>x[1]))>0.95valid 13.27 57.06 24.31
R13 SDV G(v1.dx==1^v2.dx==1^v3.dx==1 =)v2.x>v3.x) valid 35.37 2085 3.05
UPPAAL -SMC Pr[63000]([ ] (dx[1]==1 ^dy[1]==0^dx[2]==1^dy[2]==0
^(inStr[1]_indec[1]_instr[1]_inacc[1]_inconstSpeed[1])^
(inStr[2]_instr[2]) =)x[1]>x[2]))>0.95valid 11.43 55.67 24.42
R14SDV G( v1auto^signType==5 =)F[0;5000](v1static^v2static^
v3static) )valid 4.67 1903 4.91
UPPAAL -SMC Pr[63000] ([ ] (:allstop.fail)) >0.95 valid 20.28 52.47 23.10
R15SDV G(v1.const==true^v2.const==true^v1.vel >v2.vel =)F[0;200]
v2.acc==true)valid 5.10 2095 4.20
UPPAAL -SMC Pr[63000] ([ ] (:acc(1).fail)) >0.95 valid 21.52 43.68 22.43
R16SDV G(v2.const==true^v3.const==true^v2.vel >v3.vel =)F[0;200]
v3.acc==true)valid 0.15 2038 38.76
UPPAAL -SMC Pr[63000] ([ ] (:acc(2).fail)) >0.95 valid 19.43 40.46 23.21
R17 SDV G(v1.const==true^v2.const==true^v1.vel <v2.vel =)F[0;200]
v2.dec==true)valid 0.15 1963 23.04
UPPAAL -SMC Pr[63000] ([ ] (:R17TR.fail)) >0.95 valid 27.3 39.10 24.60
R18 SDV G(v2.const==true^v3.const==true^v2.vel <v3.vel =)F[0;200]
v3.dec==true)valid 11.52 2026 3.99
UPPAAL -SMC Pr[63000] ([ ] (:R18TR.fail)) >0.95 valid 26.89 39.07 24.73
R19SDV G(v1.const==true^v2.const==true^dist12 >500 =)
v2.acc==truevalid 0.04 1961 4.38
UPPAAL -SMC Pr[63000] ([ ] (:R19TR.fail)) >0.95 valid 27.2 39.16 24.84
R20SDV G(v1.const==true^v2.const==true^dist12 >500=)
v3.acc==truevalid 0.01 1961 4.38
UPPAAL -SMC Pr[63000] ([ ] (:R20TR.fail)) >0.95 valid 26.53 38.92 24.65
R21SDV G(v1.const==true^v2.const==true^dist12 <safeDis =)
v2.dec==truevalid 11.13 2054 4.09
UPPAAL -SMC Pr[63000] ([ ] (:dec(1).fail)) >0.95 valid 22.1 43.23 22.60
R22SDV G(v2.const==true^v3.const==true^dist23 <safeDis =)
v3.dec==truevalid 0.03 2234 3.92
UPPAAL -SMC Pr[63000] ([ ] (:dec(1).fail)) >0.95 valid 20.59 43.27 22.81
57

--- Page 65 ---
Formal Analysis of Non-functional Properties for a Cooperative Automotive SystemReq Type Expression Result Time (min) Memory (Mb) CPU (%))
R23SDV G(v1TurnLeft =)F[0;5000]RunInSameLine) valid 15.49 1492.96 1.82
UPPAAL -SMC Pr[63000] ([ ]:turnleftTime12.fail) >0.95 valid 40.93 42.46 24.79
R24SDV G(v2TurnLeft =)F[0;5000]RunInSameLine) valid 1.10 1918 3.48
UPPAAL -SMC Pr[63000] ([ ]:turnleftTime23.fail) >0.95 valid 42.71 47.23 23.80
R25SDV G(v1.turnRight==true =) F[0;5000]v1.turnRight==false ^
v2.turnRight==false ^v1.x==v2.x_v1.y==v2.y)valid 0.31 1930 2.02
UPPAAL -SMC Pr[63000] ([ ]:turnrightTime23.fail) >0.95 valid 39.13 55.11 24.63
R26SDV G(v2.turnRight==true =) F[0;5000]v2.turnRight==false ^
v3.turnRight==false ^v2.x==v3.x_v2.y==v3.y)valid 31.26 2253 3.86
UPPAAL -SMC Pr[63000] ([ ]:turnrightTime23.fail) >0.95 valid 40.24 56.20 24.89
R27.1SDV G(velIn==1 =)F[40;60]velIn==1) valid 28.4 1642 6.51
UPPAAL -SMC Pr[63000] ([ ]:VehicleDynamic(0) cumulative .fail)>0.95 valid 7.18 51.57 24.64
R27.2SDV G(period pre==0^period==1 =)F[0;20]velIn) valid 8.42 1819.24 1.22
UPPAAL -SMC Pr[63000] ([ ]:VehicleDynamic(0) noncumulative .fail)>0.95 valid 9.17 51.19 23.25
R28.1SDV G(vel2In==1 =)F[40;60]vel2In==1) valid 0.71 1285 0.5
UPPAAL -SMC Pr[63000] ([ ]:VehicleDynamic(1) cumulative .fail)>0.95 valid 7.28 42.70 24.65
R28.2SDV G(p2pre==0^p2==1 =)F[0;20]vel2In) valid 10.98 2002.17 8.10
UPPAAL -SMC Pr[63000] ([ ]:VehicleDynamic(1) noncumulative .fail)>0.95 valid 5.6 51.79 24.66
R29.1SDV G(vel3In==1 =)F[40;60]vel2In==1) valid 0.65 54.69 8.3
UPPAAL -SMC Pr[63000] ([ ]:VehicleDynamic(2) cumulative .fail)>0.95 valid 7.23 42.70 24.69
R29.2SDV G(p3pre==0^p3==1 =)F[0;20]vel3In) valid 6.97 2084 8.30
UPPAAL -SMC Pr[63000] ([ ]:VehicleDynamic(2) noncumulative .fail)>0.95 valid 6.13 51.79 24.49
R30SDV G(:msgNormal =): autoU[2000 ;¥]auto==true) valid 4h 1588.14 7.27
UPPAAL -SMC Pr[63000] ([ ] (:sporadic(0).fail)) >0.95 valid 0.001 30.96 0.9
R31SDV G(:msgNormal2 =): auto2 U[2000 ;¥]auto2==true) valid 49.15 2253 38.85
UPPAAL -SMC Pr[63000] ([ ] (:sporadic(1).fail)) >0.95 valid 0.002 30.96 1.2
R32SDV G(:msgNormal =): auto3 U[2000 ;¥]auto3==true) valid 59.15 2125 36.40
UPPAAL -SMC Pr[63000] ([ ] (:sporadic(2).fail)) >0.95 valid 23:03 1167.54 22.24
R33SDV G(rpre==0^r>0=)F[100;300]s==r) valid 19.7 1661 7.31
UPPAAL -SMC Pr[63000] ([ ] (:v1Controller execution .fail))>0.95 valid 7.7 51.67 24.71
R34SDV G(r2pre==0^r2>0=)F[100;300]s2==r2) valid 1.38 1493 3.63
UPPAAL -SMC Pr[63000] ([ ] (:v2Controller execution .fail))>0.95 valid 6.5 42.61 24.72
R35SDV G(r3pre==0^r3>0=)F[100;300]s3==r3) valid 1.08 1551 20.3
UPPAAL -SMC Pr[63000] ([ ] (:v3Controller execution .fail))>0.95 valid 7.12 43.24 24.79
R36SDV G(rcd pre==0^rcd>0=)F[50;100]scd==rcd) valid 1.83 1533.81 1.49
UPPAAL -SMC Pr[63000] ([ ] (:sensor1 execution .fail))>0.95 valid 7.47 43.24 24.97
58

--- Page 66 ---
Formal Analysis of Non-functional Properties for a Cooperative Automotive SystemReq Type Expression Result Time (min) Memory (Mb) CPU (%))
R37SDV G(rcd2 pre==0^rcd2>0=)F[50;100]scd2==rcd2) valid 1.23 12.69 8.07
UPPAAL -SMC Pr[63000] ([ ] (:sensor2 execution .fail))>0.95 valid 7.03 42.72 24.63
R38 SDV G(rcd3 pre==0^rcd3>0=)F[50;100]scd3==rcd3) valid 2.26 1515.98 3.41
UPPAAL -SMC Pr[63000] ([ ] (:sensor3 execution .fail))>0.95 valid 9.91 35.12 24.56
R39 SDV G(sou1 pre==0^sou2>0=)(F[300;700]tar1==cur1^tar16=0)) valid 30.01 1718.32 3.78
UPPAAL -SMC Pr[63000] ([ ] forall (e:endtoend) ( :e.fail)) >0.95 valid 5.15 39.38 24.54
R40 SDV G(sou2 pre==0^sou2>0=)(F[300;700]tar2==cur2^tar26=0)) valid 10.08 1204.86 5.96
UPPAAL -SMC Pr[63000] ([ ] forall (e:endtoend2) ( :e.fail)) >0.95 valid 6.27 42.56 24.68
R41SDV G(v1.const==true ^v2.const==true^dist12 >500 =)
v2.acc==truevalid 0.04 1961 4.38
UPPAAL -SMC Pr[63000] ([ ] (:execv1.fail)) >0.95 valid 7.28 42.70 24.76
R42SDV G(v1.const==true ^v2.const==true^dist12 >500 =)
v3.acc==truevalid 0.01 1961 4.38
UPPAAL -SMC Pr[63000] ([ ] (:execv2.fail)) >0.95 valid 7.47 42.70 24.67
R43SDV G(v2.const==true ^v3.const==true^dist23 <safeDis =)
v3.dec==truevalid 0.03 2234 3.92
UPPAAL -SMC Pr[63000] ([ ] (:execv3.fail)) >0.95 valid 7.33 42.70 24.77
R44SDV G(:rpre==0^r>0=)F[0;200]posIn^F[0;200]AposIn^F[0;200]
velIn^F[0;200]AvelIn)valid 32.53 36.51 15.31
UPPAAL -SMC Pr[63000] ([ ]:v1Controller synchronization .fail))>0.95 valid 5.98 50.84 24.51
R45SDV G(:r2pre==0^r2>0=)F[0;200]posIn2^F[0;200]AposIn2^
F[0;200]velIn2^F[0;200]AvelIn2)valid 105.75 1197.67 6.56
UPPAAL -SMC Pr[63000] ([ ]:v2Controller synchronization .fail))>0.95 valid 7.17 42.37 24.74
R46SDV G(:r3pre==0^r3>0=)F[0;200]posIn3^F[0;200]AposIn3^
F[0;200]velIn3^F[0;200]AvelIn3)valid 1.04 1249.30 4.3
UPPAAL -SMC Pr[63000] ([ ]:v3Controller synchronization .fail))>0.95 valid 7.33 42.37 24.52
R47SDV G(etcon1==w con1^etcon2==w con2^etsen1==w sen1^etsen2==w sen2
=)wcon1+ w con2+ w sen1+ w sen2>EndtoEnd)valid 31.26 2253 38.86
UPPAAL -SMC Pr[63000]( < >:(etcon1==w con1^etcon2==w con2^etsen1==w sen1
^etsen2==w sen2=)wcon1+ w con2+ w sen1+ w sen2>EndtoEnd)
60.05valid 165.65 175.24 23.53
R48SDV G(BrakeEnergy <30000) valid 32.53 36.51 1.31
SMC E[63000;100] (max: energy.braking energy) 79441172 8.7 51.44 24.58
SMC simulate 100 [ 63000] (total energy) valid 7.67 45.50 24.63
R49SDV G(ConEnergy 630) valid 18.05 1000.8 2.05
UPPAAL -SMC Pr[63000] ([ ] energy con630))>0.95 valid 18.05 1000.8 0.9
R50SDV G(CDEnergy 65) valid 31.26 2253 38.86
UPPAAL -SMC Pr[63000] ([ ] energy sen65))>0.95 valid 20.2 80.9 24.02
59

--- Page 67 ---
Formal Analysis of Non-functional Properties for a Cooperative Automotive System
Fig.8.20. DirectX andDirectY represent the directions of the three vehicles and posx
andposy indicate the position of the three vehicles. After analyzing CE, the cause
of errors was found: After the lead vehicle turns left, the following vehicle begins
to turn left after it detects that the running direction of the lead vehicle is changed.
The two vehicles turn left at different locations. We modify SDV and U PPAAL -
SMC models according to the CE: a turning location where the lead vehicle turns is
recorded and sent to the following vehicle. Hence all the following vehicles should
turn at the same turning location to ensure that the three vehicles are still in a lane
after turning. After the reﬁnement, R23 and R24 are satisﬁed in both SDV and
UPPAAL -SMC.
(a)signType
(b) Vehicles’ position
Figure 8.19: CE in SDV: In (b), leadVe.y equals to followVe.y ) from 0 to 8s, which indicates that the two
vehicles run in the same lane. In (a), signType becomes “turn left (4)” at 8s and the lead vehicle begins to turn
left. However, the following vehicle turns left at a different location ( leadVe.x is not equal to followVe.x at 9s).
Hence, the “x” is unequal after turning, which means that the two vehicles run on different lanes. Thus R23
and R24 is violated.
Probability Estimation query is applied on R1-R47, R49-R50, indicating that
the property can be veriﬁed as valid within [0.902, 1]. For estimate the maximum
energy consumption for braking the vehicles (R48), we adapt Expected value query
60

--- Page 68 ---
Formal Analysis of Non-functional Properties for a Cooperative Automotive System
Figure 8.20: CE in SMC: At the beginning, three vehicles run towards direction (1,0). The three values of
posy are the same, which indicates that the three vehicles are in the same lane. After a left turn sign is detected,
the lead vehicle starts to turn left. Since the ﬁrst follower turns left at (184, 0) and the second turns left at (157,
0), the three values of posx are not equal after turning, which indicates the three vehicle are not running in the
same lane. Thus R5 is violated.
Figure 8.21: Probabilistic distribution of the expected energy consumption
61

--- Page 69 ---
Formal Analysis of Non-functional Properties for a Cooperative Automotive System
Figure 8.22: Total energy consumption estimation of the lead vehicle
and generate probability distribution diagram (Fig.8.21) of the expected energy con-
sumption. It illustrates that the average of energy consumption is approx. 7944J and
the expected energy consumption is always less than 30kJ. The total energy of the
lead vehicle is estimated with Simulation query for 100 times within 300 time units.
Fig.8.22 shows the result of one time simulation. At the beginning, the lead vehi-
cle runs at constant speed, hence the total energy consumption increases constantly.
When it recognizes the minimum speed limit sign ( signType = 2), the vehicle starts
to accelerate thus energy is consumed faster. The total energy then increases con-
stantly with slight ﬂuctuation due to energy consumption of the sensor and the cam-
era. When the vehicle recognizes a turn right sign ( signType = 3), it turns right
from 1.55s to 1.88s, during which the energy is consumed faster than when the ve-
hicle is running constantly. The vehicle ﬁnally recognizes a stop sign ( signType =
5) at 4.46s and stops at 4.84s. The total energy consumed during braking is 18.33kJ,
which is less than 30kJ, which validates R48. After the vehicle stops, the sensors
and the camera still work, thus the consumed energy increases slowly.
62

--- Page 70 ---
Formal Analysis of Non-functional Properties for a Cooperative Automotive System
Chapter 9
Veriﬁcation of Comparison Constraint in
UPPAAL -SMC
For comparison constraint (R47), which states that the execution time interval mea-
sured from v1Controller tov2Controller needs to be greater than or equal to the
sum of the worst-case execution time of fps, can be speciﬁed as:
j= [ ](et con1==w con1^etcon2==w con2^etsen1==w sen1^etsen2==w sen2=)
wcon1+ w con2+ w sen1+ w sen2>EndtoEnd .
We verify this requirement in U PPAAL -SMC with the query:
Pr[63000]j>0:95 (9.1)
which means that the probability that jis satisﬁed should be greater than or equal
to 0.95. However, U PPAAL -SMC cannot give the decidable result because of the
large state space. Hence we transform the “always” operator with its dual operator
“eventually” and then verify that the probability that the negation of jis satisﬁed is
less than or equal to 0.05, i.e.,
Pr[63000]:j60:05 (9.2)
In CTL, A[ ] yE< >:y. Here we want to validates the equivalence be-
tween (9.1) and (9.2) by specifying same requirements into the two different types of
formulas and compare the veriﬁcation results. We applied the existed case studies of
Fischer protocol and train gate system provided in U PPAAL -SMC˙In Fischer protocol
example, we check the mutual exclusion property that two processes can get into the
critical section at the same time. We verify
Pr[63000]([ ]8(i:id)8(j:id)P(i):cs^P(j):cs=)i=j)>p (9.3)
Pr[63000](< >:(8(i:id)8(j:id)P(i):cs^P(j):cs=)i=j))61 p(9.4)
Technical Report 63

--- Page 71 ---
Formal Analysis of Non-functional Properties for a Cooperative Automotive System
Table 9.1: Veriﬁcation Results of Mutual Exclusion in Fischer Protocol Example
Expression Result Time (s) No. of Runs Mem (Kb)
Pr [63000] ([ ] forall (i:id t) forall (j:id t) P(i).cs^P(j).cs
=)i == j) >0.95valid 0.003 140 26188
Pr [63000] ( < >:(forall (i:id t) forall (j:id t) P(i).cs^
P(j).cs =)i == j)) 60.05valid 8.672 140 26188
Pr [63000] ([ ] forall (i:id t) forall (j:id t) P(i).cs^P(j).cs
=)i == j) >0.9valid 0.009 67 26752
Pr [63000] ( < >:(forall (i:id t) forall (j:id t) P(i).cs^
P(j).cs =)i == j)) 60.1valid 4.175 67 26752
Pr [63000] ([ ] forall (i:id t) forall (j:id t) P(i).cs^P(j).cs
=)i == j) >0.8valid 0.007 60 27688
Pr [63000] ( < >:(forall (i:id t) forall (j:id t) P(i).cs^
P(j).cs =)i == j)) 60.2valid 3.081 60 27688
Pr [63000] ([ ] forall (i:id t) forall (j:id t) P(i).cs^P(j).cs
=)i == j) >0.7valid 0.002 53 26996
Pr [63000] ( < >:(forall (i:id t) forall (j:id t) P(i).cs^
P(j).cs =)i == j)) 60.3valid 3.263 53 26996
Pr [63000] ([ ] forall (i:id t) forall (j:id t) P(i).cs^P(j).cs
=)i == j) >0.6valid 0.007 31 27584
Pr [63000] ( < >:(forall (i:id t) forall (j:id t) P(i).cs^
P(j).cs =)i == j)) 60.4valid 1.755 31 27584
Pr [63000] ([ ] forall (i:id t) forall (j:id t) P(i).cs^P(j).cs
=)i == j) >0.5valid 0.005 26 27724
Pr [63000] ( < >:(forall (i:id t) forall (j:id t) P(i).cs^
P(j).cs =)i == j)) 60.5valid 1.487 26 27740
The veriﬁcation results of (9.3) and (9.4) are shown in Table.9.1. The veriﬁca-
tion results of (9.3) and (9.4) are the same. We then conduct the same veriﬁcation
for the mutual exclusion property in train gate system, i.e., only one train can cross
the gate at one time.
Pr[6100]([]8(i:id)8(j:id)Train (i):cross^Train (j):cross =)i=j)>p(9.5)
Pr[6100](<>:(8(i:id)8(j:id)Train (i):cross^Train (j):cross =)i=j))61 p
(9.6)
Table.9.2 shows that veriﬁcation result of (9.5) and (9.6) are the same. From
the above experimental results, we can conclude that (9.1) and (9.2) are equivalent.
By verifying the negation of R47 is satisﬁed with the probability at most 0.05, we
can get the decidable result of R47.
64

--- Page 72 ---
Formal Analysis of Non-functional Properties for a Cooperative Automotive System
Table 9.2: Veriﬁcation Results of Mutual Exclusion in Train Gate Example
Expression Result Time (s) No. of Runs Mem (Kb)
Pr [6100] ([ ] forall (i:id t) forall (j:id t) Train(i).Cross ^
Train(j).Cross =)i == j) >0.95valid 0.004 140 26988
Pr [6100] ( < >:(forall (i:id t) forall (j:id t) Train(i).Cross^
Train(j).Cross =)i == j)) 60.05valid 0.078 140 26988
Pr [6100] ([ ] forall (i:id t) forall (j:id t) Train(i).Cross ^
Train(j).Cross =)i == j) >0.85valid 0.003 126 26980
Pr [6100] ( < >:(forall (i:id t) forall (j:id t) Train(i).Cross^
Train(j).Cross =)i == j)) 60.15valid 0.003 126 26996
Pr [6100] ([ ] forall (i:id t) forall (j:id t) Train(i).Cross ^
Train(j).Cross =)i == j) >0.75valid 0.004 111 27080
Pr [6100] ( < >:(forall (i:id t) forall (j:id t) Train(i).Cross^
Train(j).Cross =)i == j)) 60.25valid 0.003 111 27436
Pr [6100] ([ ] forall (i:id t) forall (j:id t) Train(i).Cross ^
Train(j).Cross =)i == j) >0.65valid 0.003 96 27436
Pr [6100] ( < >:(forall (i:id t) forall (j:id t) Train(i).Cross^
Train(j).Cross =)i == j)) 60.35valid 0.002 96 27260
Pr [6100] ([ ] forall (i:id t) forall (j:id t) Train(i).Cross ^
Train(j).Cross =)i == j) >0.55valid 0.003 81 27272
Pr [6100] ( < >:(forall (i:id t) forall (j:id t) Train(i).Cross^
Train(j).Cross =)i == j)) 60.45valid 0.057 81 27272
Pr [6100] ([ ] forall (i:id t) forall (j:id t) Train(i).Cross ^
Train(j).Cross =)i == j) >0.45valid 0.003 67 27308
Pr [6100] ( < >:(forall (i:id t) forall (j:id t) Train(i).Cross^
Train(j).Cross =)i == j)) 60.55valid 0.032 67 27328
Pr [6100] ([ ] forall (i:id t) forall (j:id t) Train(i).Cross ^
Train(j).Cross =)i == j) >0.35valid 0.005 52 26752
Pr [6100] ( < >:(forall (i:id t) forall (j:id t) Train(i).Cross^
Train(j).Cross =)i == j)) 60.65valid 0.041 52 26752
Pr [6100] ([ ] forall (i:id t) forall (j:id t) Train(i).Cross ^
Train(j).Cross =)i == j) >0.25valid 0.003 37 27896
Pr [6100] ( < >:(forall (i:id t) forall (j:id t) Train(i).Cross^
Train(j).Cross =)i == j)) 60.75valid 0.007 37 27840
Pr [6100] ([ ] forall (i:id t) forall (j:id t) Train(i).Cross ^
Train(j).Cross =)i == j) >0.15valid 0.007 23 27840
Pr [6100] ( < >:(forall (i:id t) forall (j:id t) Train(i).Cross^
Train(j).Cross =)i == j)) 60.85valid 0.007 23 27840
Pr [6100] ([ ] forall (i:id t) forall (j:id t) Train(i).Cross ^
Train(j).Cross =)i == j) >0.05valid 0.0.007 8 27840
Pr [6100] ( < >:(forall (i:id t) forall (j:id t) Train(i).Cross^
Train(j).Cross =)i == j)) 60.95valid 0.007 8 27840
65

--- Page 73 ---
Formal Analysis of Non-functional Properties for a Cooperative Automotive System
Chapter 10
Related Work
In the context of E AST-ADL, efforts on the integration of E AST-ADL and formal
techniques based on timing constraints were investigated in several works [14–16],
which are however, limited to the executional aspects of system functions without
addressing energy-aware behaviors. Kang [17], Goknil et al. [18] and Seceleanu
et al. [19] deﬁned the execution semantics of both the controller and the environ-
ment of industrial systems in CCSL [20] which are also given as mapping to U P-
PAAL models amenable to model checking. In contrast to our current work, those
approaches lack precise stochastic annotations specifying continuous dynamics in
particular regarding different energy consumption rates during execution. Though,
Kang et al. [21, 22] and Marinescu et al. [23] present both simulation and model
checking approaches of S IMULINK and U PPAAL -SMC on E AST-ADL models, nei-
ther formal speciﬁcation nor veriﬁcation of extended E AST-ADL timing constraints
with probability were conducted. Our approach is a ﬁrst application on the integra-
tion of E AST-ADL and formal V&V techniques based on a composition of energy-
and probabilistic extension of E AST-ADL/TADL constraints. Gholami [24] extended
the block library of S IMULINK in order to specify basic LTL properties and to trans-
form them into assertions that are veriﬁable by SDV. However, this work is limited
to functional properties (i.e., Neither energy nor timing constraints are addressed)
and restricted to specify a subset of LTL.
Technical Report 66

--- Page 74 ---
Formal Analysis of Non-functional Properties for a Cooperative Automotive System
Chapter 11
Conclusion
We present an approach to perform V&V on nonfunctional properties of (cooperative)-
automotive systems using SDV and U PPAAL -SMC at the early design phase: 1. ET
requirements are translated into POMs to perform formal veriﬁcation using SDV;
2. Probabilistic extension of E AST-ADL constraints is deﬁned and the semantics of
the X TCis translated into analyzable U PPAAL -SMC models for formal veriﬁcation;
3. A set of mapping rules is proposed to facilitate the guarantee of translation and
V&V are performed on the X TC. As ongoing work, a dedicated plugin that di-
rectly provides translation of LTL2S IMULINK and of S/S to U PPAAL -SMC in fully
automatic will supplement our tool chain, A-BeTA (A b: EAST- ADLBehavioral
Modeling and Translation into Analy-zable Model).
Technical Report 67

--- Page 75 ---
Formal Analysis of Non-functional Properties for a Cooperative Automotive System
Acknowledgment
This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China and In-
ternational Cooperation & Exchange Program (46000-41030005) within the project
EASY .
Technical Report 68

--- Page 76 ---
Formal Analysis of Non-functional Properties for a Cooperative Automotive System
References
[1] “ISO 26262-6: Road vehicles functional safety part 6. Product development
at the software level. International organization for standardization, geneva,”
2011.
[2] “IEC 61508: Functional safety of electrical, electronic, programmable elec-
tronic safety related systems. International organization for standardization,
geneva,” 2010.
[3] A. Legay and M. Viswanathan, “Statistical model checking: Challenges and
perspectives,” STTT , vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 369–376, 2015.
[4] A. David, D. Du, K. G. Larsen, A. Legay, M. Mikucionis, D. B. Poulsen, and
S. Sedwards, “Statistical model checking for stochastic hybrid systems,” in
HSB, ser. EPTCS 92, 2012, pp. 122–136.
[5] A. David, K. G. Larsen, A. Legay, M. Mikucionis, and D. B. Poulsen, “Uppaal
SMC tutorial,” STTT , vol. 17, no. 4, 2015, pp. 397–415.
[6] EAST-ADL Consortium, “EAST-ADL domain model speciﬁcation v2.1.9,”
Maenad European Project, Tech. Rep., 2011. http://www.maenad.eu/
public/EAST-ADL-Specification_M2.1.9.1.pdf
[7] H. Blom, H. L ¨onn, F. Hagl, Y . Papadopoulos, M.-O.Reiser, C.-J. Sj ¨ostedt, D.-J.
Chen, F. Tagliab `o, S. Torchiaro, S. Tucci et al. , “EAST-ADL: An architecture
description language for automotive software-intensive systems,” Embedded
Computing Systems: Applications, Optimization, and Advanced Design , 2013,
p. 456.
[8] “Simulink/StateFlow,” http://www.mathworks.nl/products/ .
[9] H. Blom, L. Feng, H. L ¨onn, J. Nordlander, S. Kuntz, B. Lisper, S. Quinton,
M. Hanke, M.-A. Peraldi-Frati, A. Goknil, J. Deantoni, G. B. Defo, K. Klobe-
danz, M. zhan, and O. Honcharova, “Timing Model, Tools, algorithms, lan-
guages, methodology, USE cases,” TIMMO-2-USE, Tech. Rep., 2012.
[10] “UPPAAL-SMC,” http://people.cs.aau.dk/ ˜adavid/smc/ .
[11] C. Baier, J.-P. Katoen, and K. G. Larsen, Principles of Model Checking . MIT
press, 2008.
Technical Report 69

--- Page 77 ---
Formal Analysis of Non-functional Properties for a Cooperative Automotive System
[12] E. Y . Kang, D. Mu, and L. Huang, “Veriﬁcation and validation of a cooperative
automotive system,” Tech. Rep., 2017. [Online]. Available: https://sites.
google.com/site/kangeu/home/publications
[13] E. Y . Kang, D. Mu, L. Huang, and Q. Lan, “Model-based analysis of timing
and energy constraints in an autonomous vehicle system,” IEEE QRS-C , July
2017, pp. 525–532.
[14] T. N. Qureshi, D.-J. Chen, and M. T ¨orngren, A Timed Automata-Based Method
to Analyze EAST-ADL Timing Constraint Speciﬁcations . Springer, 2012.
[15] E. Kang, E. P. Enois, R. Marinescu, C. Seceleanu, P. Schobbens, and P. Pet-
tersson, “A methodology for formal analysis and veriﬁcation of EAST-ADL
models,” Reliability Engineering and System Safety Journal , 2013, pp. 127 –
138.
[16] E. Kang, P. Schobbens, and P. Pettersson, “Verifying functional behaviors of
automotive products in EAST-ADL2 using UPPAAL-PORT,” in SAFECOMP .
Springer, vol 6894, 2011, pp. 243–256.
[17] E. Kang and P. Schobbens, “Schedulability analysis support for automotive
systems: from requirement to implementation,” in 29th Symposium on Applied
Computing , 2014, pp. 1080–1085.
[18] A. Goknil, J. Suryadevara, M.-A. Peraldi-Frati, and F. Mallet, “Analysis sup-
port for TADL 2 timing constraints on EAST-ADL models,” ECSA . Springer,
2013.
[19] C. Seceleanu, M. Johansson, J. Suryadevara, G. Sapienza, T. Seceleanu, S.-E.
Ellevseth, and P. Pettersson, “Analyzing a wind turbine system: From simula-
tion to formal veriﬁcation,” Science of Computer Programming , vol. 133, 2017,
pp. 216–242.
[20] F. Mallet, M.-A. Peraldi-Frati, and C. Andre, “MARTE CCSL to execute
EAST-ADL timing requirements,” in 12th International Symposium on Obe-
jct, Component, Service-oriented Real-time Distributed Computing , 2009, pp.
249 –253.
[21] E. Kang, J. Chen, L. Ke, and S. Chen, “Statistical analysis of energy-aware
real-time automotive systems in EAST-ADL/Stateﬂow,” ICIEA . IEEE, 2016,
pp. 1328–1333.
[22] E. Kang, L. Ke, M. Hua, and Y . Wang, “Verifying automotive systems in EAST-
ADL/Stateﬂow using UPPAAL,” in 2015 22nd Asia-Paciﬁc Software Engineer-
ing Conference . IEEE, 2015, pp. 143–150.
70

--- Page 78 ---
Formal Analysis of Non-functional Properties for a Cooperative Automotive System
[23] R. Marinescu, H. Kaijser, M. Miku `eionis, C. Seceleanu, H. L ¨onn, and A. David,
“Analyzing industrial architectural models by simulation and model-checking,”
in3rd International Workshop on Formal Techniques for Safety-Critical Sys-
tems. Springer, 2014, pp. 189 – 205.
[24] M.-R. Gholami, “Verifying timed LTL properties using simulink design veri-
ﬁer,” Ph.D. dissertation, ´Ecole Polytechnique de Montr ´eal, 2016.
71
