--- Page 1 ---
Aalborg Universitet
A toolchain for domestic heat-pump control using Uppaal Stratego
Riaz, Imran; Jensen, Peter Gjøl; Larsen, Kim Guldstrand; Srba, Jiri
Published in:
Science of Computer Programming
DOI (link to publication from Publisher):
10.1016/j.scico.2023.102987
Creative Commons License
CC BY 4.0
Publication date:
2023
Document Version
Publisher's PDF, also known as Version of record
Link to publication from Aalborg University
Citation for published version (APA):
Riaz, I., Jensen, P. G., Larsen, K. G., & Srba, J. (2023). A toolchain for domestic heat-pump control using
Uppaal Stratego. Science of Computer Programming, 230, Article 102987.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scico.2023.102987
General rights
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright owners
and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
            - Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the public portal for the purpose of private study or research.
            - You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit-making activity or commercial gain
            - You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the public portal -
Take down policy
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us at vbn@aub.aau.dk providing details, and we will remove access to
the work immediately and investigate your claim.
Downloaded from vbn.aau.dk on: April 01, 2026

--- Page 2 ---
Science of Computer Programming 230 (2023) 102987
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Science  of Computer  Programming
journal  homepage:  www.elsevier.com/locate/scico
A toolchain  for domestic  heat-pump  control  using Uppaal  
Stratego
Imran Riaz Hasrat∗, Peter Gjøl Jensen∗, Kim Guldstrand Larsen,  Jiˇrí Srba
Department  of Computer  Science,  Aalborg  University,  Aalborg,  Denmark
a r t i c l e i n f o a b s t r a c t
Article history:
Received  2 December  2022
Received  in revised  form 12 May 2023
Accepted  7 June 2023
Available  online 14 June 2023
Keywords:
Model identiﬁcation
Strategy  synthesis
Heat-pump  control
Floor heatingHeatpump-based  ﬂoor-heating  systems  for domestic  heating  offer ﬂexibility  in energy  
consumption  patterns,  which can be utilized  for reducing  heating  costs—in  particular  when 
considering  hour-based  electricity  prices.  Such ﬂexibility  is hard to exploit  via classical  
Model  Predictive  Control  (MPC),  and in addition,  MPC requires  a priori calibration  (i.e., 
model  identiﬁcation)  which is often costly and becomes  outdated  as the dynamics  and 
use of a building  change.  We solve these shortcomings  by combining  recent  advancements  
in stochastic  model  identiﬁcation  and automatic  (near-)optimal  controller  synthesis.  Our 
method  suggests  an adaptive  model-identiﬁcation  using the tool CTSM-R, and an eﬃcient  
control  synthesis  based on Q-learning  for Euclidean  Markov  Decision  Processes  viaUppaal  
Stratego . This paper investigates  three potential  control  strategy  perspectives  (i.e., ﬁxed-
target,  target-band,  and setbacks)  to achieve  energy  eﬃciency  in the heating  system.  To 
examine  the performance  of the suggested  approaches,  we demonstrate  our method  on an 
experimental  Danish  family-house  from the OpSys project.  The results  show that a ﬁxed-
target strategy  offers up to a 39% reduction  in heating  cost while retaining  comparable  
comfort  to a standard  bang-bang  controller.  Even better,  target-band  and setbacks  strategies  
gain up to 46-49%  energy  cost savings.  Furthermore,  we show the ﬂexibility  of our method  
by computing  the Pareto-frontier  that visualizes  the cost/comfort  tradeoff.  Additionally,  
we discuss  the applicability  ofStratego for an old-fashioned  binary-mode  heat-pump  
system  and report signiﬁcant  cost savings  (33%) as compared  to the bang-bang  controller.  
Moreover,  we also present  the performance  analysis  ofStratego against  an industry-
standard  control  strategy.
©2023 The Author(s).  Published  by Elsevier  B.V. This is an open access  article  under the 
CC BY license  (http://creativecommons  .org /licenses  /by /4 .0/).
1. Introduction
Space  heating  is the primary  source  of energy  consumption  in residential  and commercial  buildings,  consuming  more 
than 40% of the energy  delivered  to such facilities  [1]. Intelligent  control  of heating  systems  promises  to reduce  this energy  
use, thereby  countering  global  warming  effects  and CO2emissions.
Model  Predictive  Controllers  (MPC)  have been demonstrated  as an eﬃcient  method  for control  of domestic  heating  
systems  with the potential  for both energy  and cost reductions  [2–4]. In the classical  setting  of MPC, an approximate  system  
model  under  control  is constructed  before  application  and paired  with a control  objective.  In the setting  of a domestic  
heating  system,  such a model  describes  heat dynamics  of the house  and external  effects  that may impact  the temperature  
*Corresponding  authors.
E-mail addresses: imranh@cs.aau.dk (I.R. Hasrat),  pgj@cs.aau.dk (P.G. Jensen).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scico.2023.102987
0167-6423/ ©2023 The Author(s).  Published  by Elsevier  B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://
creativecommons  .org /licenses  /by /4 .0/).

--- Page 3 ---
I.R. Hasrat, P.G. Jensen, K.G. Larsen et al. Science of Computer Programming 230 (2023) 102987
of the house,  for instance,  residential  behaviour,  outdoor  temperature  or solar radiation  contributing  to the temperature  of 
the rooms.  This model  also deﬁnes  the possible  actions  of the controller  along with the impact  of these control-actions  on 
the behaviour  of the system.  When  the given model  is paired  with a control  objective  (e.g. minimize  cost and maximize  
comfort),  (model,  objective)-pairing  induces  an optimization -problem.  Depending  on the formalism  used to describe  the 
model  and control  objective,  different  solverscan be used to obtain  the next optimal  control  action  to use. As a result,  one 
can apply the MPC-controller  in a tight and periodic  loop of “observe,  solve, act” to control  the system.
This paper  targets  a ﬂoor-heating  heat-pump  control  problem  for a standard  family  house.  In the case of domestic  
heating  systems,  three signiﬁcant  challenges  appear  in the classical  MPC application:
•the heating  dynamics  of a house  are not known  a priori,
•the behaviour  and dynamics  of a house  change  over the lifetime  of the house,
•the design,  tuning  and deployment  of MPC for learning  near-optimal  control  strategies  to minimize  a desired  objective  
function  is not straightforward.
To address  these issues,  we propose  a framework  for model-identiﬁcation  for use with the tool UPPAAL  Stratego extending  
on the concept  presented  by Larsen  et al. [3]. In particular,  we introduce  the model  estimation  into the loop of the regular  
MPC-control.  We employ  the tool CTSM-R (continuous  time stochastic  modelling  in R) [5]t o identify  the house  model  by 
utilizing  the historical  dataof the house.  We further  propose  an online  strategy  synthesis  approach  where  the controller  con-
siders  the real-time  and periodically  predicts  future  control  decisions.  The controller  learns  near-optimal  strategies  within  
the given price budget  based  on the selected  learning  method.  The main contributions  of the method  are as follows.
1. Developing  data-driven  thermal  dynamics  and constant-coeﬃcient  estimations  using CTSM-R.
2. Modelling  a case-house  inStratego using the estimated  heat transfer  coeﬃcients  and thermal  dynamics.
3. Employing Stratego MPC to learn near-optimal  control  strategies  for operating  the heat-pump  under  four control  ap-
proaches,  namely  ﬁxed-target , target-band , setbacks and binary-mode controller.
4. Examining  the performance  stability  ofStratego by providing  experimentations  for four weeks.
5. Analysing  the eﬃciency  of theStratego controller  to handle  the trade-off  between  heating  cost and user comfort.
6. Investigating  the impact  of various  measurement  noise and learning  parameters  on the controller’s  performance.
Related  workSeveral  domestic  heating  systems  have been discussed  in the literature.  Vogler-Finck  et al. [4]s t u d y  the house  
dynamics  where  the control  objective  is given in the restricted  form of linear  equations.  They apply grey-box modelling  
facility  from MATLAB  System  Identiﬁcation  toolbox  [6]t o identify  a model  for predictive  control.  They examine  three family  
houses  of different  ages and the results  witness  reduced  carbon  footprint  of heating  by MPC optimization  based  on energy  
and CO2. However,  they use a simple  deterministic  model  for MPC whereas  we apply a stochastic  model  for MPC with an 
online  strategy  synthesis  approach.  An alternative  approach  is adopted  by Larsen  et al. [3] who  utilize  the tool Stratego [7,8]
to obtain  near-optimal control-optimization  for switch-controlled  hybrid  stochastic  systems.  The authors  suggest  an online  
and compositional  synthesis  approach  for a family-house  ﬂoor-heating  system,  focusing  purely  on maximizing  comfort  and 
disregarding  energy  consumption.  Hermansen  et al. [9]t a r g e t  the energy  cost optimization  problem  by designing  an MPC 
for an existing  heat booster  substance  for ultra-low  temperature  district  heating.  They validate  their control  strategy  on a 
22-ﬂat  building  in Copenhagen  and report  signiﬁcant  energy  cost reduction.  In our work, we instead  optimize  for multiple  
objectives  (comfort  and cost) and introduce  a model  identiﬁcation  approach  into the loop of an MPC control.
For large and complex  systems,  model  identiﬁcation  becomes  an important  aspect  of MPC control  to identify  a relatively  
simple  and reduced-order  model  to make it practically  controllable  in real-time.  However,  Prívara  et al. [10]d e s c r i b e  that 
model  identiﬁcation  is one of the main practical  obstacles  for large scale use of MPC. The grey-box modelling  is one of the 
commonly  used approaches  that require  a small data-set  for model  identiﬁcation.  Ferracuti  et al. [11] and Fonti et al. [12]
utilise  low-order  grey-box models  to detect  short-term  (15min,  1h and 3h horizons)  thermal  behaviour  of a real building  
while Reynders  et al. [13]u s e d  grey-box approach  to identify  reduced-order  energy  building  models.  However,  these works  
do not offer a controller  synthesis  for the identiﬁed  models.  We create  a specialised  model  for a fully automatic  heat-pump  
case where  we ﬁrst identify  the model  and then use it for strategy  synthesis  and evaluation.
Vinther  et al. [14]p r o p o s e  black-box approach  to estimate  MPC models  from multiple  Artiﬁcial  Neural  Network  (ANN)  
techniques  with a Genetic  Algorithm  (GA) to predict  the future  set-points  (for room temperatures)  in an existing  ﬂoor-
heating  system.  Furthermore,  Nassif  et al. [15]a l s o  use ANN with GA for optimisation  of a HVAC  system.  Harasty  et al. 
[16] apply  a differential  evolution  (DE) algorithm  with ANN for MPC control  and optimisation  of room temperature  for 
the conservation  of cultural  heritage.  These  approaches  are based  on oﬄine  learning,  but we offer an online  learning  ap-
proach  where  the control  decisions  are predicted  periodically  for the near future  by considering  the real-time,  making  them 
applicable  in practice  even for long-lasting  horizons.
This paper  is an extended  version  of [17]w i t h  the following  three additional  contributions.
First, we extend  our previous  experiments  to allow Stratego to control  three more weeks  (from different  months)  to 
see the stability  in its performance.  Second,  we add more experiments  related  to sensitivity  analysis  of learning  parameters
to explore  the edge points  where Stratego achieves  the best possible  performance  and stops improving  further.  The last 
and the most signiﬁcant  contribution  is that we explore  target-band , setbacks, and binary-mode heat-pumps  as various  
2

--- Page 4 ---
I.R. Hasrat, P.G. Jensen, K.G. Larsen et al. Science of Computer Programming 230 (2023) 102987
Fig. 1.An Overview of the four-rooms family house equipped with ﬂoor-heating.
control  strategies.  We study the target-band and setbacks controllers  as potential  methods  of further  reducing  heating  energy  
consumption.  In contrast,  the purpose  of binary-mode controller  is to show the ability  ofStratego to save heating  cost while 
controlling  the old heat-pumps  operated  under  a binary-mode.
Replacing  a ﬁxed-target  with a comfort/target  band is a potential  way to unlock  the heat ﬂexibility  in the thermal  dy-
namics  of the building  [18,19]. Golmohamadi  et al. [18]a d d a 4 ◦C comfort-band  to optimize  power-to-heat  ﬂexibility  with 
an Economic  Model  Predictive  Controller,  while Williams  et al. [19]u t i l i z e  this ﬂexibility  to regulate  the room temperatures  
when a shortage/access  happens  in the supply  side. The heat ﬂexibility  offered  by heat-pumps  plays a key role in reducing  
the heating  cost [20]. The heat can be stored  in a thermal  storage  tank during  off-peak  periods  and used in peak peri-
ods. The authors  propose  a genetic  algorithm  that shifts most heating  loads to off-peak  periods.  These  approaches  are only 
helpful  for heating  cost reductions,  but at the same time they provide  generally  unacceptable  wide range of comfort-bands.  
However,  with our target-band controller,  we introduce  a small 1 ◦C comfort-band  that not only helps to save signiﬁcant  
energy  costs but also offers  acceptable  comfort.
Due to technological  advancements,  users can program  schedules  that suit their occupancy  patterns  and comfort  prefer-
ences.  They can set up a lower  temperature  (called  a setback)  for the sleeping  hours  and the period  of their absence.  Moon  
et al. [21]s t u d y  the effect of set-point,  setback  temperature,  and setback  period  for eﬃcient  energy  consumption  while 
an artiﬁcial  neural  network  (ANN)  model  is proposed  in [22]t o estimate  the good start point of a setback.  In addition  to 
programmable  schedules  of absence,  using an intelligent  system  that takes the GPS location  of the users into account  helps 
to improve  the preferred  comfort  and decrease  the heating  cost [23]. The intelligent  system  estimates  the arrival  time of 
the users and calculates  the heat activation  time. The system  activates  the heat early enough  to achieve  comfort  before  the 
ﬁrst resident  arrives  home.  However,  in our setbacks controller,  we stick to two ﬁxed setback  periods  (one for unoccupied  
duration  and the other for sleeping  hours)  and investigate  their effect on comfort  and energy  cost reductions.
2. Usecase  and method
OpSys  project [ 24]i n v e s t i g a t e s  energy  ﬂexibilities  in residential  buildings  with heat-pumps.  An experimental  house  has 
been constructed  in the OpSys  project,  and the modeling  of the house  has been performed  using Dymola software. Dymola
software [ 25]i s a commercial  modeling  and simulation  environment  based  on the open Modelica  modeling  language.  We 
utilize  the recorded  data from Dymola model  to demonstrate  our approach  on the same experimental  family  house,  which  is 
sketched  in Fig.1. It is a 150m2house  with four rooms  of different  sizes and material  properties:  Room 1is the designated  
living room with a build-in  kitchen,  Room 2 and Room 4 are bedrooms,  and Room 3 serves  as the bathroom  with a light 
concrete  ﬂoor as opposed  to the light wooden  ﬂoors  of the other rooms.  The system  uses hot water  as a means  of heat 
distribution.
As it is standard  for existing  houses,  the heating  system  has two layers  of control:  room thermostats  (with a ﬁxed 
mechanical  bang-bang  controller),  and a heat-pump  (for which  we derive  a controller).  The model  reﬂects  a realistic  sce-
nario where  an existing  building  is retroﬁtted  with an intelligent  heat-pump.  Notice  here that each room thermostat  acts 
independently  of the heat-pump  and the other thermostats;  it is simply  concerned  with opening  the ﬂow of hot water  
when the room temperature  drops below  a certain  set point (ﬁxed  to 22◦C in our experiments).  This implies  that the only 
control-point  of concern  is the intensity  of the heat-pump.
The system  is designed  as a closed-loop  system  with a ﬁxed distribution-key.  This means  that the ingoing  massﬂow  
of water  (Mf) must be distributed  to the rooms  via the manifold.  Conventionally,  the manifold  is calibrated  s.t. a ﬁxed 
proportion  of water  is designated  to each room.  This distribution-key  we denote  MfRifor a room i, where  i =1, ..., k, and 
kis the number  of rooms.  The individual  room thermostats  regulate  the binary  valves  vi. This implies  that the massﬂow  is 
re-distributed  (proportionally)  to the remaining  open valves  if certain  valves  are shut. Furthermore,  we denote  by Tforward
and Treturnthe forward  and return  water  temperature.
The main purpose  of the heat-pump  is to balance  the difference  between  the room temperatures  ˜Ti
rand a given set 
point Tgwith the cost of heating  cost(τ) =priceτ·wτ, which  is a time-dependent  function  of the energy  consumption  
of the heat-pump  wτ(determined  directly  by the controller)  and the market  electricity  price (priceτ) which  varies  on an 
hourly  basis and is known  24 hours  in advance.  Naturally,  a consumer  wishes  to weight  comfort  against  cost, and we 
3

--- Page 5 ---
I.R. Hasrat, P.G. Jensen, K.G. Larsen et al. Science of Computer Programming 230 (2023) 102987
Fig. 2.Estimation and control process using observed data.
can thus state the optimization  criteria  and introduce  the 0 ≤Wcomf≤1w e i g h t i n g  factor  that allows  for such tuning.  This 
allows  us to derive  the following  (Wcomf-parameterized)  ﬁtness  function  for our controllers  for a period  τ0to τngiven that 
the heat-pump  settings,  energy  prices  and room temperatures  (denoted  ˜Ti
r(τ)) are known  for the duration  for krooms  as:
F(τ0,τn)=τn/integraldisplay
τ0⎛
⎝/parenleftbig
(1−Wcomf)·cost(x)/parenrightbig
+Wcomf·/radicaltp/radicalvertex/radicalvertex/radicalbtk/summationdisplay
i(Tg−˜Ti
r(x))2⎞
⎠dx (1)
where  the ﬁrst part in the integral  reﬂects  the contribution  of energy  cost while the second  part records  the penalty  given 
when the indoor  temperature  (˜Ti
r) in a room deviates  from the set point (Tg); in the summation  part, the individual  penal-
ties are added  to make a combined  penalty.  Notice  that this function  penalizes  more signiﬁcant  deviations  of temperatures  
in a squared  fashion  while the cost increase  has a linear  impact  on the ﬁtness  function.
2.1. Methodological  overview
While  a high-ﬁdelity  model  of our experimental  house  (Dymola model)  is provided,  this model  is infeasible  for practi-
cal experiments  both due to its high computational  effort caused  by the high ﬁdelity  and due to licensing  issues  making  
massive  parallel  experiments  unfeasible.  The overview  of our suggested  approach  can be seen in Fig.2. We initially  derive  a 
low-ﬁdelity  model  of the thermal  dynamics  of the building  via a data-driven  grey-box model  estimation  using theCTSM-R
software  [26]. The CTSM-R library  allows  ﬁnding  best-ﬁt  parameters  for a stochastic  model  based  on samples  of a (virtual)  
house.  The speciﬁc  grey-box  formulation  is given in Section 3along with an evaluation  of its performance.  Notice  that the 
model-identiﬁcation  problem  is constructed  s.t. the estimation  can be computed  in a decomposed  manner,  i.e. a model  is 
computed  individually  for each room,  and the set of models  is later recomposed.  We do so to avoid an explosion  in com-
putational  effort from a large set of variables  to estimate.  While  this grey-box model  yields  us the internal  heat coeﬃcients  
(how the energy  dissipates  between  rooms  or a heater),  it does not capture  the heat transfer  from the hot water  ﬂowing  
through  the pipes.  Therefore,  we derive  a model  capturing  the relationship  between  internal  temperature  changes  and the 
drop in the heat-carrying  water,  yielding  us the return  water  temperature  (Treturn).
Given  these two thermal  models,  we can develop  estimated  house  model  of the experimental  house  and instantiate  a 
Euclidean  Markov  Decision  Process  (EMDP)  [27]f r o m  which Stratego can learn near-optimal  control  strategies.  This model  
not only simulates  the behaviour  of the house  but also contains  the expected  weather  and future  energy  price prediction.  
We use this model  for both evaluation  and predictive  control  in our experimental  setup,  including  an experiment  with 
varying  degrees  of noise in the model  used for predictive  control.  For instance,  we replay  a historical  weather  scenario  
during  the evaluation  while the predictive  controller  only has access  to an approximate  weather  forecast.
3. Thermal  model  identiﬁcation
The CTSM-R software  [5] allows  for continuous-time  grey-box model  identiﬁcation.  The general  method  of CTSM-R  is 
based  around  maximum  likelihood  estimation  and a gradient-decent  approach  for convergence.  It identiﬁes  Continuous  
Time Stochastic  Model  and estimates  the embedded  parameters. CTSM-R has been successfully  applied  for the identiﬁcation  
and estimation  of physical  system  models,  e.g., heat thermodynamics  of buildings  and walls,  thermostats  and radiators,  and 
more [28–30].
We model  the thermal  dynamics  of the house  as presented  in Equations (2)–(4)  from Fig.3. For readability,  we annotate  
the system  in the following  way: predicted  state-variables  by a tilde, e.g. ˜Ti
r, inputs  directly  affected  by the two levels  of 
controls  (i.e. the heat-pump or the room thermostat ) with an overline,  e.g. Mi, impact  of nature  with a dot, e.g. ˙Ta, and 
constants  (to be estimated)  are left without  decoration.
The thermal  dynamics  model  follows  a classical  three-state  framework  consisting  of room temperature  (˜Ti
r), heater  tem-
perature  (˜Ti
h) and envelope  temperature  (˜Ti
e). The three-state  energy  model  presented  in Equations (2)–(4)  is a modiﬁed  
version  of what was presented  in [26]. The model  [26]i s suited  for a single  room open to outside  from all sides but unable  
4

--- Page 6 ---
I.R. Hasrat, P.G. Jensen, K.G. Larsen et al. Science of Computer Programming 230 (2023) 102987
Fig. 3.The thermodynamics  system with the input data and the heat transfer  coeﬃcients  where i ∈{1, 2, 3, 4}and, (α), (β) are “resistance”  and “capacity”.
to capture  the heat effect from neighboring  rooms.  In contrast,  our modiﬁed  model  captures  the heat contributions  from 
neighboring  rooms  well. To reduce  the complexity,  we here consider  the rooms  as individual  model  identiﬁcation  problems  
to overcome  instability  in the model  identiﬁcation  when the number  of coeﬃcients  to be estimated  grows.  In Equation (2),  
the room temperature  (˜Ti
r) is directly  affected  by the heater  (relative  to the coeﬃcient  αi
h), the envelope  (relative  to the 
coeﬃcient  αi
e) and the direct  solar radiation  of the room ˙Si(relative  to the coeﬃcient  αi
s). In Equation (3),  the heater  
temperature  (˜Ti
h) is impacted  by the room temperature.  It also receives  energy  from the in-ﬂowing  hot water,  which  is pro-
portional  to the ﬂow rate Miand the relative  difference  to the forward  temperature  of the water  (Tforward). In Equation (4),  
the envelope  (˜Ti
e) models  the energy  transfer  through  the walls surrounding  the room.  The envelope  thus exchanges  energy  
with the room itself (˜Ti
r), the outside  world  ˙Toutdoor(proportional  to the coeﬃcient  αi
a), and with the other rooms  of the 
house  (the last sum term of Equation (4)).
A legend  of the variables  used can be seen in Fig.3a for data-variables  and Fig.3b for the transfer  coeﬃcients.  Given  a 
time-series  of historical  data of the variables  presented  in Fig.3a (excluding  ˜Ti
hand ˜Ti
e), theCTSM-R software  can estimate  
the heat transfer  coeﬃcients  presented  in Fig.3b. The model  is estimated  s.t. the suggested  coeﬃcients  allow us to predict  
˜Ti
rwith a high accuracy  given known  values  for the massﬂow  and temperature  of the feed-in  water  and the environmental  
inﬂuences  such as sun and outdoor  temperature.
Decomposed  grey-box  modelling Notice  here that the presented  model  only considers  a single  room.  This implies  that the 
identiﬁcation  can be done on a room-to-room  basis without  the explosion  in the coeﬃcients  to be estimated.  In general,  
this allows  enables  faster model  identiﬁcation.  This implies  repeating  the same model-identiﬁcation  scheme  four times but 
with different  indexing.  As we shall see later, four such identiﬁed  models  can be recomposed  to form a complete  model  
with high predictive  power.
Evaluation  of the estimations We shall now assess  the quality  of our proposed  model-identiﬁcation.  The model  is identi-
ﬁed on a time-series  consisting  of data generated  by the high-ﬁdelity Dymola model  using historical  weather  input from 
February  05, 2009, from Aalborg,  Denmark  and ﬁve days forward  at a sample  rate of 60 seconds.
We note that the model  estimation  for the values  is completed  in less than 7 minutes  for each room.  We remark  here 
that the data used for the estimation  contains  some effects  not captured  by Equations (2)–(4);  notably  occupants  and 
cooking  activities,  contributing  to signiﬁcant  noise in the system.
To estimate  the quality  of the model,  we compute  a 6000 minutes  time series  from Dymola model  data into CTSM-R and 
compare  the predicted  room temperatures  of each of the identiﬁed  room models  to the reference  temperatures.  In Fig.4
we see a head-to-head  comparison  for all the rooms  where  we can observe  that the identiﬁed  model  demonstrates  good 
predictive  power.  In particular,  we note that no divergent  behaviour  is observed.  The deviation  of each room from measured  
data can be seen in Fig.4e. Excluding  Room  1, the largest  average  deviation  observed  for all rooms  is less than 1C◦, and in 
general,  kept below  0.5C◦of difference.  However,  in Room  1 in the following  intervals  1000-1400,  2400-2900,  3800-4300,  
5

--- Page 7 ---
I.R. Hasrat, P.G. Jensen, K.G. Larsen et al. Science of Computer Programming 230 (2023) 102987
Fig. 4.Predicted, measured indoor temperatures and the deviations between them.
and 4700-5400  minutes,  signiﬁcant  deviation  occurs,  which  is traced  back (in the data) to the unaccounted  contribution  of 
heat from cooking  activities  which  are expected  to be unobservable  in a real application—and  not captured  during  the model  
identiﬁcation.  The starting  points  of these intervals  approximately  become  17:00,  16:00,  15:30,  and 6:30 when converted  to 
hours  of the day. The heat contribution  keeps  growing  for about  one and a half hours  during  each interval,  reﬂecting  that 
some stove is continuously  on. These  hours  probably  refer to the occupants’  dinner  and breakfast  cooking  activities.  We also 
observe  a lower  peak between  5000 to 6000 minutes  which  can be the outcome  of several  factors.  The main factor  is that 
CTSM-R  tries to minimize  the overall  average  error;  when it ﬁnds some signiﬁcant  upper  peaks  in the measured  data due to 
kitchen  activities,  it introduces  lower  peaks  in the predicted  trajectory  to balance  the error effect.  This lower  peak can also 
result  from human  behaviour,  e.g., opening  a window.  The other possible  factor  is that the house  thermodynamics  model  
does not capture  the solar radiation  effect and some other heat losses.
Estimating  return-water  temperatures The model  created  so far is only concerned  with the internal  transfer  of energy  in the 
house;  however,  in Fig.1we can see that the return-water  of the rooms  is given as input to the heat-pump.  We thus need 
to estimate  a second  model  for predicting  the return-water  temperature.  We here again adopt  a data-driven  approach  and 
derive  a model  of this temperature-drop  directly  from data. We here assume  a simple  linear  model;  a room’s  temperature  
increase  is assumed  to be primarily  due to energy  dissipation  from the heater.  While  this assumption  is valid in a closed  
system  (due to the principle  of energy  conservation),  we know that the assumption  is incorrect:  external  inﬂuences  occur,  
such as energy  loss and gain from neighboring  rooms.  This assumption  allows  us to establish  the relationship  described  
in Equations ( 5)–(6). In Equation ( 5), we state that the energy  loss (Energyi
loss) from the hot water  pipes is equal to the 
difference  of forward  water  (Tforward) and ﬂoor temperature  (˜Ti
h) for a speciﬁc  room.  The Equation ( 6)i n t r o d u c e s  the energy  
gain in a room (Energyi
gain), which  is the temperature  difference  between  ﬂoor and indoor  temperature.  In Equation ( 7), we 
show the assumption  that the difference  between  the forward  and return  water  temperatures  for individual  rooms  is equal 
to the sum of energy  loss and gain. By using historical  data for Tforward, ˜Ti
hand ˜Ti
r, we can estimate  the coeﬃcients  α, β
and intercept  γusing a simple  linear  regression  method  in R. Again,  these coeﬃcients  allow us to later predict  the value 
of Ti
returnfor use in our full predictive  model.  Notice  that prior to model-identiﬁcation,  we ﬁlter out data points  where  the 
water  is not ﬂowing  (i.e. the local thermostat  has shut off the supply).  It is observed  that while the return  temperatures  are 
all above  32 ◦C, the absolute  mean error in estimating  them is for all the rooms  between  0.74 ◦C and 0.95 ◦C.
Energyi
loss=Tforward −˜Ti
h(5)
Energyi
gain=˜Ti
h−˜Ti
r(6)
6

--- Page 8 ---
I.R. Hasrat, P.G. Jensen, K.G. Larsen et al. Science of Computer Programming 230 (2023) 102987
Fig. 5.Examples of Uppaalprimitives.
Tforward −Ti
return≈α·Energyi
loss+β·Energyi
gain+γ (7)
4. Modelling  in U PPAAL  STRATEGO
We now create  a complete  predictive  model  given the two identiﬁed  thermal  models.  For doing  so, we use theUppaal
tool suit [31–34] which  has been successfully  applied  in many industrial  projects  for veriﬁcation,  performance  analysis,  and 
strategy  synthesis. Uppaal  Stratego [7]i s a branch  of the tool that provides  machine  learning-based  techniques  for strategy  
synthesis  and cost optimization  of different  controllers  from Priced  Timed  MDPs.  It has a rich modelling  formalism  for 
stochastic  and hybrid  games  and control  synthesis  exploiting  eﬃcient  reinforcement  learning  facilities.  InUppaal, systems  
are modelled  as networks  of ﬁnite-state  automata  processes.  In addition, Stratego provides  C-library  support  [35] which  
offers  a convenient  way to construct  complex  interactions  with other libraries  and historical  data, for instance, Stratego
itself.
4.1. Introduction  toUppaal  Stratego
Uppaal provides  a graphical  user interface  to deﬁne  system  descriptions  as networks  of timed  automata.  It includes  
a description  language,  a simulator,  and a model-checker  as three main parts. The description  language  is the modeling  
language  that describes  the system  behavior  and provides  the data variables  for networks  of timed  automata.  The automata  
network  represents  the processes  that work in parallel;  each process  is instantiated  using a parameterized  template.  The 
simulator  and model-checker  provide  automated  analysis  and also help to enable  early fault detection  before  verifying  
the system.  To provide  a basic understanding  of the tool semantics,  we explain  some basic examples  in Fig.5. Further  
information  about  the tool can be found  in [31,36].
Locations: The single  circles  in Fig.5are regular  locations,  and the double  circle represents  an initial  location.  The arrows  
between  the locations  are transitions/actions.  The ﬁrst location  in Fig.5c is committed.  A committed  state cannot  be delayed,  
and the system  in a committed  state does not allow time to pass.
Clocks  and variables: The real-valued  clocks  facility  is available  in the tool to capture  critical  timing  aspects  of a system.  
The clocks  represent  the time progress  and handle  the continuous  expressions  as differential  equations.  On the other hand, 
discrete  variables  in the tool are used to provide  the data storage  facility.  In Fig.5a, we globally  declare  the clocks,  variables,  
and functions  used in the examples.  Anything  deﬁned  in the global  declarations  is accessible  by all the processes  in the 
system.  However,  the local declarations  limit access  to only a speciﬁc  process.
Invariant: It is an expression  on the locations  which  uses clocks  and integer  variables  to deﬁne  the maximum  allowed  time 
of stay on that location.  The invariant  x<=5in Fig.5b indicates  that the system  is allowed  to stay here until the clock x
reaches  the value up to 5.
Guard:A guard  is a condition  that uses clocks,  integers,  and constants;  it evaluates  to a Boolean  value.  The transition  in 
Fig.5b can only be taken when the guard  evaluates  to true, i.e., clock xhas at least a value 2.
Select:A select  label generates  a temporary  variable  accessible  only during  that particular  edge/transition.  The select  state-
ment in Fig.5c is equivalent  to i=1, ..., 5, meaning  that ﬁve transitions  with unique  ivalues  exist, and the controller  can 
choose  any transition  that sets ito a value between  1 and 5.
Update: The update  label is used to set, reset or update  the values  of variables  directly  or through  functions  just before  
leaving  a transition.  The functions  can be from the system’s  description  or some Clibraries.  The update  label in Fig.5d 
increments  the value of yusing function  g(x)if clock xvalue is more than 3.
Controllable  and uncontrollable  transitions: InUppaal, the transitions  can be controllable  or uncontrollable.  In Fig.5e, the 
solid edge indicates  controllable  action,  and the dashed  line indicates  uncontrollable  (controlled  by the environment)  action.  
If two parallel  running  processes  have controllable  and uncontrollable  actions  enabled  simultaneously,  the environment  
has priority  to take any transition  or pass control  to the controller.  If the controller  is given control,  it decides  the action  
according  to its strategy.
Communication: InUppaal, the processes  communicate  with each other through  channels  or shared  variables.  The variables  
declared  in global  declarations  are shared  variables.  The variable  yis shared  by all the processes  and is responsible  for 
exchanging  information.
7

--- Page 9 ---
I.R. Hasrat, P.G. Jensen, K.G. Larsen et al. Science of Computer Programming 230 (2023) 102987
Fig. 6.Function deﬁnitions and related variable declarations.
4.2. Case house model  inUppaal  Stratego
Recall  that our heating  system  has two levels  of control:  selection  of the heat-pump  intensity  and opening/closing  of 
the room thermostats.  We control  the heat-pump  intensity  with a bang-bang  (BB) and aStratego controller  and compare  
their performance.  However,  for both BBand Stratego , each room’s  thermostat  valve opens  if the indoor  temperature  
falls below  22 ◦C and closes  if it rises over 22 ◦C.BBswitches  the heat-pump  onand offbased  on the current  room 
temperatures,  unconcerned  with electricity  prices  or weather  conditions. Stratego , on the other hand, employs  machine  
learning  approaches  to learn better  future  control  decisions  by considering  the electricity  price and stochastic  weather  
forecast.  It optimizes  the ﬁtnessfunction  to reduce  the indoor  and target  temperature  gap and minimizes  the cost.
The overall  composition  of the system  as a model  inStratego can be seen in Fig.7. We design  sub-parts  of the system  
as separate  templates  (parameterizable  automata).  The dashed-line  areas represent  four templates  of the model:  Room, 
HeatPumpController , DataReader and ObjectiveFunction . In the Roomtemplate,  we express  the continuous  variables  ˜Ti
r, ˜Ti
h
and ˜Ti
e(developed  in Equations (2)–(4)  as real-time  clocks  which  evolve  with time, but with rate-expressions  matching  
the identiﬁed  models.  The DataReader template  reads the weather and day-ahead  electricity  priceinformation  from the data 
ﬁle into the model.  The ObjectiveFunction template  implements  the ﬁtness/optimization function  (see Equation  (1)). The 
HeatPumpController template  implements  the control  mechanism  of the controller  where  choices  for using different  energy  
levels  for heat-pump  are made.
To perform  speciﬁc  tasks, the templates  in Fig.7use functions  namely  room _control() , calculate _cop(), init(), 
set_massflow() and fetch _new_data(). We here describe  room _control() and fetch _new_data() functions  (see Fig.6b) 
and their related  declarations  (see Fig.6a). However,  the remaining  functions  are long and complex;  hence  their details  are 
kept in the repeatability  package  [37]. The function  room _control() implements  the bang-bang  controllers  of the room 
thermostats,  which  decides  whether  to periodically  open or close the valves  leading  to each room,  this directly  gives a 
way to compute  the distribution  of the ongoing  ﬂow by the set_massflow() function.  The room temperature  (Ti[r]) is 
compared  with the target  temperature  (Tg) where  r loops over id_tand id_t=0, ..., 3a s declared  in Fig.6a. The value 
of is_massflow _on[r]is set to 1 if room rhas temperature  below  Tgand needs  heat in the next interval  and vice versa.  
To fetch electricity  and weather  information  from CSV ﬁles, we import  our customized  function  named  get_data() from 
c-library  (data_reader.cpp).  For both weather  and electricity  price, the function  fetch _new_data() provides  time, day, and 
monthinformation  to get_data() periodically  (once an hour) and gets updated  data for that particular  point in time.
Stratego handles  this heating  problem  as a stochastic  hybrid  game. An (instantiated)  set of templates  constitutes a  Net-
work of (Hybrid  Stochastic)  Timed  Game  Automata  (which  semantically  gives us an EMDP)  where  a state is given by a 
location  vector  (one for each template  instance)  and an assignment  of concrete  values  to any variable.  The system  may then 
evolve  by respecting  guards and invariants – in particular,  those that restrict  the continuous  development  of clocks  with 
respect  to our house  dynamics.  In HeatPumpController , the initial  location  is committed  (marked  by a C in the locations)  (see 
Fig.7) forcing  the model  to initially  call the init() function,  initializing  the weather, electricity  priceand solar radiations val-
ues. At the following  location,  the controller  may take any of the two edges  depending  on the amount  of energy  it decides  
to operate  the heat-pump  in an interval;  in the lower  transition,  the heat-pump  is shut off while in the upper  uses the 
selectstatement  to compactly  implement  11 different  intensity  levels  of the controller  (encoded  in the type intensity _t). 
I.e. the controller  assigns  the temporary  variable  ia discrete  value from intensity _t(range  between  0 and 10) to reﬂect  
8

--- Page 10 ---
I.R. Hasrat, P.G. Jensen, K.G. Larsen et al. Science of Computer Programming 230 (2023) 102987
Fig. 7.Overall system composition.
different  intensity  level choices  to operate  the heat-pump.  The function  room _control() is triggered  to open or close the 
room thermostat  valves.  The variable  consumed _powercontains  the amount  of electricity  selected  by the controller  for each 
intermediate  interval  during  strategy  synthesis  while heat _produced is the produced  heat for every interval.  The function  
calculate _cop()calculates  the coeﬃcient  of performance (COP) value used to measure  the produced  heat. Notice  that the 
COP value,  for a given return-water  temperature  and outdoor  temperature,  provides  a gearing  of input to output  energy;  i.e. 
at a COP value of 2, a single  kWh of power  yields  2 kWh of  energy.  Such gearing  is normally  found  in the technical  speci-
ﬁcations  of a heat-pump.  This gearing,  along with the pump  intensity-setting,  massﬂow  and the return-water  temperature,  
allows  for the computation  of the forward temperature  and using the equations  for return-water  temperature.  The return-
water  temperature  is computed  based  on the previous  time-step,  and the relative  changes  in the indoor  temperatures  allow 
us to predict  this value using the developed  equations  from Section3. At the waitlocation,  the invariant  x<=interval _time
bounds  the system  to stay there until the value of clock x(local clock)  reaches  interval _timei.e. 15minutes.  The constant  
interval _timeis the control  frequency  of the heat-pump.  The guard  x>=interval _timeprevents  the system  from making  
this transition  before  spending  15 minutes  at the waitlocation,  after which  the clock xis reset to zero, allowing  for timing  
a new interval.
Evaluation  using Stratego  We use the provided  model  for both learning  and evaluation  in our experiments.  However,  in 
the evaluation  phase,  the control  choices  of theStratego controller  template  are restricted  to follow  those suggested  by a 
call to an external  library,  implying  that the controller  is invoked  for every simulated  15 minutes.  When  we evaluate  the 
system  under  the control  of a bang-bang  controller,  this call returns  either  full intensity  or the 0 intensity  value.  When  the
Stratego itself is used as a controller  instead,  the call instantiates  the above  templates—but  instead  of evaluating,  it will 
synthesize  a controller  by repeated  sampling.
4.3. Learning  byStratego
To attain  a predictive  controller, Stratego trains  on the instantiated  model,  using the initial  state estimate  by exploiting  
repeated  sampling  and Q-learning.  This allows  the tool to factor  in temporal  changes  such as weather  and price changes  of 
the near future.  However,  four problems  arise:
1. not  all variables  are observable,  speciﬁcally  only the room-temperatures  (˜Ti
r), the weather  forecast  and the price pro-
jection  can be observed,
2. controllers  take time to compute,  leading  to a delay from observation  to reaction,
9

--- Page 11 ---
I.R. Hasrat, P.G. Jensen, K.G. Larsen et al. Science of Computer Programming 230 (2023) 102987
3. the  development  of the real world  (or evaluation  model)  can deviate  over time, and
4. both  weather  forecasts  and prices  have a limited  horizon.
The latter points  we shall discuss  in Section 4.4, and let us instead  here address  the ﬁrst issue.
Initial  state estimation In our three-state  thermodynamics  model,  the changes  in room temperature  (˜Ti
r) are directly  de-
pendent  on two hidden  states,  i.e., ﬂoor temperature  (˜Ti
h) and envelope  temperature  (˜Ti
e). The states  are unobservable  and 
they intuitively  track the abstract  value of “energy  stored  in the heater”  and “energy  stored  in the wall” respectively.  This 
implies  that the tool works  on a partially  observable  model.  To attain  reasonable  estimates,  we can predict  these hidden  
variables—and  similarly  the future  value of observable  values  to accommodate  for the observational  delay.  Assuming  that 
a full state is known  at τtand that a control  choice  has already  been made,  then the state at τt+15can be captured  by 
forward  simulation  of the model.  Experiments  show that this method  of approximating  the hidden  variables  ˜Ti
eand ˜Ti
h
allowed  a drift of no more than 0.1 ◦C between  the repeated  estimates  of the variables  in the model  used for learning  and 
the model  used for evaluation.
4.4. Online  synthesis
Given  that energy  costs are only known  24 hours  in advance  and that weather  forecasts  are known  to have degrading  
predictive  power  the further  into the future  they look, we utilize  an online  synthesis  procedure.  At the same time, as our 
model  used for controller  synthesis  has hidden  variables,  a rapid recomputation  of a strategy  allows  us to adjust  for errors  
made in the initial  state-estimation  and potential  discrepancies  with the real house  (or evaluation  model  in our case).
We thus propose  a method  where  at each 15-minute  interval,  the volatile  variables  (energy  price, weather  and mea-
surable  variables  of the house)  are monitored  and transferred  to the controller.  This allows  the controller  to instantiate  
the method  of Section 4.3with the most recent  measurements.  We can then letStratego synthesize  a controller  on. An 
overview  of this ﬂow is given in Fig.8. We divide  each day into four 6-hour  periods,  each with 24 of 15-minute  intervals.  
The reuse interval  (k) is 24, which  means  a single  strategy  is used for kintervals.  In the ﬁrst interval, Stratego gets the 
current  room temperatures , weather  forecast and day-ahead  electricity  price, estimates  the initial  state and synthesizes  a strat-
egy that minimizes  the ﬁtness  function  Fby sampling  12-hours  (learning  horizon)  ahead  in future.  The controller  saves the 
ﬁrst strategy  (S1). The heat-pump  uses S1during  intervals  2–25 and makes  another  strategy  during  interval  25, which  is 
then used for the next 24 intervals  (i.e. from 26–49)  and so on.
Notice  here that it is assumed  that the synthesis  procedure  is notinstantaneous,  implying  that a synthesized  controller  
can only be applied  in the sub-subsequent  interval.  To overcome  this issue, we apply the initial  state-estimation  as described  
in Section 4.3to estimate  the house  state at a time-point  τ+15 from  measurements  obtained  at τ. We set the training  
horizon  of the method  to be 12 hours,  implying  that the learning  method  will only sample  the system  up to a horizon  of 
12 hours  from the starting  measurement.  This can aptly be done inStratego using the query  presented  in Equation ( 8). 
We here see that the controller  is trained  to only react on the observable  variables  minute _clock(tracking  real-time),  Ti
[i](tracking  indoor  room temperatures),  Toutdoor (tracking  weather  forecast)  and Tforward (tracking  the forward  water  
temperature).  The observable  variables  are input to the controller.  The energy  price is also an input,  but it is not observed  
directly  in the training  as it follows  a ﬁxed pattern  from historical  data. The result  of the synthesis  procedure  is a reactive  
strategy  that for an assignment  of the input variables  yields  a (near-)optimal  action  to take [3,8,27]
strategy S = minE (F) [minute _clock <=1 2∗60)] (8)
{} ->{minute _clock, Ti[0], Ti[1], Ti[2], Ti[3],
Toutdoor, Tforward}: <>minute _clock==(12 ∗60)
Notice  also that Equation ( 8)d e ﬁ n e s  a feature  vector  (observable  variables  of the state-space)  to be only directly  measurable  
variables  of the original  system.  This makes  the strategy  directly  applicable  for several  intervals  (up to the learning  horizon)  
in the actual  system  under  control.  We can exploit  this to lower  the overall  computational  effort of deploying  our approach,  
which  directly  impacts  the overall  energy  impact  of running  the smart  heating  system.  Essentially,  by reusing  a strategy  for 
several  intervals,  a single  server  can act as a controller  for a group  of houses,  i.e. if a strategy  only needs  to be computed  
every six intervals,  six houses  can share the computational  resource.
5. Experiments  and evaluation
In this section,  we ﬁrst describe  the experimental  setup with all realistic  conditions  and assumptions.  We then evaluate  
our approach  by providing  a series  of experiments  and also study different  factors  that affect the performance  ofStratego . 
A reproducibility  package  for our experimentation  is available  in [37].
10

--- Page 12 ---
I.R. Hasrat, P.G. Jensen, K.G. Larsen et al. Science of Computer Programming 230 (2023) 102987
Fig. 8.Online synthesis approach shown on a two day period.
Fig. 9.Outside weather during the weeks controlled in our experiments.
5.1. Experimental  setup
To validate  our approach,  we experiment  with controlling  the experimental  house  from the OpSys  project  for four in-
dividual  weeks  with weather  conditions  matching  January  (week  2), February  (week  6), March  (week  10), and April (week  
14), 2018. As a reference,  we use the estimated  model  presented  in section4. We utilize  the recent  energy  prices  (autumn  
2022)  from the Danish  day-ahead  electricity  market  in all the experiments  presented  in the rest of the section.  The goal of 
controller  is to minimize  the parameterized  cost-criteria  deﬁned  in Equation ( 1)i n section2for the period  under  control.  
In all experiments,  we compare  different  variations  of the online Stratego -based  controller  against  a standard  bang-bang  
(BB) controller.  If the temperature  in any room drops below  22 ◦C, theBBcontroller  turns the heat-pump  on; otherwise,  it 
keeps  the heat-pump  off.
We conduct  four series  of experiments:
1. a series  of evaluations  with realistic  observability  and time,
2. a series  of alternative  control  strategy  approaches,
3. a study of sensitivity  analysis  of impact  of measurement  noise,  and
4. a study of sensitivity  analysis  of learning  parameters.
All experiments  are conducted  on an AMD EPYC 7551 processor  and limited  to a single  core and 2GB of memory.  We 
limit the controller  to 15-minute  control  intervals  which  is suﬃcient  for systems  with as slow dynamic  as ﬂoor-heating.  For 
each reported  conﬁguration,  the experiment  is repeated  10 times and the mean value is reported  with standard  deviation  
intervals  reported  in bar-charts.  In all series,  we observe  changes  to the results  when the weights  of comfort  (0 ≤Wcomf≤1)
changes;  we modify  these values  in steps of 0.1. To make this weighting  independent  of the given week and to allow for 
this proportional  weighting  between  two units (cost (DKK)  and squared  degrees  Celsius),  we compute  a normalization-factor  
normbased  on theBBcontroller.  This normalization-factor  is computed  by estimating  the performance  of theBBcontroller  
on the week leading  up to experimental  week in terms  of costand comfort. The normalization-factor  is then given directly  
by norm=comfort
cost.
The outside  temperature  for different  weeks  can be seen in Fig.9. Week 6 is the coldest,  and week 14 is the hottest  week 
we control  in our experiments.  We consider  the fact that a house  and a controller  cannot  have the same weather  information  
because  the house  experiences  the real weather,  and the controller  has to work with weather  forecasts.  In our experimental  
11

--- Page 13 ---
I.R. Hasrat, P.G. Jensen, K.G. Larsen et al. Science of Computer Programming 230 (2023) 102987
Fig. 10.Actual weather  and random  noise added trajectories  over 100 simulations  where the middle line is the actual weather,  and the red lines represent  
the weather  predictions.
Fig. 11.Experimental results for four different weeks under ﬁxed-target Stratego with realistic assumptions on observability and time.
setup,  instead  of providing  theStratego controller  with the exact weather  information,  we add random  noise to allow the 
controller  to work under  realistic  conditions.  The result  of 100 simulations  executed  under  12 hours  is presented  in Fig.10. 
It can be observed  that the predicted  weather  (forecast)  may differ from actual  weather  by approximately  ±1 ◦C.
In our plots, we report  relativeperformance  to that of theBBcontroller.  If the relative  number  in the bar-charts  is below  
1, a controller  performs  better  than BBand vice versa.  We compare  the results  with BBas the behavior  of theBBcontroller  
in the model  (when  replayed  with historical  weather)  is deterministic.  We omit to report  values  for a pure emphasis  on 
cost as this leads the controller  to (as expected)  turn off all heat.
12

--- Page 14 ---
I.R. Hasrat, P.G. Jensen, K.G. Larsen et al. Science of Computer Programming 230 (2023) 102987
Fig. 12.The cost/comfort  tradeoff  with different  Wcomfsettings  (red lines separate  the points on its left side where Stratego is outperforming BBw.r.t both 
comfort  and cost).
5.2. Evaluations  with realistic  observability  and time
We design  a ﬁxed-target Stratego controller  for this series  of experiments.  In this case, all the rooms  have a ﬁxed target  
temperature  (i.e., 22 ◦C). The ﬁtness  function  (in Equation ( 1)) gets penalized  when the room temperatures  deviate  from 
the set-point.  In this series,  we emulate  a realistic  setup;  this implies  that hidden  variables  are estimated,  the weather  
forecast  is stochastic,  and the controller  only can be applied  with a 15 minutes  delay from the variable  observation-time,  as 
described  in Section 4.
We experiment  with Stratego realistic  observation  setup and compare  it with the standard BBcontroller  in Fig.11. 
The ﬁtnessand costmeasures  on vertical  axes represent  ﬁtness  function  and energy  cost values,  respectively.  However,  the 
discomfort measure  indirectly  represents  comfort;  a reduction  in discomfort improves  comfort. Each measure  is calculated  by 
computing  its values  from both controllers  in the formula  measure =Stratego
BBwhich  means Stratego performs  better  than
BBwith a number  lower  than 1 and vice versa.  We ﬁx the learning  parameters  s.t. the wall-clock  computation  time is not 
exceeding  15 minutes  on given hardware;  namely  600 samples,  and a reuse interval  of 24 (6 hours)  limiting  the computa-
tion effort—named  as realistic conﬁguration.  We present  ﬁxed-target Stratego experiments  to evaluate  its performance  by 
controlling  the heat-pump  during  four weeks  (2, 6, 10, and 14) from other months.
First, we compare  the results  from both controllers  for week 6, which  is an interesting  week as being the coldest.  We 
see that theBBcontroller  is dominated  in all ways by theStratego controller  (see Fig.11a). In particular,  we see that at 
Wcomf=0.4Stratego controller  achieves  comparable  comfort (at least same comfort  asBB) to theBBcontroller  (Fig.11b), 
but at a 33% reduction  in cost (Fig.11c). In Fig.11a, we observe  that for any setting  of the parameters,  theStratego -based  
controller  dominates  in the distance  measure  and more so with an increased  comfort  weight.
In Fig.12, we have also annotated  the average  temperature  experienced  throughout  the week for the realistic controller  
to provide  a tangible  perspective  on the discomfort  measure.  A less than 0.10 ◦C deviation  in the average  temperature  from 
the setpoint  with Wcomf≥0.4a g a i n  results  in a 33% reduction  in cost. As theBBcontroller  is incapable  of adjusting  to the 
time-varying  cost function,  theStratego controller  outperforms  it with a focus on cost as expected.  More interestingly,  the 
beneﬁt  of using Stratego grows  with an increased  focus on comfort.  Notice  that Equation ( 1) penalizes  overshooting.  We 
hypothesize  that the binary-mode  of theBBentails  periods  of large overshooting  of the target  temperature  and others  with 
undershooting  due to the 15-minute  control  interval.1The Stratego controller  can instead  compensate  gradually  and react 
more subtly.  We observe  that the realistic controller  performs  much better  than BB.
Now we discuss  the performance  analysis  of the same controllers  for the remaining  weeks  (2, 10, 14). The Stratego
controller  proves  consistent  performance  improvement  in all the Wcomfsettings,  which  can be witnessed  in Fig.11a. We can 
see that at Wcomf=0.2t h e controller  offers  comparable  comfort while providing  cost reductions  up to 38-53%  (see Figs.11b, 
11c). The average  cost saving  during  the four weeks  is more than 39%. It is interesting  to note that the controller  responds  
to the change  in Wcomfvalues  and signiﬁcantly  improves  the comfort  when we emphasize  it more by increasing  Wcomf.
5.3. Alternative  control  strategy  approaches
To investigate  potential  energy  cost reduction  options,  we introduce  several Stratego controllers  based  on various  control  
strategy  approaches.  We describe  the controllers  in the following.
−Target-band: In this controller,  we introduce  a small range of acceptable  set-points  to save additional  energy  costs. In 
this case, we have a 1 ◦C target-band  where  ±0.5 ◦C deviation  from the ﬁxed-target  is not penalized.  The little ﬂexibility  
in set-point  provides  a useful  direction  for the users to save signiﬁcant  energy  while being less strict but still very close 
to their favorite  set-point.
1Due to wear and tear on heat-pumps  it is undesirable  to change states too often.
13

--- Page 15 ---
I.R. Hasrat, P.G. Jensen, K.G. Larsen et al. Science of Computer Programming 230 (2023) 102987
Fig. 13.March week experimental results for four different control strategies under realistic assumptions on observability and time.
−Setbacks: It is important  to consider  occupancy  variations  into account  for better  control  mode.  There  are always  some 
time slots when the house  is unoccupied  or the users prefer  a much lower  temperature  than the normal  set-point;  this 
allows  heat-pump  to reduce  heat output  resulting  in less energy  use. Additionally,  this approach  helps in improving  
comfort  in general.  This low-temperature  period  is referred  to as a setback.  We investigate  our system  with two setback  
periods  per day: the users’  sleeping  time (from 00:00  to 06:00)  and the period  of users’  regular  absence  at home  (from 
08:00  to 15:00).  For setback  periods,  we consider  19 ◦C instead  of 22 ◦C.
−Binary-mode: The ﬁxed-target , target-band and setbacks controllers  operate  the heap-pump  under  multiple  intensity  lev-
els (11 in our case), the approach  ﬁts well with modern  heat-pumps.  However,  this multi-level  concept  is not helpful  for 
old heat-pump  systems  as they only work under  the binary-mode,  i.e., on/off. We expand  the applicability  ofStratego
to attack  the binary-mode  heat-pump  control  problem  and provide  a reasonable  set of related  experiments.
So far, we have witnessed  signiﬁcant  energy  savings  with ﬁxed-target controller.  Now we present  a series  of alternative  
controllers  (i.e., binary-mode , target-band , and setbacks) under  realistic  assumptions  on observability  and time. Fig.13shows  
the experimental  results  for week 10 controlled  under  four different  control  strategy  approaches.  All the controllers  beat BB
with all Wcomfsettings  (see Fig.13a). However,  binary-mode controller  performs  a bit worse  than BBonly at Wcomf=0.1. 
With this setting,  all the controllers  emphasize  90% on costand only 10% on comfort. Due to limited  operational  modes,  
the binary-mode controller  has very low ﬂexibility  to choose  near-optimal  decisions  compared  to the other three controllers.  
The ﬁxed-target , binary-mode , target-band and setbacks controllers  gain comparable  comfort at Wcomf0.2, 0.4, 0.1 and 0.2 
respectively  (see Fig.13b, 13c). For achieving  the comparable  comfort, the setbacks controller  offers  the highest  (47%)  and the 
binary-mode controller  attains  the lowest  (30%)  energy  cost reductions  while the target-band controller  (46%)  overperforms  
ﬁxed-target controller  (37%)  as expected.
14

--- Page 16 ---
I.R. Hasrat, P.G. Jensen, K.G. Larsen et al. Science of Computer Programming 230 (2023) 102987
Table 1
Money paid (in Danish Krone (DKK)) for heating  during different  weeks under different Stratego control  approaches  where the bold numbers  represent
Stratego saving energy cost while attaining  at least comparable  comfort toBB.
Control MethodWcomf settings
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
January (week 2): BB cost is 967 DKK
ﬁxed-target (cost) 468 549 584 612 639 664 683 715 744 785
———(discomfort) 2.08 1.04 0.81 0.68 0.62 0.58 0.55 0.55 0.57 0.57
binary-mode (cost) 283 486 555 601 640 659 692 717 764 848
———(discomfort) 10.6 2.05 1.13 0.87 0.74 0.68 0.65 0.63 0.64 0.67
target-band (cost) 462 524 542 554 567 578 583 596 607 747
———(discomfort) 1.06 0.32 0.2 0.15 0.13 0.12 0.12 0.11 0.11 0.11
setbacks (cost) 372 446 487 510 535 554 581 608 638 689
—-(discomfort) 2.63 1.03 0.64 0.49 0.42 0.39 0.37 0.37 0.37 0.38
February (week 6): BB cost is 1229 DKK
ﬁxed-target (cost) 534 716 784 828 873 907 933 968 1004 1055
———(discomfort) 9.94 2.51 1.41 0.99 0.82 0.7 0.65 0.64 0.63 0.65
binary-mode (cost) 194 434 631 776 873 930 986 1056 1110 1197
———(discomfort) 33.72 16.38 6.88 2.7 1.42 1.14 0.95 0.81 0.79 0.8
target-band (cost) 521 692 748 786 808 827 835 854 863 1013
———(discomfort) 8.77 1.54 0.63 0.3 0.2 0.14 0.13 0.11 0.1 0.11
setbacks (cost) 442 614 671 699 727 756 791 826 868 934
—-(discomfort) 9.93 2.18 1.12 0.84 0.63 0.5 0.43 0.4 0.38 0.39
March (week 10): BB cost is 1126 DKK
ﬁxed-target (cost) 626 704 741 767 799 819 845 870 897 916
———(discomfort) 1.5 0.86 0.68 0.61 0.58 0.56 0.56 0.58 0.59 0.59
binary-mode (cost) 446 656 727 782 819 868 889 927 972 1015
———(discomfort) 7.21 1.57 1.02 0.83 0.76 0.7 0.7 0.69 0.69 0.69
target-band (cost) 606 657 675 686 698 707 717 718 729 855
———(discomfort) 0.61 0.23 0.16 0.12 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.09 0.09 0.09
setbacks (cost) 521 591 628 654 681 699 726 745 779 809
—-(discomfort) 1.61 0.66 0.45 0.39 0.36 0.33 0.34 0.34 0.34 0.35
April (week 14): BB cost is 653 DKK
ﬁxed-target (cost) 256 308 336 362 392 416 437 467 513 559
———(discomfort) 1.3 0.8 0.6 0.54 0.51 0.48 0.47 0.46 0.47 0.47
binary-mode (cost) 214 293 325 340 355 363 379 396 417 456
———(discomfort) 1.96 0.77 0.57 0.52 0.49 0.48 0.46 0.48 0.49 0.5
target-band (cost) 251 281 297 304 319 326 341 346 381 565
———(discomfort) 0 . 5 0 . 2 2 0 . 1 60 . 1 40 . 1 30 . 1 20 . 1 20 . 1 2 0 . 1 2 0 . 1 2
setbacks (cost) 168 221 248 270 297 320 348 386 425 474
—-(discomfort) 1.59 0.82 0.59 0.47 0.42 0.4 0.39 0.38 0.37 0.38
After discussing  the performance  of various Stratego controllers  for March  week,  we present  the costand comfort results  
from these controllers  for four independent  weeks  in Table1. From the table, it is clear that all the controllers  (including
BB) reﬂect  the highest  cost in week 6 and the lowest  cost in week 14. The outside  weather  condition  is the main reason  
behind  the high energy  use in week 6. As all the rooms  have two walls open to the outside,  the heating  energy  consumption  
is highly  inﬂuenced  by the outside  weather.  It means,  the controllers  consume  more energy  in week 6 to provide  enough  
warm  water  to heat the rooms  to a comfortable  level. Moving  from left to right in the table, we emphasize  comfort,  which  
is why the heating  cost keeps  rising and discomfort  decreases.  For all control  strategies,  discomfort  suddenly  drops when 
Wcomfis between  0.1 and 0.3. At Wcomf=0.1,Stratego generally  offers  worse  comfort  than BB(as expected)  because  it 
emphasises  energy  cost (weight  for cost is 0.9). By shifting  Wcomffrom 0.1 to 0.2, we double  the focus on comfort,  but the 
focus on cost is reduced  by only a few degrees  (0.9 to 0.8). Similarly,  when we move from 0.2 to 0.3, we increase  focus on 
comfort  by 50%. As a result  of these remarkable  rises in comfort  focus,  discomfort  signiﬁcantly  drops between  0.1 and 0.3. 
All the controllers  are cost-wise  always  cheaper  than BB, and with bold numbers,  they are better  in comfort  as well. If we 
look at the cost in week 2, the setbacks controller  spends  487 DKK (BBcost is 967) and ﬁxed-target , binary-mode and target-
bandcontrollers  spend  584, 601 and 524 DKK respectively.  The setbacks approach  achieves  the overall  best performance  in 
all the weeks  with average  cost reductions  of 49%. The cost savings  for ﬁxed-target , binary-mode and target-band are 39%, 
33% and 46% respectively.  The setbacks and target-band strategy  approaches  offer signiﬁcant  additional  cost savings  due to 
less energy  demand  than ﬁxed-target . It is interesting  to note that the binary-mode outperforms  ﬁxed-target in week 14. We 
conjecture  that a ﬁxed-target (multi-mode)  controller  needs  more computational  effort to beat a binary-mode controller  in 
relatively  hot weeks.
Fig.14reveals  the visualization  of the room temperatures  samples  recorded  under  the four implementend Stratego
controller  approaches.  The temperatures  for ﬁxed-target controller  are compact  towards  22 ◦C due to a ﬁxed set-point  
(Fig.14a). However,  we observe  more over and undershooting  in temperatures  in case of binary-mode and target-band
(Fig.14b, Fig.14c). This range of ﬂuctuation  is as expected  due to less ﬂexibility  in adjusting  the temperatures  by binary-
15

--- Page 17 ---
I.R. Hasrat, P.G. Jensen, K.G. Larsen et al. Science of Computer Programming 230 (2023) 102987
Fig. 14.Temperature trajectory samples from various Stratego controllers.
modecontroller  and a non-penalized  1 ◦C band in target-band controller.  For the setbacks case, the controller  drops the room 
temperatures  according  to the ﬁxed setback  time and set-point  (Fig.14d).
5.4. Sensitivity  analysis  of impact  of measurement  noise
As our experimental  setup is virtual,  we can study the impact  of stochastic  weather-prediction,  hidden  variables  and 
delayed  controller  response;  this comparison  is seen in Fig.15.
The experimental  setup is similar  to the realistic series  apart from the speciﬁed  changes.  We experiment  with four 
conﬁgurations:
1. full  observability,  allowing  for delayed  controller  response,  perfect  weather-prediction  and direct  observation  of hidden  
variables  (i.e. an ideal scenario),
2. predicted  ˜Ti
h& ˜Ti
e, otherwise  as full observability,
3. noisy  weather,  otherwise  as full observability,  and
4. partial  observability,  exactly  the same setup as in the realistic  evaluation series.
In Fig.15, we observe  that while a high emphasis  on cost (which  is a fully observable  variable),  the impact  of noisy 
weather  prediction  and predicted  unobservable  variables  has only a modest  effect (2-3%),  however  with more than 0.8 
focus on comfort,  we see the uncertainty  of the weather  signiﬁcantly  impacting  the performance  (up to 8%), indicating  
a sensitivity  of the controller  towards  accurate  forecasts.  We observe  an anomaly  with a 0.1 emphasis  on comfort  where  
the full observability  conﬁguration  is signiﬁcantly  worse  than the predicted  scenario.  While  the discrepancy  appears  to be 
within  measurement  noise,  it still warrants  further  investigation.  We hypothesize  that the squaring  of the difference  of the 
target  and the actual  temperature  in Equation ( 1)l e a d s  to rare spikes  in the response  affecting  the partition-reﬁnement  
scheme  deployed  ofStratego .
5.5. Sensitivity  analysis  of learning  parameters
Stratego is a sampling-based  tool, and the performance  (in terms  of quality  of the controller  synthesized)  is dependent  
on the number  of samples  provided.  This is given directly  in the number  of runs (simulations)  the engine  is allowed  to 
conduct.
We here experiment  with reducing  the overall  computational  effort needed  for control.  In Section 4.4, we introduced  
the reuseinterval  which  allows  for applying  a given control  strategy  for an extended  period.  In Fig.16a, we observe  that 
a tighter  re-computation  cycle of 1 interval  (every  15 minute)  allows  us to gain 7%  performance  compared  to our realistic
16

--- Page 18 ---
I.R. Hasrat, P.G. Jensen, K.G. Larsen et al. Science of Computer Programming 230 (2023) 102987
Fig. 15.February week control under different observability situations with 24 reuse intervals and 600 learning runs.
Fig. 16.Effect of choosing different sets of reuse intervals and number of runs.
series  of experiments.  We also observe  that Stratego attains 11%  improved  performance  in some instances.  Towards  the 
reuse of 24 periods,  we observe  a drop in performance  when the reuse interval  is extended.  On the other hand, with reuse 
interval  1, the controller  uses the computational  power  24 times more frequently  than 24 reuse intervals.  In Fig.16b, we see 
that an increase  in the number  of runs (in general)  improves  the performance.  However,  with a doubled  effort of 1200 runs 
(approx  30 minutes  of computation  pr. strategy),  the performance  in general  improved  by 2% and in a rare case by 3%. We 
can see a similar  improvement  in performance  with an increase  from 300 to 600 runs. To explore  the edge points  where  the 
performance  improvement  becomes  constant,  and Stratego offers  no further  beneﬁts,  we allow the controller  to synthesize  
the strategies  with an increased  budget  of up to 9600 runs. We can see that Stratego constantly  keeps  improving  the 
performance  with a similar  trend.  The results  reﬂect  that the edge point still needs  to be explored,  even with 9600 runs, 
and the controller  is still eager to improve  the performance.  Moving  from 600 to 9600 runs, we increase  the computational  
effort of simulations  16 times and get 6% performance  improvement  in general  and, in some cases,  above  9%. On the other 
hand, the time to compute  a single  strategy  reaches  to approx  240 minutes.  However,  a similar  anomaly  is observed  with 
an 0.1 emphasis  on comfort  as was found  in the Measurement  Noise-series  of experiments.  We conjecture  that this effect 
manifests  to a higher  degree  with an increased  learning  effort.
In conclusion,  increasing  the number  of learning  runs or frequency  of synthesizing  a strategy  improves  performance.  
However,  this improvement  is less signiﬁcant  compared  to the increased  computational  effort and time. Thus, our realistic
evaluation  setup with 600 learning  runs and 24 reuse intervals  produces  good results  close to the best achievable  perfor-
mance  while limiting  real-time  computation  time below  15 minutes.
17

--- Page 19 ---
I.R. Hasrat, P.G. Jensen, K.G. Larsen et al. Science of Computer Programming 230 (2023) 102987
Fig. 17.Experimental results for four different weeks under ﬁxed-target Stratego relative to WCS.
5.6. Comparison  with weather  compensation  strategy
To further  investigate  the performance  stability  ofStratego , we implement  a control  strategy  using the reference  curve 
from the product  sheet presented  in [38]. The strategy  is an industry  standard  and is named  weather  compensation  strategy  
(WCS). InWCS, the controller  obtains  the outside  temperature  (drops/rises)  information  from the outdoor  sensor  and op-
erates  the heat-pump  accordingly  at a lower/higher  forward  water  temperature  to maintain  the indoor  room temperature.  
We ﬁne-tuned  the reference  curve by trying  different  settings  to suit the building  construction  type. In Fig.17, we compare  
ﬁxed-target Stratego (under  realistic  assumptions  described  in Section 5.2) with WCSwhere  each measure  on the vertical  
axis is calculated  by computing  its values  from both controllers  in the formula  measure =Stratego
WCS.Stratego ﬁtness-wise  
outperforms WCSevery month,  and with Wcomf=0.6, it saves (8-26%)  energy  cost while improving  the comfort  between  1-
16%. In general, Stratego obtains  23-26%  cost savings  in colder  months  and 8% for the warmer  month  (where  the potential  
cost saving  is low).
6. Conclusion
We presented  a tool-chain  for controlling  a heat-pump  system  in a ﬂoor-heating  case study.  The tool-chain  offers  an 
end-to-end  solution  for ﬂoor-heating  applications  by establishing  an automatic  procedure  for the identiﬁcation  of house  
thermodynamics  and designing Uppaal  Stratego controller.  We compare  the performance  ofStratego controller  against  
the traditionally  used bang-bang  controller.  We experiment  with four individual  weeks  having  different  outside  weather  
18

--- Page 20 ---
I.R. Hasrat, P.G. Jensen, K.G. Larsen et al. Science of Computer Programming 230 (2023) 102987
conditions.  Experimental  results  show that our ﬁxed-target controller  offers  signiﬁcant  improvements  in both user comfort
as well as energy  cost, even when realistic  limitations  on computation  effort are taken into account.  In particular, Stratego
saves 39% energy  cost while preserving  the same comfort as the standard  bang-bang  controller.  We also analyze  the cost-
comfort trade-off  paradigm,  which  shows  that we can save energy  costs by slightly  compromising  comfort.
This study also aimed  to identify  the impact  of various  control  strategies  on heating  costand comfort in residential  
buildings.  To do so, we introduced  target-band and setbacks strategy  approaches.  The approaches  indicated  a signiﬁcant  
impact  on heating  energy  consumption.  We report  7% and 10% additional  cost savings  (as compared  to ﬁxed-target ) by 
implementing  target-band and setbacks concepts,  respectively.  Moreover,  we design  a binary-mode controller  to examine  the 
capability  ofStratego to control  the old heat-pump  systems.  The controller  does not perform  as good as a ﬁxed-target
multi-mode  controller,  but the average  energy  cost reduction  is still quite good (33%).  We also compare  the performance  
of ﬁxed-target Stratego with an industry-standard  control  strategy WCS. The results  show that Stratego outperforms WCS
and offers  up to 8-26%  cost reductions  with 1-16%  improvement  in comfort.
Apart from the controllers  with realistic  limitations  on time and observability,  this paper  also presents  a sensitivity  
analysis  of the impact  of measurement  noise and learning  parameters.  As the full observability setup considers  exact weather  
and measured  hidden  variables  (˜Ti
e, ˜Ti
h), it gains 2-3% additional  performance  for ﬁtness  function  in general  and at some 
points  8% with more focus on comfort. However,  by using the maximum  needed  computational  power  and making  a strategy  
in every interval  (15 minutes),  we can improve  the controller’s  performance  by 7-11%.  Increasing  the number  of learning  
runs is another  aspect  of improving  performance.  Using  9600 simulation  runs, we increase  the learning  time and effort by 
16 times but achieve  less signiﬁcant  performance  improvement  of 6%.
The current  approach  is scalable  but needs  some manual  modiﬁcations  when applying  it to a different  building.  We 
need the building  layout  to know how the walls are shared  among  the rooms  and outside  in order to instantiate  the 
thermodynamic  equations  to reﬂect  the building.  We also need one week of historical  data from the building  to instantiate  
each room’s  model  identiﬁcation  process  inCTSM-R. In the last step, we need to modify  a few variables  (representing  the 
number  of rooms)  to employ  the identiﬁed  model  inStratego . All this, in principle,  can be automated.
We believe  that the results  can be further  improved  by introducing  a heat buffer  and that the computational  effort can 
be reduced  by techniques  such as ensemble  learning.  The performance  of the heating  system  can also be improved  by using 
users’  GPS location,  especially  in the case of setbacks control  strategy.
Declaration  of competing  interest
The authors  declare  that they have no known  competing  ﬁnancial  interests  or personal  relationships  that could have 
appeared  to inﬂuence  the work reported  in this paper.
Acknowledgements
We would  like to thank  Simon  Thorsteinsson  for his extensive  help in acquiring  base data from Dymola model  for model  
identiﬁcation.  This research  is partly  funded  by the ERC Advanced  Grant LASSO,  the Villum  Investigator  Grant S4OS, as well 
as DIREC:  Digital  Research  Centre  Denmark.
References
[1]M.K. Dixit, J.L. Fernández-Solís,  S. Lavy, C.H. Culp, Identiﬁcation  of parameters  for embodied  energy measurement:  A literature  review,  Energy Build. 42 
(2010) 1238–1247.
[2]M.K. Agesen,  K.G. Larsen, M. Mikuˇcionis, M. Muñiz, P. Olsen, T. Pedersen,  J. Srba, A. Skou, Toolchain  for user-centered  intelligent  ﬂoor heating  control,  
in: IECON 2016 - 42nd Annual  Conference  of the, IEEE Industrial  Electronics  Society,  2016, pp. 5296–5301.
[3]K.G. Larsen, M. Mikuˇcionis, M. Muñiz, J. Srba, J.H. Taankvist,  Online and compositional  learning  of controllers  with application  to ﬂoor heating,  in: M. 
Chechik,  J.-F. Raskin (Eds.), Tools and Algorithms  for the Construction  and Analysis  of Systems,  Springer,  Berlin, Heidelberg,  2016, pp. 244–259.
[4]P. Vogler-Finck,  R. Wisniewski,  P. Popovski,  Reducing  the carbon footprint  of house heating  through  model predictive  control  – A simulation  study in 
Danish conditions,  Sustain.  Cities Soc. 42 (2018) 558–573.
[5] R. Juhl, J.K. Møller, H. Madsen,  CTSMR - Continuous  Time Stochastic  Modeling  in R, 2016, arXiv.
[6]L. Ljung, Matlab system identiﬁcation  toolbox—getting  started guide r2016a,  Mathworks  (Ed.), Mathworks  (2016).
[7]A. David, P.G. Jensen, K.G. Larsen, M. Mikuˇcionis, J.H. Taankvist,  Uppaal stratego,  in: International  Conference  on Tools and Algorithms  for the Construc-
tion and Analysis  of Systems,  Springer,  2015, pp. 206–211.
[8]A. David, P.G. Jensen, K.G. Larsen, A. Legay, D. Lime, M.G. Sørensen,  J.H. Taankvist,  On time with minimal  expected  cost!, in: International  Symposium  
on Automated  Technology  for Veriﬁcation  and Analysis,  Springer,  2014, pp. 129–145.
[9]R. Hermansen,  K. Smith, J.E. Thorsen,  J. Wang, Y. Zong, Model predictive  control  for a heat booster  substation  in ultra low temperature  district  heating  
systems,  Energy 238 (2022) 121631.
[10]S. Privara,  J. Cigler, Z. Váˇna, F. Oldewurtel,  C. Sagerschnig,  E. Žáˇceková,  Building  modeling  as a crucial part for building  predictive  control,  Energy Build. 
56 (2013) 8–22.
[11]F. Ferracuti,  A. Fonti, L. Ciabattoni,  S. Pizzuti,  A. Arteconi,  L. Helsen,  G. Comodi,  Data-driven  models  for short-term  thermal  behaviour  prediction  in real 
buildings,  Appl. Energy 204 (2017) 1375–1387.
[12]A. Fonti, G. Comodi,  S. Pizzuti,  A. Arteconi,  L. Helsen,  Low order grey-box  models  for short-term  thermal  behavior  prediction  in buildings,  Energy Proc. 
105 (2017) 2107–2112.
[13]G. Reynders,  J. Diriken,  D. Saelens,  Quality  of grey-box  models  and identiﬁed  parameters  as function  of the accuracy  of input and observation  signals,  
Energy Build. 82 (2014) 263–274.
19

--- Page 21 ---
I.R. Hasrat, P.G. Jensen, K.G. Larsen et al. Science of Computer Programming 230 (2023) 102987
[14]K. Vinther,  T. Green, S.Ø. Jensen, J.D. Bendtsen,  Predictive  control  of hydronic  ﬂoor heating  systems  using neural networks  and genetic  algorithms,  
IFAC-PapersOnLine  50 (2017) 7381–7388.
[15]N. Nassif, Modeling  and optimization  of hvac systems  using artiﬁcial  neural network  and genetic  algorithm,  Build. Simul. 7( 3 ) (2014) 237–245.
[16]S. Harasty,  S. Lambeck,  A. Cavaterra,  Model predictive  control  for preventive  conservation  using artiﬁcial  neural networks,  in: 12th REHVA World 
Congress,  Aalborg,  Denmark,  2016.
[17]I.R. Hasrat, P.G. Jensen, K.G. Larsen, J. Srba, End-to-end  heat-pump  control  using continuous  time stochastic  modelling  and uppaal stratego,  in: Y. 
Aït-Ameur,  F. Cr˘aciun (Eds.), Theoretical  Aspects  of Software  Engineering,  Springer  International  Publishing,  Cham, 2022, pp. 363–380.
[18]H. Golmohamadi,  K. Guldstrand  Larsen, P. Gjøl Jensen, I. Riaz Hasrat, Optimization  of power-to-heat  ﬂexibility  for residential  buildings  in response  to 
day-ahead  electricity  price, Energy Build. 232 (2021) 110665.
[19]S. Williams,  M. Short, T. Crosbie,  On the use of thermal  inertia in building  stock to leverage  decentralised  demand  side frequency  regulation  services,  
Appl. Therm. Eng. 133 (2018) 97–106.
[20]P. Ponnaganti,  J.R. Pillai, B. Bak-Jensen,  P. Vogler-Finck,  Intelligent  operation  of thermal  storage  systems  based heat pump pool for cost eﬃciency,  in: 
2022 IEEE/PES  Transmission  and Distribution  Conference  and Exposition  (T&D), IEEE, 2022, pp. 01–05.
[21]J.W. Moon, S.-H. Han, Thermostat  strategies  impact on energy consumption  in residential  buildings,  Energy Build. 43 (2011) 338–346.
[22]J.W. Moon, S.K. Jung, Algorithm  for optimal  application  of the setback  moment  in the heating  season using an artiﬁcial  neural network  model, Energy 
Build. 127 (2016) 859–869.
[23]M. Kersken,  H. Sinnesbichler,  Simulation  study on the energy saving potential  of a heating  control  system featuring  presence  detection  and weather  
forecasting,  Fraunhofer  IBP Rapport  527 (2013) 40.
[24] S. Østergaard  Jensen, OPSYS tools for investigating  energy ﬂexibility  in houses with heat pumps,  https://www.annex67.org  /media /1838 /report -opsys -
ﬂexibilitet  .pdf, 2018.
[25] Dayssault  systems.  dymola  (dynamic  modeling  laboratory)  systems  engineering,  https://www.3ds  .com /products  -services  /catia /products  /dymola/ , Octo-
ber 2022.
[26] R. Juhl, N.R. Kristensen,  P. Bacher,  J. Kloppenborg,  H. Madsen,  Grey-box  modeling  of the heat dynamics  of a building  with CTSM-R,  http://ctsm  .info /
pdfs /examples  /building2  .pdf, 2017.
[27]M. Jaeger, G. Bacci, G. Bacci, K.G. Larsen, P.G. Jensen, Approximating  euclidean  by imprecise  Markov decision  processes,  in: International  Symposium  
on Leveraging  Applications  of Formal Methods,  Springer,  2020, pp. 275–289.
[28]E. Carrascal,  I. Garrido,  A.J. Garrido,  J.M. Sala, Optimization  of the heating  system use in aged public buildings  via model predictive  control,  Energies  9 
(2016) 251.
[29]C.A. Thilker,  H.G. Bergsteinsson,  P. Bacher,  H. Madsen,  D. Calì, R.G. Junker, Non-linear  model predictive  control  for smart heating  of buildings,  E3S Web 
of Conferences,  vol. 246,  EDP Sciences,  2021, p. 09005.
[30]X. Yu, S. You, H. Cai, L. Georges,  P. Bacher,  Data-driven  modelling  and optimal  control  of domestic  electric  water heaters  for demand  response,  in: The 
International  Symposium  on Heating,  Ventilation  and Air Conditioning,  Springer,  2020, pp. 77–86.
[31]K.G. Larsen, P. Pettersson,  W. Yi, Uppaal in a nutshell,  Int. J. Softw. Tools Technol.  Transf. 1 (1997) 134–152.
[32]G. Behrmann,  A. David, K.G. Larsen, J. Håkansson,  P. Pettersson,  W. Yi, M. Hendriks,  Uppaal 4.0, IEEE Computer  Society,  2006.
[33]P. Bulychev,  A. David, K.G. Larsen, M. Mikuˇcionis, D.B. Poulsen,  A. Legay, Z. Wang, Uppaal-SMC:  Statistical  model checking  for priced timed automata,  
arXiv preprint,  arXiv:1207.1272,  2012.
[34]G. Behrmann,  A. Cougnard,  A. David, E. Fleury, K.G. Larsen, D. Lime, Uppaal-tiga:  Time for playing  games!,  in: International  Conference  on Computer  
Aided Veriﬁcation,  Springer,  2007, pp. 121–125.
[35]P.G. Jensen, K.G. Larsen, A. Legay, U. Nyman,  Integrating  tools: Co-simulation  in uppaal using fmi-fmu,  in: 22nd International  Conference  on Engineering  
of Complex  Computer  Systems  (ICECCS),  IEEE, 2017, pp. 11–19.
[36]G. Behrmann,  A. David, K.G. Larsen, A tutorial  on uppaal,  in: Formal methods  for the design of real-time  systems,  Springer,  2004, pp. 200–236.
[37] I.R.  Hasrat, P.G. Jensen, K.G. Larsen, J. Srba, Artefact  for “A Toolchain  for Domestic  Heat-Pump  Control  Using Uppaal Stratego”,  https://doi  .org /10 .5281 /
zenodo  .7413575 , 2022.
[38] Control  technology:  weather  compensated  controls  (Viessmann:  climate  of innovation),  https://viessmanndirect  .co .uk /ﬁles //8e57dbc7  -8a10 -4065 -bcc6 -
a27700ee752a  /weather  _comp .pdf, 2023.
20
