--- Page 1 ---
 
 
General rights  
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and/or other  copyright 
owners and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise  and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.  
 
 Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the public portal for the purpose of private study or research.  
 You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit -making activity or commercial gain  
 You may freely distribute the URL identifying the p ublication in the public portal  
 
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us providing details, and we will remove access to the wo rk im mediately 
and investigate your claim.  
  
 
   
 
 
Downloaded from orbit.dtu.dk on: Apr 01, 2026
Formal Modelling and Verification of a Distributed Railway Interlocking System Using
UPPAAL
Laursen, Per Lange ; Trinh, Van Anh Thi ; Haxthausen, Anne Elisabeth
Published in:
Leveraging Applications of Formal Methods, Verification and Validation: Applications
Link to article, DOI:
10.1007/978-3-030-61467-6_27
Publication date:
2020
Document Version
Peer reviewed version
Link back to DTU Orbit
Citation (APA):
Laursen, P. L., Trinh, V. A. T., & Haxthausen, A. E. (2020). Formal Modelling and Verification of a Distributed
Railway Interlocking System Using UPPAAL. In Leveraging Applications of Formal Methods, Verification and
Validation: Applications (pp. 415-433). Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-61467-6_27

--- Page 2 ---
Formal Modelling and Verication of a
Distributed Railway Interlocking System Using
UPPAAL
Per Lange Laursen, Van Anh Thi Trinh, and Anne Elisabeth Haxthausen
DTU Compute, Technical University of Denmark, Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
perlangelaursen@gmail.com ,anh-van@live.com ,aeha@dtu.dk
Abstract. This paper investigates the modelling and model checking of
a real-world distributed railway interlocking system algorithm using UP-
PAAL. Interlocking systems for specic railway networks are veried by
instantiating a generic (re-congurable) model with conguration data
that describes the network and involved trains. There are three vari-
ants of the generic model: (1) The rst variant includes the minimum
required operations such as reserving a segment for a train, locking a
point in a xed position, and moving a train. (2) A restricted variant
that uses a more strict operational order. (3) A variant that extends
the rst variant with a cancel operation that removes reservations and
locks. Verication experiments are carried out on instances of all variants
in order to check their correctness and compare their performance. The
scalability of the three variants has been investigated with networks of
varying sizes. Finally, for a real-world railway network, instances of the
three model variants have been successfully veried.
Keywords: Distributed systems, Railway interlocking systems, Formal
verication, Model Checking, UPPAAL
1 Introduction
The aim of this paper is to report on the experiences using UPPAAL [4] for
model checking a real-world distributed railway interlocking system.
Background. A railway interlocking system is a signalling system component
responsible for controlling the switching of points in a railway network and the
issuing of movement authorities to the trains running in that network, such that
train collisions and derailments are avoided. Usually, interlocking systems are
centralised control systems. For small local railways, this can be a quite expen-
sive solution, so it has long been of interest to examine the possibilities of using
distributed interlocking systems, as discussed in [9]. In distributed interlocking
systems, the control is delegated to a collection of control components physically
distributed along the tracks and inside the trains. These components each have
their own state space for storing relevant data. With this approach, the com-
ponents communicate with each other in order to cooperate in controlling the

--- Page 3 ---
trains and the switch points in the railway network. For a survey over dierent
distributed control algorithms, see [11]. Although being a less expensive solution,
the required communication also makes it more dicult to verify the safety of
trains in the system. For that, the CENELEC standard EN 50128 [5] strongly
recommends to use formal verication methods.
Contribution and Related Work. There are many examples of formal ver-
ication of railway control systems, see e.g. [1, 2, 6, 8, 13, 15, 16, 18, 21], but only
very few for distributed interlocking systems, see e.g. [10,12,14].
The distributed interlocking concept considered in this paper is based on the
RELIS 2000 interlocking system of INSY GmbH. This system was rst modelled
and veried in [14] using RSL [20] and the RAISE theorem prover. As verication
by means of theorem proving is rather time consuming, while verication by
means of model checking is fully automated, the use of the latter was later,
in [12], investigated for the same case study. In [12], RSL* and the SAL symbolic
model checker were used only for a proof of concept, and hence eciency was
here of less concern. It actually turned out that the tool did not scale up well
for larger networks, in which case compositional reasoning was used instead.
The main goal of our study is to investigate whether UPPAAL has better
scaling, such that larger networks can be veried. UPPAAL has been chosen, as it
uses a symbolic on-the-y verication technique, which has generally proved very
ecient for many applications, see for instance [19, 22]. UPPAAL additionally
comes with an appealing graphical user interface, which may aect the mod-
elling experience positively compared to modelling and model checking through
a terminal for instance. Furthermore, we will investigate what it means for the
verication performance if the control algorithm is restricted to a variant having
a more specic execution order. We also use the opportunity to model addi-
tional functionality not included in [12]: an operation for cancelling reservations.
Finally, we will also examine how well suited UPPAAL is as a modelling tool
compared to RSL* and SAL.
Our control algorithm variants are similar to the ones presented in [12,14], but
our models dier of course wrt the choice of data types as UPPAAL oers fewer
data types than RSL and RSL*. They also dier from [12] by using channels
instead of shared variables for modelling the communication between control
components. A major dierence from [12] is: For improved eciency, a train
in our models (like in [14]) only reserves route segments and locks points in
the order that they are needed, leading to some simplications. Furthermore, in
contrast to [12,14], points are modelled in more detail, taking into account that
a point can be in a switching state.
A totally dierent algorithm for a distributed interlocking system based on
a two-phase commit protocol was modelled and veried in [10] using UMC [3].
Overview. First, in Sects. 2 and 3, short, informal introductions to the UP-
PAAL modelling language and the case study are given. Then, in Sects. 4 and 5,
models of three dierent variants of the interlocking system are described. The

--- Page 4 ---
rst variant (later referred to as the `First model') describes each of the dierent
operations that a train control computer can perform, i.e. reserve a segment,
switch and lock a point, and move the train to a new segment. Each of these dif-
ferent operations can be attempted in any order by the train control computer.
The second variant restricts the execution sequence of the dierent operations to
a more ideal sequence, while the third variant includes an additional operation
for cancelling reservations and locks. Desired properties are then presented in
Sect. 6 and used for the experiments described in Sect. 71. A conclusion on the
modelling and verication experiences is given in Sect. 8.
2 The UPPAAL Modelling Language
This section gives a very short, informal introduction to the major UPPAAL
modelling language constructs used in this paper. The reader is assumed famil-
iar with the theory of timed automata and temporal logics. For more details,
especially on the semantics of the concurrency construct, the reader should con-
sult [4].
In UPPAAL, a system is modelled as a network of parallel timed automata
(called processes), which are nite-state machines extended with (1) time in the
form of real-valued clocks that progress synchronously and (2) data variables of
simple data types (bounded integers, arrays, etc.). Even though UPPAAL can
use real-valued clocks as a part of an automaton, it is still possible to dene
and work with untimed automata. In that case, time will not aect the resulting
state space of an automaton. The models that are described as a part of this
paper are all untimed.
The specication of a system model consists of (1) templates for timed au-
tomata, (2) declarations of clocks, data variables, constants, channels, and func-
tions, which can be used in the templates, and (3) a system declaration, which
is a parallel composition of processes, which are instances of the templates. The
processes can communicate asynchronously via shared variables or synchronously
via unicast channels and broadcast channels.
Fig. 1. An example of a timed automaton in UPPAAL.
1The experiment models and the veried properties can be found at https://github.
com/perlangelaursen/DistributedRailwayControl

--- Page 5 ---
A timed automaton consists of locations and edges. In the graphical repre-
sentation of timed automata (for an example, see Fig. 1), locations are shown
as circles and may have a name shown in purple colour. The initial location is
shown by a double circle. A location may be labelled with an invariant (shown
in pink colour), which is a Boolean expression over variables and clocks. The
process can stay in that location and let time pass as long as the invariant is
satised, but when the invariant becomes false, it must leave the location.
Edges are shown as arrows. An edge may be labelled with (1) some param-
eters of the form id:type (shown in light green colour), (2) a guard (shown
in green colour), which is a Boolean expression over variables and clocks deter-
mining when the edge is enabled and can be red, (3) updates of variables and
clocks (shown in blue colour), which are executed when the edge is red, and
(4) synchronisations of the form c? orc! over a channel c(shown in light blue
colour). For a unicast channel c, an edge labelled with c! in one process (the
sender) may synchronise with an edge labelled with c? in another process (the
receiver) provided that both edges are enabled. For a broadcast channel c, an en-
abled edge labelled with c! in one process may synchronise with all enabled edges
labelled with c? in other processes. If there are no receivers, then the sender can
still execute the c! action. A channel may be declared to be urgent . Whenever
an enabled edge is able to synchronise over an urgent channel, this edge must
be red without any delay.
For the specication of desired properties, UPPAAL uses a subset of Timed
Computation Tree Logic (TCTL) [4], where the outer-most formula must be an
application of one of the two quantiers A(along all paths) or E(along at least
one path) or the leads-to operator -->, and these must not be nested.
3 Case Study
In this section, the considered case study from [14] is described informally.
Fig. 2. Railway network with control components and train components.
Railway Network. A railway network (see Fig. 2) is composed of a series of
segments ,points , and sensors . A segment is a linear section of a railway track.

--- Page 6 ---
Each of its two ends can be connected to another segment. A point allows for
two dierent connections to the same segment when the railway branches into
two dierent directions. The segment that can be connected to two dierent
segments is called the stem segment while the other two are the plus and minus
segments. The stem segment can only be connected to one of the two other seg-
ments at a time. To change the connection, the point must be switched. Each
point also has a sensor, which is used to detect a train passing the critical section
of the point.
Control Components. The distributed railway interlocking system consists of
atrain control computer (TCC) in each train and a control box (CB) at each
place where segments can be connected (see Fig. 2). Control boxes placed at
points are also called switch boxes since they are responsible for switching and
locking their associated points.
Control Task. The task of the control system is to ensure the safety of trains in
the railway network under control. The trains are considered safe if they never
collide orderail . Two trains (potentially) collide with each other if they occupy
the same segment at the same time, and a train (potentially) derails if it is pass-
ing a switching point or if it enters a point from the wrong side (an unconnected
branch).
Overall Control Strategy. The control strategy to ensure safety is as follows.
Collisions are prevented by requiring that a train must obtain a reservation of a
segment before it is allowed to enter it. This means that the train gets exclusive
access to the segment, and therefore a segment may only be reserved by one
train at a time. Derailment is prevented by requiring that a train obtains a lock
of a point in the correct position for its route before it is allowed to pass it.
Locking a point prevents the point from being switched, so a point can only be
switched if no train has obtained a lock for it.
Distributed State Space. Information about obtained reservations and locks
are stored in the state space of a train's TCC, which also has information about
the train's route and its current position in the route. TCCs obtain these reser-
vations and locks by sending requests to control boxes (see Fig. 3).
In the state space of a control box, the control box stores information about
reservations of its associated segments. If the control box is a switch box (i.e.
has an associated point), it also stores information about which sections are cur-
rently connected by the point and whether the point is locked for a train.
Reserving a Segment. A control box is associated with and responsible for
the segments that it is placed by. If a train wishes to request a reservation of
a segment, it should send this request to the control boxes placed at each end
of that segment. This means that a full reservation of a segment is obtained by

--- Page 7 ---
Fig. 3. Interactions between control components and point components.
requesting and successfully receiving the reservation of the segment at each of
the segment's two control boxes.
A train only requests a reservation of a segment in its route at a control
box in its route. It will only do so if it does not currently have that reservation.
Dierent from [12], three additional conditions have been added:
{The train does not yet have the maximum allowed number of reservations,
{it has reserved all the segments between its current position and the segment
in question and
{it always reserves a segment at the control box closest to its position rst.
The rst mentioned condition makes it possible to experiment with dierent
values when guring out how to improve the verication process. The two other
conditions reduce the number of possible execution sequences by only allowing
reservations to be made in the order that the train needs them while moving
along its route.
When a control box receives a request for reserving a segment, it checks that
{it is in fact associated with that segment and
{the segment is not already reserved by another train.
If reservation is possible, the control box returns a positive acknowledgement
to the requesting TCC, otherwise a negative acknowledgement is returned. If a
request is positively acknowledged, both the control box and the TCC update
their state spaces accordingly.
Locking a Point. To prevent a train from moving between unconnected seg-
ments or passing a switching point, it is necessary to rst lock the point in the
correct position.

--- Page 8 ---
A train sends a lock request to a switch box with the IDs of the segment
that it is currently on and the segment that it wants to move to. It only requests
locks in its route that it does not already have, and for connections of segments
that are adjacent in the route and for which it already has the reservations at
the switch box. Similarly to reservations, additional conditions have been added
in order to improve the verication process:
{The train does not yet have the maximum allowed number of locks and
{it has already obtained the necessary locks between its current position and
the switch box.
The receiving switch box will then check that
{it has not locked its point for another train,
{the received segments are the stem segment and either the plus or the minus
segment and
{the received segments have been reserved by the requesting train.
If locking is possible, the switch box will switch the point if the segments
are not already connected. It will then lock it and nally return a positive ac-
knowledgement to the requesting train and both will update their state spaces.
Otherwise, it will return a negative acknowledgement.
Releasing Reservations and Locks. Sensors detect trains in their critical
sections by becoming active , and if no train is in the critical section, passive .
When a sensor goes from active to passive, it triggers the release of reservations
and locks at the associated control box. A TCC either uses the Global Positioning
System (GPS) or track components signalling their location to know when it
should release its reservations and lock data.
4 First Model
Our UPPAAL models have been designed to be re-congurable, so that they
can be reused for a whole class of railway networks by only instantiating them
with some conguration data: A model instance consists of (1) declarations of
constants (provided as conguration data) dening a railway network, control
parameters, and initial data of the control components, (2) channels, (3) func-
tions, (4) templates, and (5) a system. The four last items are the same for all
instances of the same model, and the same holds for the constant names, but
the values of the constants are individual for each instance.
This section describes our rst model. Details can be found in the report [17].
Conguration Data. Conguration data consists of (1) integer constants
NTRAIN ,NCB,NPOINT ,NSEG , and NROUTELENGTH dening the number of trains,
control boxes, points, segments, and route lengths, respectively, (2) constants
resLimit andlockLimit dening the limits of how many reservations and locks

--- Page 9 ---
each train is allowed to have at a time, and (3) constant arrays dening the rail-
way network and initial data for the state spaces of the TCCs and CBs. For
example, the array segRoutes
const segV_id segRoutes [ NTRAIN ][ NROUTELENGTH ] = {{...} ,...};
stores in segRoutes[i] an array of the segments of the route of the train with
IDi. (All components of a specic kind are given an integer ID in the interval
[0;N 1], where Nis the number of components of that kind.)
Templates. The templates for the railway components are: Train ,CBand
Point . These templates each have a single parameter named id, which can
be instantiated with the ID of a train, a control box, and a point, respectively,
resulting in a process modelling the behaviour of the entity with that ID. In
addition, an Initializer template and an urgent broadcast channel, start , is
used for initiating the initialisation of the instances of the other templates.
Sensors could also have been modelled as instances of a Sensor template
and channel synchronisation could then have been used to model a sensor's
sensing of passing trains and the forwarding of its status to its associated control
box. However, both the communication between a train and a sensor and the
communication between a sensor and a control box (which is a wired connection)
can be seen as taking no time. Hence, one can model this communication as a
single synchronisation directly between the train and the control box, so there
is no need for a separate Sensor template.
System Declaration. The generic system declaration
system Initializer , Train , CB , Point ;
creates automatically one Initializer process, a Train(t) process for each
train/TCC t, aCB(cb) process for each control box cb, and a Point(p) process
for each point p.
Channels. In addition to the broadcast channel used in the initialisation step,
eight types of unicast channels, one for each of the interaction arrows shown in
Fig. 3, are declared for binary communication between components.
chan reqSeg [ NCB ][ NTRAIN ][ NSEG ];
chan reqLock [ NCB ][ NTRAIN ][ NSEG ][ NSEG ];
chan OK[ NTRAIN ];
chan notOK [ NTRAIN ];
chan pass [ NCB ];
chan passed [ NCB ];
chan switchPoint [ NPOINT ];
chan OKp [ NCB ];
For instance, when a train twants to send a request to a control box cbfor
a reservation of segment seg, it needs to send its own ID and the segment
ID along in the request. This request can be modelled as an output on the
channel reqSeg[cb][t][seg] . The control box cbcan synchronise with that by
making an input on that channel. The channels OK[t] and notOK[t] can then

--- Page 10 ---
be used by the control box to send a positive and negative acknowledgement to
t, respectively. pass[cb] and passed[cb] can be used by a train to signal to
a control box cbthat it has started and nished passing the sensor associated
with that control box, respectively. switchPoint[p] can be used by a control
boxcbto request point pto switch to its other position and OKp[cb] can then
be used by the point to notify that it has been locked in the requested position.
Synchronous communication of data over channels rather than via shared
variables as in [12], ensures that data is never lost or altered before it is received.
The Initializer Template. The Initializer automaton has one edge from
its initial location to its only other location. On this, it synchronises on an
urgent broadcast channel, start , with all Train and CBinstances to initiate
their initialisation.
Fig. 4. The rst model's Train template.
The Train Template. The Train template declares local variables (1) for
storing the distributed state information described in Sect. 3 for a TCC and
(2) for storing the actual position of the train itself. Below, the most important
variables are explained.
{routeLength stores the number of segments in the train's route.
{segments and boxes are arrays in which the IDs of the segments and the
control boxes along the train's route are stored, respectively.
{index stores the index of the segment in segments that the train believes
that it is occupying.

--- Page 11 ---
{resSegIndex stores the index of the segment in segments that needs to be
reserved next, and resCBIndex stores the index of the control box in boxes at
which this segment should be reserved for the train.2Hence, the next reserva-
tion should be of segment segments[resSegIndex] atboxes[resCBIndex] .
{lockIndex stores the index of the control box in boxes that needs its asso-
ciated point to be locked next.
{curSeg and headSeg stores the IDs of segments actually occupied by the
train.3If the train is only occupying one segment, the ID of that is stored in
curSeg while headSeg = -1 . If it is occupying two segments, the segment
IDs occupied by the rear and the front of the train are stored in curSeg and
headSeg , respectively. These variables are not used by the controller, but
only for formulating the safety properties that should be veried in terms of
the train's actual position.
The Train automaton for a train with ID idcan be seen in Fig. 4.
The outgoing edge from the Initial location synchronises with Initilizer
on the start channel and then copies conguration data to its local variables.
The edge is only enabled if the data are wellformed.
After initialisation, it enters the location SingleSegment , which indicates
that the train is located on a single segment.
From SingleSegment , there are two outgoing (request) edges used for re-
questing a segment reservation and for requesting a switching/locking of a point
at a control box. These edges are guarded by functions that ensure that an oper-
ation is only initiated if the conditions stated in Sect. 3 are fullled. For instance,
the guard for a reservation request is dened by the following function:
bool possibleToReserve () {
return resSegIndex < routeLength && resSegIndex - 1 - index < resLimit ;
}
This function states that a segment reservation should only be requested if (1)
there are more segments in the route that the train has not yet reserved, and
(2) the maximum number of allowed reservations will not be exceeded by a
reservation.
If a guard is true, the train can send its request to the control box by a
synchronisation on the channel intended for that. E.g. for a reservation request,
it will be reqSeg[boxes[resCBIndex]][id][segments[resSegIndex]] .
After that, the train waits for the control box to either send a positive or
negative acknowledgement by synchronisation on OK[id] ornotOK[id] , respec-
tively. After a positive acknowledgement, it also updates its state space. In the
case of a reservation, the update is made by the following function:
void updateResInfo (){
resBit = resBit ^1;
resSegIndex = ( resBit ==0) ? resSegIndex +1 : resSegIndex ;
2As segment reservations and locks of points are made in sequential order in contrast
to [12], no data structures for explicitly storing reservations and locks are needed {
they can be derived from resSegIndex ,resCBIndex , and lockIndex .
3Trains are assumed to reside on at most two segments.

--- Page 12 ---
resCBIndex = ( resBit ==1) ? resCBIndex +1 : resCBIndex ;
}
Since a segment must be reserved at two control boxes, resSegIndex should
not be incremented every time a reservation has been obtained, but only every
second time. resBit stores an integer ranging from 0 to 1, which is ipped every
time a reservation has been obtained. resSegIndex is then only incremented
whenever resBit is 0. Similarly, resCBIndex should only be incremented every
second time: whenever resSegIndex is not.
From SingleSegment , there is also an edge to DoubleSegment and one back
from that to SingleSegment , for modelling that the train starts and nishes
passing a control box. The rst edge is guarded by a function checking that the
passing is only initiated if the conditions stated for that in Sect. 3 are fullled.
On both edges the location information of the train is updated.
Finally, there is an edge from SingleSegment to the Arrived location. This
is red when the train has arrived at its destination, i.e. is on the last segment
of its route.
Fig. 5. The rst model's CBtemplate.
The CBTemplate. The CBtemplate declares local variables for storing the
distributed state at control boxes as described in Sect. 3. For instance, there
is a segments array for storing the IDs of up to three segments that can be
reserved at that CB, and an array, res, of the same length, which in res[i]
stores the reservation status of the segment in segments[i] : The status is -1if
the segment is not reserved by a train, and otherwise it is the ID of the train
that has reserved the segment.
The CBautomaton for a control box with ID idcan be seen in Fig. 5.
After initialisation, the CBenters the location Idle . From that, there is an
outgoing edge on which it waits for a reservation request by synchronisation
on a channel intended for that. After a synchronisation, it checks whether the

--- Page 13 ---
conditions stated in Sect. 3 for granting the requested reservation are fullled.
Based on the result of that check, it sends either a positive or negative acknowl-
edgement back to the requesting train, tid, by synchronisation on OK[tid] or
notOK[tid] , respectively. If the request is granted, the CBupdates its own state
space and returns to the Idle location. The mentioned check is expressed using
the following function:
int [ -1 ,2] checkSegment ( seg_id sid) {
for (i:int [0 ,2]) {
if( segments [i] == sid && res [i] == -1) {
return i; // sid exists and is not reserved
}
}
return -1; // sid either not found or already reserved
}
This function call ( checkSegment(j) ) checks whether it can nd the requested
segment jamong the CB's associated segments and that it is not reserved. If
the reservation is possible, the index of the segment is returned, otherwise -1 is
returned.
From the Idle location, there are other similar loops for handling a locking
request from a train and for releasing reservations and locks for a train at the
control box when the train passes it. The handling of locking requests is more
complicated as that may also involve the switching of a point. Due to space
limitations, the interested reader is referred to [17] for details.
Note that a CBcannot synchronise for a request from a train or with a passing
train, when it is not in Idle (i.e. it is already processing a request or being passed
by a train). This design ensures that a control box can only communicate with
one train at a time.
5 Other System Variants
Two additional variants of the model described in Sect. 4 have been developed to
explore how the model can be restricted and also extended . While the restricted
model enforces a more restricted sequence of operations, the extended model
introduces a new cancel operation, which can be used to cancel reservations and
locks.
Restricted Operation Sequence. Although Train s are free to request seg-
ments and locks and pass CBs whenever they wish as long as the guards are
true, it is not always benecial to do so. For example, if a Train has not yet
obtained its maximum allowed number of segment reservations or locks, it may
choose to either reserve more segments or request the locking of connections of
segments that it has already reserved. Hence, to further reduce the number of
possible execution sequences, this variant should limit the number of choices a
Train has.
An example of such a restricted sequence could be formulated as follows:
Obtain as many reservations as possible, obtain as many locks as possible and
nally move forward in the route for as long as possible.

--- Page 14 ---
Fig. 6. The Train template with restricted options.
To ensure the deterministic execution path, the SingleSegment location has
been divided into several locations: SingleSegment ,Reserving ,PassOrLock
and Locking as seen in Fig. 6. Each of these locations will at most have one
enabled edge to another location by considering both the current state and
the potential future state of a Train . An example of this is when a Train is
reserving a segment. It will make the reservation request and transition to the
Reserving location. If the reservation was successful , it will go to either the
SingleSegment location or the PassOrLock location depending on whether it
can make more reservations or not. If the reservation was unsuccessful , then it
will also go to either the PassOrLock location or the SingleSegment location
this time depending on whether it already has at least one full reservation or
not. The other operations are designed in the same manner by analysing what
is possible in the next location before actually transitioning to it.
Extension with Cancel Operation. A situation that has not yet been dis-
cussed in the rst model is the situation in which a train is unable to proceed
on its route due to livelocks. This situation can for instance arise if a Train
gets the reservation of a segment at one of the segment's associated CBs, while
another Train gets the reservation of the same segment at the other associated
CB. This prevents either of the two Train s to get the full reservation of the seg-
ment. Therefore, it may be benecial to have a cancel operation that will allow
aTrain to cancel its obtained reservations and locks if needed.
The general strategy of the cancel operation is that a Train cancels reserva-
tions and locks in the opposite order of how it obtained them. For a description
of how the cancel operation has been implemented, see [17].

--- Page 15 ---
6 Verication Properties
This section shows examples of the formalisation in TCTL of safety properties
and other relevant properties to be veried. The complete list of properties and
their formalisation can be found in [17].
Safety Properties. The safety properties to be veried are `no collision' and
`no derailment'. Here we show how the former of these is formalised.
`No collision' means that at any time, no two dierent Train instances occupy
any of the same segments. This property is formalised as:
A[] forall (i: t_id ) forall (j: t_id ) Initializer . Initialized && i != j imply
( Train (i). curSeg != Train (j). curSeg ) &&
( Train (i). DoubleSegment imply Train (i). headSeg != Train (j). curSeg ) &&
( Train (i). DoubleSegment && Train (j). DoubleSegment imply Train (i).
headSeg != Train (j). headSeg )
The query states that in all paths, for all states after the initialisation step (i.e
when the Initializer automaton has reached the location Initialized ), two
Train instances with dierent IDs, iandj, have positions that do not include
the same segments. With two position variables ( curSeg andheadSeg ) for each
Train , it should be checked that the values of these for one train are dierent
from the values of these for the other train, but the value of headSeg for a
train should only be checked when the train occupies two segments, i.e. if its
automaton is in location DoubleSegment , which for a train with ID = ican be
checked by the formula Train(i).DoubleSegment .
Other Properties. We have formulated other relevant properties to be veri-
ed. For example, consistency properties , which express the consistency between
Train state spaces and CBstate spaces, e.g. that whenever a Train has stored a
segment reservation at a control box, the corresponding CBhas stored the same
segment as reserved for that train.
We have also formalised a liveness property that expresses that there exists
a path in which all trains eventually arrive at their destinations:
E<> forall (i: t_id ) Train (i). Arrived
7 Verication Experiments
A series of experiments has been conducted in order to determine whether the
properties presented in Sect. 6 can be veried for instances of the three generic
models for some specic networks having a typical RELIS 2000 layout4and what
the verication resource usage is5. Furthermore, a comparison of verication
metrics of UPPAAL and SAL has been made.
4The RELIS 2000 system was intended for local railways with up to 20 stations with
1{2 track segments each, connected by single lines, and operated by 2{3 trains.
5The experiment models and the veried properties can be found at https://github.
com/perlangelaursen/DistributedRailwayControl

--- Page 16 ---
The rst set of networks focuses on the scalability of the system where the
number of stations varies. A general description can be seen in Fig. 7 where two
trains are positioned in each end of a network with nstations. Train t0's route
is shown as a dashed line, while the route of t1is shown as a dotted line.
Fig. 7. Network with nstations.
Fig. 8. Nrumbanen with two trains.
The second set of networks is based on the local railway network Nrumba-
nenin Denmark. There are two separate situations for this network. The rst
situation represents the regular trac where two trains start in each end of the
network while their destinations are in the opposite ends as seen in Fig. 8. The
second situation represents the rush hour trac with an additional train t2.t0
starts at segment s0with destination at s18,t1starts at s18with destination
ats10andt2starts at s10with destination at s0.
For each model instance, each of the properties have been veried6three
times and the averages of the elapsed time and resident memory usage peaks
(extracted from UPPAAL's model checker) have been calculated.
Table 1 shows the elapsed time and resident memory usage peaks for veri-
cation of the `no collision' property for both experiment series for each of the
model variants (with the limit control parameters set to 2).
The results show that the time and memory usage increases when the size
of the network increases. The reason for the exponential growth is due to the
increasing number of places where trains can pass each other, which results in
more states that need to be checked. The results also show (as expected) that the
restricted model generally has the lowest time and memory usage, and that the
model including the cancel operation has the highest time and memory usage.
This is because the restricted model has fewer interleavings than the other model
6The experiments were performed with UPPAAL version 4.1.19 on a machine with
Arch Linux OS, an AMD Ryzen 2700X processor clocked at 4.0 GHz and 64GB
RAM memory clocked at 2666MHz.

--- Page 17 ---
Table 1. Verication metrics for `No collision': elapsed time in seconds on the left-hand
side of a column and memory usage peak in KB on the right-hand side. All models use
limits = 2. Verications that lasted longer than 24 hours (86400 seconds) were stopped.
Conguration First model Restricted model Model with cancel
Station One 0,013 / 6515 0,021 / 8508 0,046 / 8727
Station Two 0,195 / 9944 0,127 / 12579 0,894 / 16641
Station Four 8 / 41508 2 / 39384 34 / 139527
Station Six 176 / 152875 48 / 122787 951 / 680333
Station Eight 1145 / 422327 277 / 276996 6587 /2104345
Station Ten 4344 / 955109 1064 / 560651 23912 /5207884
Station Twelfth 17905 / 3436440 3151 / 1360780 71971 / 11269876
Station Fourteen 47898 / 5680072 8540 / 2043916 stopped
Station Sixteen stopped 26376 / 3225156
Station Twenty 72986 /6961996
Nrumbanen (2T) 112 / 122196 20 / 113553 251 / 238945
Nrumbanen (3T) 4700 /1834129 395 / 313881 9697 / 3638703
variants, while the model with the cancel operation has additional states. Within
24 hours, the restricted model was veriable for up to 20 stations, while the two
others had to be stopped for 16 and 14 stations, respectively.
It could be interesting to compare our UPPAAL results with the SAL results
in [12] for some common network. The railway network in Fig. 13 on P. 30 in [12]
can be used for that, as it is the same as our Station One . The third model variant
in [12] uses the Just-In-Time principle to reserve segments and lock points, which
is close to our `First model' with the limit parameters set to 1, but it diers by
being less restrictive with respect to the order of reservations. For a more fair
comparison of the verication performance, we have adapted the model from [12]
to a new model (Model 4) that follows our more restricted order. Table 2 shows
a comparison of the verication performance using the UPPAAL and the SAL
model checkers, respectively, for these two models instantiated with the Station
One network.7As it can be seen, UPPAAL had a much better performance only
spending 0.017 seconds and 9.5 MB RAM to verify the UPPAAL model, whereas
SAL spent around 6 seconds and 105{110 MB RAM for the RSL* model. The
same was tried for the Station Ten network. In this case, UPPAAL spent 1858
seconds and 675 MB, while RSL*-SAL did not scale up to that.
8 Conclusion
This paper described the modelling and verication of three variants of a real-
world distributed railway control system algorithm using UPPAAL.
Having modelled the rst variant, it was easy to rene it to one enforcing a
more restricted operation sequence, which improved the verication metrics and
7The verication using UPPAAL was this time kindly performed by Signe Geisler
on her machine used in [12] to make the comparison possible. In [12], an Intel(R)
Core(TM) i7-8650U CPU clocked 1.90 GHz with 31GB of memory was used.

--- Page 18 ---
Table 2. Verication metrics for verifying 'No collision' for Station One using SAL
and UPPAAL.
Model Checker Model Time (sec) Memory (MB)
SAL RSL* Model 4 6.03 - 6.18 105 - 110
UPPAAL UPPAAL First model with limit 1 0.017 9.5
scalability signicantly compared to the former. Extending the rst model with
an additional operation was even more straightforward than rening it since no
changes to existing locations or edges were made, but only new locations and
edges were added. Verication of the extended model costs more in terms of
space and time than for the two other models, but the new operation introduced
in this model is required in real-world systems to prevent livelocks. In conclusion,
the rst model was modelled in such a way that it was easy to both improve the
verication process by rening it, but also extend it if new functionalities were
to be introduced. One could also attempt to combine the two new variants by
extending the restricted version with a cancel operation. The algorithm should
then be re-specied, for example by allowing cancellations as a special operation
at any time possible. This would introduce more interleavings, but still be more
restricted than the extended model.
Compared to the use of RSL* and SAL in [12], some concepts have been
more dicult to express in UPPAAL, which led to some less elegant solutions,
e.g. the use of -1 as a ller because no list data structure of variable length was
available. On the other hand, UPPAAL's model checker is signicantly faster and
less memory consuming than the SAL symbolic model checker, and consequently
the use of UPPAAL scaled up to larger networks much better. Furthermore,
UPPAAL's graphical tool generally made the modelling process more visual and
straightforward, while the simulator and diagnostic trace function also made it
simple to debug and test the dierent model variants.
In future work, we wish to explore the use of other tools, e.g. UMC, nuXmv,
SPIN, and mCRL2, to model and verify the same railway control system and
compare with that. It could also be interesting to experiment with variants of the
UPPAAL models using shared variables for communication instead of channels,
and to extend the model with the possibility of message loss (due to wireless
communication) and check that the system still remains safe. Furthermore, it
could be interesting to experiment with stochastic variants of the UPPAAL
models and use UPPAAL STRATEGO [7] to synthesise schedulers.
Acknowledgements. We would like to express our gratitude to Jan Peleska
from whom the case study originates and with whom the second author had the
great pleasure to verify the same case study by theorem proving [14]. We are
grateful to Signe Geisler for repeating some of our experiments on her laptop
making it possible to compare the verication performance of some of our veri-
cation experiments using UPPAAL with some of her experiments using SAL.

--- Page 19 ---
Finally, we would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for useful suggestions
for the presentation.
References
1. Basile, D., ter Beek, M.H., Fantechi, A., Gnesi, S., Mazzanti, F., Piattino, A.,
Trentini, D., Ferrari, A.: On the industrial uptake of formal methods in the rail-
way domain - A survey with stakeholders. In: Furia, C.A., Winter, K. (eds.) In-
tegrated Formal Methods. pp. 20{29. Springer International Publishing (2018).
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-98938-9 2"
2. Basile, Davide and Beek, Maurice H. ter and Ferrari, Alessio and Legay, Axel: Mod-
elling and analysing ERTMS L3 moving block railway signalling with Simulink and
Uppaal SMC. In: Larsen, K.G., Willemse, T. (eds.) Formal Methods for Industrial
Critical Systems. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 11687, pp. 1{21. Springer
Verlag (2019). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-27008-7 1
3. ter Beek, M.H., Fantechi, A., Gnesi, S., Mazzanti, F.: A state/event-based model-
checking approach for the analysis of abstract system properties. Science of Com-
puter Programming 76(2), 119{135 (2011)
4. Behrmann, G., David, A., Larsen, K.G.: A tutorial on uppaal . In: Bernardo, M.,
Corradini, F. (eds.) Formal Methods for the Design of Real-Time Systems: 4th
International School on Formal Methods for the Design of Computer, Communi-
cation, and Software Systems, SFM-RT 2004. pp. 200{236. No. 3185 in Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, Springer{Verlag (September 2004)
5. CENELEC { European Committee for Electrotechnical Standardization: EN
50128:2011 { Railway applications { Communications, signalling and processing
systems { Software for railway control and protection systems (2011)
6. Comptier, M., Deharbe, D., Perez, J.M., Mussat, L., Pierre, T., Sabatier, D.:
Safety analysis of a CBTC system: A rigorous approach with Event-B. In: Fan-
techi, A., Lecomte, T., Romanovsky, A. (eds.) Reliability, Safety, and Security
of Railway Systems. Modelling, Analysis, Verication, and Certication. Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, vol. 10598, pp. 148{159. Springer Verlag (2017).
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-68499-4 10
7. David, A., Jensen, P.G., Larsen, K.G., Miku cionis, M., Taankvist, J.H.: UPPAAL
STRATEGO. In: Baier, C., Tinelli, C. (eds.) Tools and Algorithms for the Con-
struction and Analysis of Systems. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 9035,
pp. 206{211. Springer Berlin Heidelberg (2015)
8. Fantechi, A.: Twenty-Five Years of Formal Methods and Railways: What Next? In:
Counsell, S., N u~ nez, M. (eds.) Software Engineering and Formal Methods. Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, vol. 8368, pp. 167{183. Springer (2014)
9. Fantechi, A., Gnesi, S., Haxthausen, A., van de Pol, J., Roveri, M., Treharne,
H.: SaRDIn - A safe recongurable distributed interlocking. In: Proc. 11th World
Congress on Railway Research (WCRR 2016). Ferrovie dello Stato Italiane, Milano
(2016)
10. Fantechi, A., Haxthausen, A.E., Nielsen, M.B.R.: Model checking geographically
distributed interlocking systems using UMC. In: 25th Euromicro International
Conference on Parallel, Distributed and Network-based Processing (PDP). pp.
278{286 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1109/PDP.2017.66

--- Page 20 ---
11. Fantechi, A., Haxthausen, A.: Safety interlocking as a distributed mutual exclu-
sion problem. In: Howar, F., Barnat, J. (eds.) Formal Methods for Industrial Crit-
ical Systems. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 11119, pp. 52{66. Springer
(2018). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-00244-2 4
12. Geisler, S., Haxthausen, A.E.: Stepwise development and model checking of a dis-
tributed interlocking system using RAISE. Formal Aspects of Computing (pub-
lished online rst, 21 February 2020). https://doi.org/10.1007/s00165-020-00507-2
13. Hansen, H.H., Ketema, J., Luttik, B., Mousavi, M.R., van de Pol, J.: Towards
model checking executable UML specications in mCRL2. Innovations in Systems
and Software Engineering 6(1), 83{90 (Mar 2010). https://doi.org/10.1007/s11334-
009-0116-1
14. Haxthausen, A.E., Peleska, J.: Formal Development and Verication of a Dis-
tributed Railway Control System. In: IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering,
vol. 26, pp. 687{701. IEEE (2000)
15. Hoang, T.S., Butler, M., Reichl, K.: The hybrid ERTMS/ETCS level 3 case study.
In: Butler, M., Raschke, A., Hoang, T.S., Reichl, K. (eds.) Abstract State Machines,
Alloy, B, TLA, VDM, and Z. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 10817, pp.
251{261. Springer Verlag (2018). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-91271-4 17
16. James, P., M oller, F., Nguyen, H.N., Roggenbach, M., Schneider, S., Treharne,
H., Trumble, M., Williams, D.: Verication of Scheme Plans Using CSP jjB. In:
Counsell, S., N u~ nez, M. (eds.) Software Engineering and Formal Methods, Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, vol. 8368, pp. 189{204. Springer (2014)
17. Laursen, P.L., Trinh, V.A.T.: Formal modelling and verication of dis-
tributed railway control systems. Tech. rep., DTU Compute, Techni-
cal University of Denmark (2019), https://github.com/perlangelaursen/
DistributedRailwayControl/blob/master/s144449s144456-MSc-Thesis.pdf
18. Limbr ee, C., Cappart, Q., Pecheur, C., Tonetta, S.: Verication of railway
interlocking-compositional approach with OCRA. In: International Conference on
Reliability, Safety, and Security of Railway Systems. pp. 134{149. Springer (2016)
19. Mazzanti, F., Ferrari, A.: Ten diverse formal models for a CBTC automatic
train supervision system. In: Gallagher, J.P., van Glabbeek, R., Serwe, W. (eds.)
Proceedings Third Workshop on Models for Formal Analysis of Real Systems
and Sixth International Workshop on Verication and Program Transforma-
tion. EPTCS, vol. 268, pp. 104{149 (2018). https://doi.org/10.4204/EPTCS.268.4,
http://arxiv.org/abs/1803.08668
20. RAISE Language Group: Chris George, Peter Ha, Klaus Havelund, Anne E. Hax-
thausen, Robert Milne, Claus Bendix Nielsen, Sren Prehn, Kim Ritter Wagner,
T.: The RAISE Specication Language. The BCS Practitioners Series, Prentice
Hall Int. (1992)
21. Vu, L.H., Haxthausen, A.E., Peleska, J.: Formal modelling and verication of
interlocking systems featuring sequential release. Science of Computer Program-
ming 133, Part 2 , 91 { 115 (2017), http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0167642316300570 , http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.scico.2016.05.010
22. Yi, W., Pettersson, P., Daniels, M.: Automatic verication of real-time commu-
nicating systems by constraint-solving. In: Hogrefe, D., Leue, S. (eds.) Formal
Description Techniques VII. pp. 243{258. Springer (1995)
