--- Page 1 ---
UPPAAL 4.0
Gerd Behrmann
and Alexandre David
and Kim G. Larsen
Department of Computer Science
Aalborg University, Denmark
Email:{behrmann,adavid,kgl }@cs.aau.dkJohn H˚ akansson
and Paul Pettersson
and Wang Yi
Department of Information Technology
Uppsala University, Sweden
Email:{johnh,paupet,yi }@it.uu.seMartijn Hendriks
Institute for Computing
and Information Sciences
Radboud University Nijmegen
The Netherlands
Email: m.hendriks@cs.ru.nl
Abstract—UPPAAL4.0istheresultofover twoandahalfyears
of development and contains many new features, additions to the
modeling language, performance improvements, enhancemen ts
and polish to the the easy to use graphical user interface, an d
is accompanied by several open source libraries. The tool an d
libraries are available free of charge for academic, educat ional
and evaluation purposes from http://www.uppaal.com/ .
We describe three of the new features: User deﬁned functions ,
priorities and symmetry reduction.
I. INTRODUCTION
UPPAALis a veriﬁcation tool for timed automata. Its focus
on speed and usability has made the tool popular both as
a teaching tool in academia, as a gentle introduction to the
world of model checking, and as a tool for doing serious
case studies as witnessed by the large number of publication s
in which U PPAALwas used. Version 4.0 was released in
May 2006 and introduces many new features that increase
the applicability and the performance of the tool. This pape r
describes three major features of the new release. Many more
are worth describing (such as a typical reduction in memory
usage of a factor 3 to 5, new abstraction techniques resultin g
in large performance increases [1], or our implementation o f
the generalised sweep line method), however lack of space
forces us to focus on the most visible changes.
II. USER DEFINED FUNCTIONS
Many problems require non-trivial computations with com-
plex control-ﬂow to be embedded in the model. In a graphical
language like the one used by U PPAAL, this tends to clutter
the model and makes the model hard to read and maintain.
Often, including such computations in the model enlarges th e
state space by introducing intermediate states and irrelev ant
interleaving. In the past, this has led to the addition of
committed locations in U PPAALto build atomic sequences.
In UPPAAL4.0 we have extended the modeling language
with user deﬁned functions. These are fully integrated into the
modeling language, and have access and can modify all state
variables. The syntax follows the style of C/C++/Java, and
most control-ﬂow constructsof C are supported.Functions a re
evaluatedatomicallyand mustbe deterministic,wherebyin ter-
mediatestates are avoided(similar to the dstepconstruction
in SPIN, which marks a sequence of statements as atomic and
deterministic). The only limitations are that recursive ca llsare not allowed and functions must eventually return. The
second requirement is currently not enforced by U PPAAL, and
UPPAALwill not terminate if a user deﬁned function enters
an inﬁnite loop (this is a technicality and the language was
designedsuch that futureversionsof U PPAALcan be extended
to analyze the model for such problems).
User deﬁned functions are compiled to byte-code, and
executed at veriﬁcation time on a small embedded stack
machine. We have decided not to use an external compiler
likegcc, even though this would result in faster evaluation of
complicated functions. The dependence on an external com-
piler would complicate the installation procedure of U PPAAL
considerably. We do not expect the virtual machine to be a
bottleneck for veriﬁcation, as most time is spent on other
operations anyway.
The extension has proven to be extremely useful in almost
all UPPAALmodels. Typical uses include that of naming or
hiding complicated expressions from the graphical languag e,
performing updates on data structures like routing tables,
queues, and stacks (although, the size of such data structur es
must always be bounded), and performing computations that
require loops and complex control-ﬂow. One of the more
ingenious uses we have seen, is to implement an interpreter
for live sequence charts, which when embedded in a U PPAAL
model can be used to check conformance.
III. PRIORITIES
In the implementation of real-time systems, the priorities
are often associated with processes (or tasks) to structure
and control the usage of shared resources such as CPU or
shared memory. As a consequence, programming languages
andschedulingpoliciesusedinreal-timeoperatingsystem sare
often based on a notion of priorities on tasks. In lower level s,
priorities are often associated with interrupts to hardwar e
devices and access to e.g., shared communication buses.
In UPPAAL4.0 we have extended the modelling language
with priorities on channels and automata [2]. The priority
orders deﬁned in the model are translated into a priority ord er
on internal and synchronizing transitions. At a given time-
point, an enabled transition will block(disable) another if it
has a higher priority.
The example below speciﬁes that channel ahas a lower
priority than channels bandc, and that the automaton Phas

--- Page 2 ---
a lower priority than automata QandR. In such a model,
with priorities on both automata and channels, we resolve
priorities by comparing priorities on channels ﬁrst. If the y are
the same, the automata priorities are compared. For efﬁcien t
model-checking the prority orders are total orders.
chan priority a < b, c;
system P < Q, R;
UPPAALuses difference bound matrices (DBMs) [3] to
represent convex constraints on clock variables. The efﬁci ent
implementation of priorities is made possible by the introd uc-
tion of a optimised subtraction operation in the DBM library .
However, the result of the subtraction is not necessarily a
convex zone, but rather a set of zones. The algorithm we use
for subtracion generates a disjoint set of DBMs, and uses a
heuristic to minimise the number of DBMs in the result. The
library even supports merging zones back together.
IV. SYMMETRY REDUCTION
Symmetry reduction is a well-known technique to alleviate
the state-space explosionproblemandhas recentlybeen add ed
to UPPAAL. This technique can be applied to models that con-
tain multiple equivalently behaving processes [4]. Consid er,
for instance, Fischer’s mutual exclusion algorithm. It con sists
of a set of processes that only differ in their “identity”. A
process writes its identity in a global variable and checks a fter
a while whether this global variable still contains its iden tity.
If so, it can enter the critical section.
In order to provide convenient and safe usage of symme-
try reduction, the modeling language of U PPAALhas been
extended with the scalardatatype. It can be used to deﬁne
scalarsets which can be regarded as unordered integer sub-
ranges. As a result, the only operations allowed on scalars
are (i) equivalency testing with a scalar of the same type and
(ii) assignment with a scalar of the same type. Furthermore,
scalars can be used to index arrays if the dimension of the
array has the same type as the indexing scalar. In the model
for Fischer’s mutex algorithm, the process identity is a sca lar
and therefore there is a single scalarset.
Symmetry reductioncan – in theory– be very beneﬁcial: its
savings w.r.t. the size of the reachable state space can (for a
model with one scalarset of size n) approach a factor n!. This
super-exponential gain is, unfortunately, not always obse rved
due to a fundamental technical issue. Fig. 1 shows the effect
of symmetry reduction for Fischer’s mutex algorithm.
An important application area of symmetry reduction is
the area of distributed algorithms since models of instance s
of such algorithms often consist of a number of symmetric
processes. For instance, symmetry reduction in U PPAALhas
been succesfully applied to the leader election algorithm i n
[5], a consensus algorithm [6] and the Zeroconf protocol [7]1.
1The work in [6] does not use automatic symmetry reduction, bu t recent
experiments show that this can be done with a signiﬁcant gain . 10 100 1000 10000 100000 1e+06
 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 0.01 0.1 1 10 100 1000number of states stored
time needed (s)
number of processesTime SR
Memory SR
Time without SR
Memory without SR
Fig. 1. The effects of symmetry reduction on the time and memo ry
consumption of U PPAAL4.0 for Fischer’s mutual exclusion algorithm.
V. CONCLUSION
We have described three of the most visisble new features
of UPPAAL4.0. The DBM library is released under the GPL
and contains language bindings for C, C++ and Ruby. The
parser library is released under the LGPL and is ideal for
implementing model transformation tools or analysis tools .
Java parsers and client stubs for the veriﬁcation backend ar e
distributed with U PPAALand may be used by, e.g., domain
speciﬁc tools (the documentation can be found at our web
site). Finally, U PPAALcan be used as a compiler for U PPAAL
models, translating the model to a byte-code representatio n.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
TheauthorsthankKim Algreen,MariusMikucionis,Leonid
Mokrushin, Ulrik Nyman, Robert Olesen, and Jacob Illum
Rasmussen for their contributions to U PPAAL4.0.
REFERENCES
[1] G. Behrmann, P. Bouyer, K. G. Larsen, and R. Pelnek, “Lowe r and upper
bounds in zone-based abstractions of timed automata,” International
Journal on Software Tools for Technology Transfer , September 2005.
[2] A.David, J.H˚ akansson, K.G.Larsen,and P.Pettersson, “Model checking
timed automata with priorities using dbm subtraction,” 200 6, submitted
for publication.
[3] D. L. Dill, “Timing assumptions and veriﬁcation of ﬁnite -state concurrent
systems.” in Proc. Of Automatic Veriﬁcation Methods for Finite State
Systems, ser. LNCS, vol. 407. Springer–Verlag, 1989, pp. 197–212.
[4] M. Hendriks, G. Behrmann, K. G. Larsen, P. Niebert, and F. W. Vaan-
drager, “Adding symmetry reduction to Uppaal,” in 1st International
Conference on the Formal Modeling and Analysis of Timed Syst ems
(FORMATS’03) , ser. LNCS, K. G. Larsen and P. Niebert, Eds., no. 2791.
Springer–Verlag, 2004, pp. 46–59.
[5] R. Perlman, “An algorithm for distributed computation o f a spanningtree
in an extended lan,” SIGCOMM Comput. Commun. Rev. , vol. 15, no. 4,
pp. 44–53, 1985.
[6] M. Hendriks, “Model checking the time to reach agreement ,” in3rd
International Conference on the Formal Modeling and Analys is of Timed
Systems (FORMATS’05) , ser. LNCS, P. Pettersson and W. Yi, Eds., no.
3829. Springer–Verlag, 2005, pp. 98–111.
[7] B. Gebremichael, F. Vaandrager, and M. Zhang, “Analysis of a protocol
for dynamic conﬁguration of IPv4 link local addresses using Uppaal,”
ICIS, Radboud University Nijmegen, Tech. Rep. ICIS-R06xxx , 2006,
submitted to EMSOFT 2006.
