--- Page 1 ---
International Journal on Software Tools for Technology Transfer (2022) 24:351–370
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10009-022-00653-3
GENERAL
Special Issue: FMICS 2019/2020
Exploring the ERTMS/ETCS full moving block speciﬁcation: an
experience with formal methods
Davide Basile1·Maurice H. ter Beek1·Alessio Ferrari1·Axel Legay2
Accepted: 8 March 2022 / Published online: 10 April 2022
© The Author(s) 2022
Abstract
Shift2Rail is a joint undertaking funded by the EU via its Horizon 2020 program and by main railway stakeholders. Several
Shift2Rail projects aim to investigate the application of formal methods to new ERTMS/ETCS railway signalling systemsthat promise to move European railway forward by guaranteeing high capacity, low cost and improved reliability. We explorethe ERTMS/ETCS level 3 full moving block speciﬁcations stemming from different Shift2Rail projects using Uppaal and
statistical model checking. The results range from novel rigorously formalised requirements to an operational model formally
veriﬁed against scenarios with multiple trains on a single railway line. From the gained experience, we have distilled futureresearch goals to improve the formal speciﬁcation and veriﬁcation of real-time systems, and we discuss some barriers
concerning a possible uptake of formal methods and tools in the railway industry.
Keywords Formal methods ·Railways ·ERTMS/ETCS ·Moving block ·UPPAAL ·Statistical model checking
1 Introduction
The railway sector is known for its robust safety requirements
and the use of formal methods is indeed highly recommended
in the relevant standards for the software requirements speci-ﬁcation and software system design in order to be certiﬁed at
the highest safety integrity levels. As a result, formal methods
and tools have been successfully applied to railway systems[10,18,21,36–39,47,51,77,78]. However, the railway sector
is notoriously cautious concerning the adoption of techno-
logical innovations, in particular if compared with other
transport sectors. Hence, while satellite-based positioningsystems have been in use for quite some time in the avionics
BDavide Basile
davide.basile@isti.cnr.it
Maurice H. ter Beek
maurice.terbeek@isti.cnr.it
Alessio Ferrari
alessio.ferrari@isti.cnr.it
Axel Legay
axel.legay@uclouvain.be
1ISTI–CNR, Via G. Moruzzi 1, 56124 Pisa, Italy
2Université Catholique de Louvain, Louvain-la-Neuve,Belgiumand automotive sectors, modern railway signalling systems
still prevalently use traditional ground-based train detectionsystems with ﬁxed block distancing. However, the faster
trains are allowed to run, the longer their braking distance,
which results in an increased safety distance and a decreasedline capacity. Therefore, to make the railway sector more
competitive, robust and attractive, a recognised challenge
constitutes the development and operation of moving blocksignalling systems that are as effective and precise as possi-ble [ 50,66]. While this includes satellite-based positioning,
its performance strongly depends on the signal propagation
conditions. This calls for an integrated (multi-sensor) solu-tion to cope with signal blockages (think, e.g., of tunnels)
and degraded accuracy due to so-called multipaths or non-
line-of-sight receptions, all of which typically affect satellitepositioning in urban environments [ 16,35,55,73].
The work presented in this paper builds on previous Euro-
pean Rail Trafﬁc Management System (ERTMS) models[9,11] developed in the context of the H2020 EU project
ASTRail
1(SAtellite-based Signalling and Automation Sys-
Tems on Railways along with Formal Method and Moving
Block Validation) funded by the European Shift2Rail initia-
1http://www.astrail.eu
123

--- Page 2 ---
352 D. Basile et al.
tive.2These previous models were based on a simpliﬁcation
of the moving block speciﬁcation that considered only onetrain. They were developed using Simulink for requirements
elicitation and consolidation, while Uppaal was used for
formal veriﬁcation and sensitivity analysis.
In this paper, we discuss an extension and reﬁnement of
the aforementioned Uppaal model. The model has been
extended to consider more than a single train which con-
currently communicate with the same (trackside) radioblock centre (RBC). The safety-critical logic is updated
accordingly. The movement authority that was previously
considered constant, is now computed dynamically accord-ing to the trafﬁc on the railway line, and in particular the tail
of the train ahead. The physical behaviour of a train has been
tuned and validated according to parameters available in theliterature [ 62] about high-speed trains. An extended formal
analysis has been carried out to formally verify the correct-
ness of the function that computes the movement authority,
which has been formalised in ﬁrst-order logic. The concur-rent nature of the radio block centre has led to the detection
and mitigation of corner cases. We have carried out exper-
iments to validate candidate parameter setups to reduce therisk of a train exceeding its movement authority. Finally, we
have drawn conclusions acquired from the modelling and
analysis experience, providing indications on how to furtherimprove the existing state-of-the-art on formal veriﬁcationof real-time models and its adoption by the railway industry.
Outline Section 2contains an overview of related work, while
some background information on statistical model checking
and ERTMS level 3 moving block railway signalling sys-tems is provided in Sect. 3. The core of the paper, presented
in Sects. 4and5, concerns the formal speciﬁcation and ver-
iﬁcation of an extended and reﬁned Uppaal model of the
satellite-based ERTMS level 3 moving block signalling sys-tem from [ 11]. Section 6contains some ﬁnal considerations
on the possible uptake of formal methods and tools, such as
Uppaal , in the railway industry, while Sect. 7concludes the
paper.
2 Related work
We are aware of numerous attempts at modelling and
analysing ERTMS level 3 signalling systems. Most notably,
ERTMS hybrid level 3 systems (using virtual ﬁxed blocks)and its radio block centre component have recently beenmodelled and analysed with members of the B family (for-
mal methods B, Event-B, iUML-B, and the tools ProB and
Rodin), with the model checker SPIN and its speciﬁcationlanguage Promela, with the lightweight formal speciﬁca-
2http://www.shift2rail.orgtion language Electrum that extends the Alloy languageand tool, with the systems modelling language SysML,and with the mCRL2 speciﬁcation language and toolset
[1,4,8,26,30,58,65,69,79].
However, these approaches are less suitable to perform
quantitative modelling and analysis, which is fundamentalto demonstrating the reliability of the operational behaviour
of satellite-based ERTMS level 3 moving block railway sig-
nalling system models.
One of the earliest quantitative evaluations of moving
block railway signalling systems can be found in [ 60], where
GSM-R communication between a train and a radio blockcentre is modelled in StoCharts, a conservative QoS-oriented
extension of UML statechart diagrams, and analysed with the
stochastic model checker ProVer. Only delays and communi-cation loss are modelled in [ 60], whereas physical models of
trains (e.g., braking), satellite positioning, and the logic of a
radio block centre computing the space each train is allowed
to travel are not taken into consideration.
We are also aware of attempts at modelling hybrid or
stochastic models of ERTMS level 3 (moving block and vir-
tual coupling) scenarios with Simulink, with UML, with thebounded model checker HySAT, with the probabilistic hybrid
automata veriﬁer ProHVer, with the symbolic model checker
SMV , with timed Petri nets and the timed Petri net analyserTina, and with Stochastic Activity Networks and the Möbiussimulator [ 48,49,52,53,59], generally applying classical (i.e.,
not statistical) model checking.
We believe that together with some of the above-
mentioned approaches, the work reported in this paper con-
tributes to an increased understanding of satellite-based
ERTMS level 3 moving block railway signalling systems.This resembles the view of formal methods diversity [67],
according to which the application of diverse formal meth-
ods and tools on different variants of a case study design mayincrease conﬁdence in the correctness of the analysis results.
3 Background
Uppaal Uppaal SMC [ 27] is a variant of Uppaal [15],
which is a well-known toolbox for the veriﬁcation of real-time systems. Uppaal models are stochastic timed automata,
in which non-determinism is replaced with probabilistic
choices and time delays with probability distributions (uni-
form for bounded time and exponential for unbounded time).These automata may communicate via broadcast channels
and shared variables.
Statistical Model Checking (SMC) [ 2,64] involves run-
ning a sufﬁcient number of (probabilistic) simulations of a
system model to obtain statistical evidence (with a predeﬁned
level of statistical conﬁdence) of the quantitative propertiesto be checked. Monte Carlo estimation with Chernoff-
123

--- Page 3 ---
Exploring the ERTMS/ETCS full moving block speciﬁcation 353
Hoeffding bound executes N=⌈(ln(2)−ln(α))/( 2/epsilon12)⌉
simulations ρi,i∈1...N, to provide the interval [p/prime−/epsilon1,p/prime+
/epsilon1]with conﬁdence 1 −α, where p/prime=(#{ρi|ρi|/equal1ϕ})/N,
i.e.,Pr(|p/prime−p|≤/epsilon1)≥1−αwhere pis the unknown
value of ϕbeing estimated statistically and /epsilon1andαare
the user-deﬁned precision and conﬁdence, respectively [ 64].
SMC offers advantages over exhaustive (probabilistic) model
checking [ 7,24]. Most importantly, it scales better, since there
is no need to generate and possibly explore the full state spaceof the model under scrutiny, thus avoiding the combinatorial
state-space explosion problem typical of model checking.
Indeed, the parameter Nisindependent from the size of the
state-space. Moreover, the required simulations can trivially
be distributed and run in parallel. This comes at a price. Con-
trary to (probabilistic) model checking, exact results (with100% conﬁdence) are impossible to obtain. A further advan-tage is related to its possible uptake in industry. Compared
to model checking, SMC is simple to implement, understand
and use, and it requires no speciﬁc modelling effort otherthan an operational system model that can be simulated and
checked against (state-based) quantitative properties. In fact,
SMC is becoming more and more widely accepted in industry[5,13,14,22,46,54,56,61,71,72,76].
ERTMS Moving Block Railway Signalling ERTMS is an
international standard aiming to enhance safety and efﬁ-ciency and improve cross-border interoperability of trains
in Europe by the replacement of national railway signalling
systems with a single European standard for train controland command systems. ERTMS relies on the European
Train Control System (ETCS), an Automatic Train Pro-
tection (ATP) system continuously supervising the train toensure that safety speed and distances are not exceeded. TheERTMS/ETCS standard distinguishes four levels of opera-
tion, from level 0 to level 3 (L3), depending on the role of
trackside equipment and on how the information is transmit-ted to/from trains. It is currently deployed on several lines
throughout Europe at most in its level 2 (L2).
ERTMS L2 uses trackside equipment (viz., track circuits)
to detect the occupancy of a section of a railway track by
trains, determining the location of trains with a coarse granu-
larity. This information is sent to a trackside unit, called RadioBlock Centre (RBC), which sends a Movement Authority(MA) to each train. The MA is computed by summing the
free track circuits ahead, meaning L2 is based on ﬁxed block
signalling . A block is a section of the track between two
ﬁxed points, which start and end at signals, with their lengths
designed to allow trains to operate as frequently as necessary
(i.e., ranging from many kilometres for secondary tracks toa few hundred metres for busy commuter lines). The block
sizes are determined based on parameters like the line’s speed
limit, the train’s speed, the train’s braking characteristics,drivers’ sighting and reaction times, etc. Since the railwaysector’s stringent safety requirements impose the length of
ﬁxed blocks to be based on the worst-case braking distance,regardless of the actual speed of the train, the faster trains are
allowed to run, the longer the braking distance and the longer
the blocks need to be, thus decreasing the railway track’scapacity. The MA provides a train with the maximum dis-tance it is allowed to travel, the maximum speed (depending
on the track) it is allowed to travel at, and data about the track
ahead (like temporary speed restrictions and (un)conditionalemergency stops). The Onboard Unit (OBU) of each train
uses the MA and data stored on board (e.g., the train’s brak-
ing capability) to compute the braking curve or the dynamicspeed proﬁle that determine the speed limit, triggering an
emergency brake whenever this limit is exceeded. In L2, so-
called Eurobalise responders on the rails of a railway areused for exact train positioning, while the required signallinginformation is provided to the driver’s display by continuous
data transmission via GSM-R with the RBC. Further track-
side equipment is needed for train integrity detection.
ERTMS L3 no longer relies on trackside equipment
for train position detection and train integrity supervision.
Instead, the OBU is responsible for monitoring the train’s
position and autonomously computing its current speed
through its odometry system. To this aim, the OBU periodi-
cally sends the train’s position to the RBC and the RBC, inturn, sends back an MA to each train. The MA is computedby exploiting knowledge of the position of the rear end of
the train ahead, thus computing a safe zone around the mov-
ing train, meaning L3 is based on moving block signalling .
The resulting moving block signalling systems considerably
reduce the headways between subsequent trains, thus allow-
ing trains in succession to close up, in principle to the brakingdistance. As a result, moving block signalling allows for more
trains to run on existing railway tracks, in response to the
ever-increasing need to boost the volume of passenger andfreight rail transport and the cost and impracticability of con-structing new tracks. For this to work, the precise absolute
location, speed, and direction of each train needs to be known.
These can be determined by a combination of sensors: activeand passive markers along the track, as well as trainborne
speedometers.
This envisioned future switch to next generation signalling
systems would not only optimise the exploitation of railway
tracks due to the adoption of moving block signalling, but the
removal of trackside equipment would result in lower capitaland maintenance costs. Actually, L3 does not explicitly referto the moving block concept, but it admits any implemen-
tation able to periodically provide the RBC with the train
positions and using limited trackside equipment. A few pilotimplementations referred to as Hybrid L3 (cf. Sect. 2), use
virtual ﬁxed blocks: a line is logically divided into ﬁxed
length blocks and the OBU is in charge of communicating,at speciﬁc points of the line, the train’s position, computed
123

--- Page 4 ---
354 D. Basile et al.
using its onboard odometry system. Moving block signalling
based on continuous communication and MA computationis currently implemented in some automatic metros, as part
of CBTC (Communication-Based Train Control) systems.
Shift2Rail Shift2Rail stimulates developing safe and reli-
able technological advances that allow to complete the single
European railway area with an ambitious aim: “double the
capacity of the European rail system and increase its reliabil-ity and service quality by 50%, all while halving life-cycle
costs.” To this aim, it supports transitioning to next genera-
tion (L3) ERTMS/ETCS railway signalling, with a focus onsatellite-based train positioning based on a Global Naviga-tion Satellite System (GNSS), moving block distancing, and
automatic driving. In [ 57], ASTRail partners conﬁrmed how
the use of additional sensors is recommended to improve therobustness of a GNSS-based positioning in rail scenarios. In
ASTRail, satellite-based ERTMS L3 moving block railway
signalling scenarios were mainly considered for two differentpurposes:
1. In a simpliﬁed format, for trial applications of formal
modelling and analysis to assess the usability and applica-bility of formal methods and tools in the railway domain.
This assessment is an important issue for the successful
uptake of formal methods and tools in the railway industry[10]. In [ 9], we presented such a trial experience in mod-
elling and (statistical) model checking a satellite-based
moving block railway signalling scenario with Uppaal .
In [12], we modelled a moving block signalling system
with autonomous driving and synthesised safe and opti-
mal driving strategies by applying a combination of SMCand reinforcement learning with Uppaal Stratego.
2. For modelling and validating more detailed models as
major portions of an integrated system design of mov-
ing block signalling with automated driving technologiesto provide rigorous and veriﬁed deﬁnitions of functional,
interoperability, and dependability requirements. As part
of the assessment, we conducted a survey with railwaypractitioners to identify the most mature (semi-)formal
methods and tools to be used in the railway context [ 40].
As a result of this survey, a total of 14 tools were carefullyreviewed by means of a systematic evaluation based ona set of 34 evaluation features, upon which eight tools
were selected for the aforementioned trial application
phase, in which we modelled principles of the movingblock scenario in all eight tools. This comparison exper-
iment is reported in [ 45]. Simulink and Uppaal were
among the eight selected tools. In particular, Simulink wasconsidered appropriate for functional requirements elici-
tation, early prototyping and animation involving domain
experts, while Uppaal was considered the appropriate
choice for formal veriﬁcation of real-time systems.In [11], we presented models of the above-mentioned detailed
satellite-based ERTMS L3 moving block signalling sys-tem model in both Simulink and Uppaal , with a speciﬁc
focus on the second one. The Simulink model was obtained
from a requirements elicitation and reﬁnement activity per-formed with the industrial partners of ASTRail, carried outto consolidate an initial set of requirements for the mov-
ing block signalling system into an executable speciﬁcation,
after which we developed a corresponding Uppaal model.
Thus, these models are a formalisation of the initial set of
requirements. We reported on this modelling experience and
subsequent analyses with Uppaal and drew some lessons.
We chose to perform SMC with Uppaal rather than simu-
lation and analysis with Simulink, because we had all the
monitoring infrastructure for temporal properties. Moreover,Uppaal primitively supports real-time hybrid systems and
has many graphical facilities that helped communicating
with the stakeholders. In [ 11], we showed how Uppaal can
also assist in ﬁne tuning communication parameters that arefundamental for the reliability of the model’s operational
behaviour. In particular, we validated that (i) the frequencies
of the messages exchanged between the train and its tracksidecontrol system as well as (ii) the unit of distance that a train
is allowed to proceed based on a MA can be set such that the
probabilities of failures (like the train exceeding its MA, i.e.,failing to brake in time if it lacks permission to proceed) areclose to zero. While numerical constraints for (i) and (ii) were
previously deﬁned by railway experts, in ASTRail we wanted
to explore to which extent Uppaal and SMC can be exploited
to validate such constraints and to support sensitivity analysis
on the parameters. Moreover, the possibility of graphically
depicting the state machine models and animating them dur-ing simulations has been of great help for communicating
with the stakeholders concerning the modelled requirements.
Case Study The moving block railway signalling system con-
sidered in this paper uses a scenario from [ 75], where four
different L3 moving block systems are proposed. These arecombinations of moving or ﬁxed virtual blocks and with or
without trackside train detection. The speciﬁc scenario mod-
elled in this paper is the full moving block without tracksidedetection, which is the base system type considered in [ 75],
depicted in Fig. 1. In this scenario, the system can issue MAs
based on the rear of the preceding train, and the so-called
end of authority can therefore be an arbitrary location on therailway. Note that this is different from the L2 currently in
operation where, e.g., a new end of authority occurs each 12 s
for a block section of 1 km and a train running at 300 km/h[31]. The ERTMS hybrid L3 system speciﬁcation mentioned
in Sect. 2is a possible implementation of the system type
ﬁxed virtual blocks with trackside train detection (cf. [ 75]
for details).
123

--- Page 5 ---
Exploring the ERTMS/ETCS full moving block speciﬁcation 355
Fig. 1 Overview of full moving block system type without trackside
train detection taken from [ 75]
The ERTMS/ETCS L3 moving block system architecture
is composed of the OBU and an L3 trackside unit [ 75]. The
OBU includes the Location Unit (LU), while the RBC is
the only L3 trackside unit considered. The LU receives the
train’s location from GNSS satellites and other sensors’ datawhich are aggregated. The location (and the train’s integrity)
are transmitted to the OBU, which, in turn, sends the loca-
tion to the RBC. Upon receiving a train’s location, the RBCsends an MA to the OBU (together with speed restrictions and
route conﬁgurations), indicating the space the train can safely
travel based on the safety distance with respect to precedingtrains. The RBC computes the MA by communicating withall trains under its supervision to know their position (head
and tail), neighbouring RBCs in case of handover [ 80], and
by exploiting its knowledge of the positions of switches androutes of trains through communications with a Route Man-
agement System (RMS). In our scenario, we abstract from an
RMS and from communications among neighbouring RBCs.Instead, we consider trains communicating within one RBC
supervision area. The location and the MA are continuously
updated and if the OBU does not continuously receive a freshMA, the OBU is required to force the train to brake.
4 Formal model
In this section, we discuss the Uppaal formalisation of
the moving block system scenario. The various modelsare publicly available,
3each one containing a different
parameter setup and corresponding queries according to the
experiments described in Sect. 5, to aid easier experiments
reproducibility. The models and analyses have been devel-oped using the latest Uppaal distribution (4.1.24 academic,
November 2019). Next, we outline the automata constituting
the models in detail.
In [11], we described the original Simulink/Stateﬂow
model, output of a requirement elicitation phase, and its map-
ping into a Uppaal model.
In this paper, we discuss a reﬁnement of the Uppaal model
from [ 11], where details of the guidelines used for translating
the Simulink model in Uppaal can be found. The models
in [11] considered only one train and one RBC. The MA
transmitted from the RBC to the train did not account for the
possibility of having other trains on the track, thus the MA
was ﬁxed to a certain amount of meters. Here, we model thescenario with more trains on a line, and the MA of each train
3https://github.com/davidebasile/ASTRail/tree/master/STTT2021is based on the location of the train ahead (cf. Fig. 1). The
model has also been simpliﬁed and three previous automatafor generating location requests, for replying to the location
requests, and for simulating the train behaviour have now
been merged into a single basic model called location unit.The physical behaviour of the train has been redeﬁned andvalidated based on target values retrieved from the literature.
The model consists of a number of automata composed as
a synchronous product. Below, we list its constituting com-ponents, which are three main entities, namely the RBC, the
LU, and the OBU, each represented by a different automa-
ton. We do not account for artiﬁcial random failures but focusonly on those failures that can be raised from the modelled
logic.
All components listed next are templates in Uppaal ,
which is a mechanism allowing to instantiate differentinstances of an automaton. This makes it possible to per-
form simulations and analyses with a certain number of
RBCs, OBUs, and LUs; not ﬁxed beforehand in the model.However, in line with the speciﬁcation from our industrial
partners and [ 75], we assume that each component com-
municates with other components of the same index. Forinstance, RBC_0 always communicates with OBC_0 and
never with OBC_1, which communicates with RBC_1. As
a consequence, an RBC has different threads, representedby different instantiations of the RBC template, and eachRBC thread communicates with one assigned OBU. All these
RBC threads interact by means of a shared memory, used for
reading the locations of other trains and storing the locationreceived by the assigned train.
Furthermore, this model is parametric and highly cus-
tomisable. It is possible to analyse different operationalscenarios of the moving block system by instantiating the
individual parameters of the model. For instance, it is possi-
ble to customise the period of each of the various messagessuch as the period of requesting the location or the periodof sending the MA (these values are parameters preﬁxed by
freq ). By changing these parameters, we can perform dif-
ferent evaluations of the properties of interest, as we willshow in the next section, so as to ﬁne tune the setup of these
parameters.
We now describe the model’s components. To avoid con-
fusion between a location of a train and that of the automaton,
we always refer to the automata locations as states. Thus, a
state can be intended as either a location of the automaton oras the tuple composed of the location and values of variablesand clocks, and contextual information is given to distinguish
between the two.
Global Declarations We use the global declarations below
to deﬁne constants of the whole system, channels and shared
variables, as well as the parameter setup for the analysedscenario. In Sect. 5, we refer to the values of parameters below
123

--- Page 6 ---
356 D. Basile et al.
as default values. The unit measures for time and space are
always seconds and meters, respectively. The default valueshave been derived from earlier speciﬁcations. Concerning
delays, we opted for a pessimistic approach to be able to
observe potential requirements otherwise undetected.
We note that, to perform statistical model checking, it is
necessary that all channels are broadcast, i.e., outputs arenon-blocking and discarded if not received by anyone. InSect. 5, we analyse possible message loss. We use an array
of channels to have a channel for each train. The array loc
is only used by the RBC automata, to share the locationsreceived by trains.
Location Unit The template automaton for the LU is depicted
in Fig. 2. The LU groups all aspects of the train related to the
computation of the location. In this model, we do not focus on
errors introduced due to satellite positioning, and the locationis estimated using a simple physical model of the movement
Fig. 2 Location Unit template
of the train, its speed, and the acceleration and deceleration
that are triggered by approaching the limit described by the
MA. In particular, the position of the train is stated in an
uni-dimensional space and identiﬁed by one coordinate. Thisrepresents the route that the train is following.
This template considers ﬁve parameters of the train:
const int id_T , its unique identiﬁer;
const double startloc , its starting location;
const double stoploc , its arrival location;
const double start_speed , its starting speed;
const double average_speed , its average speed.
From the initial state, depicted with two inner circles, the
automaton starts by initialising the position (called space)and speed with the corresponding parameters values. Thelocation is committed: the initialisation is the ﬁrst operation
performed by the simulation. Both speed andspace are
hybrid clocks, used to represent physical continuous enti-
ties. State I_GO represents the train travelling. The invariant
requires that both speed and space are positive, and that
the value of the clock cmust be less than the parame-
terfreqLU . Indeed, since this is a timed automaton, the
value of the clock cincreases uniformly during the per-
manence in that state. When the condition c==freqLU
is satisﬁed, the train’s location is transmitted to the OBU,with signal LU_send_location[id_T]! and buffer
z=space ; moreover, clock cis reset. We note that OBU
and LU share the same identiﬁer id_T , since they are part
of the same train. From the same state, the automaton also
receives messages from OBU about new MAs, via channel
OBU_rec_MA[id_T]? . The value of the buffer is stored in
the temporary variable ma. In case a failure is triggered by one
of the OBU components, the signal OBU_fail[id_T]? is
received, bringing the automaton to a Failure state where
the train’s location and speed are set to zero.
123

--- Page 7 ---
Exploring the ERTMS/ETCS full moving block speciﬁcation 357
Physical Model Two ordinary differential equations are also
present, used to represent the continuous evolution of phys-ical quantities. In the Failure state, there is no evolution
of location and speed, thus both derivatives are equal to zero.
In state I_GO , as usual, space is the derivative of speed and
speed is the derivative of acceleration. Concerning the rep-resentation of acceleration, we abstract away from a detailed
physical model that transforms the actuators controlled by
the computer into a speciﬁc acceleration or deceleration ofthe train. In [ 62], such a model is provided. Moreover, it is
reported that it needs 100 s for a train to stop from a speed
of300 km/h, and that the braking distance is 5000 m. Fig-
ure 8 of [ 62] shows the curve of train braking speed and the
curve of braking displacement. It takes 94.2 s from normal
operation to stop, and the braking distance is 4647.16 m,
which is reported to meet the national standard. The analysisin [60] conﬁrms the headway of 1 min for trains travelling at
300 km/h with their given parameter setup, i.e., at a distance
below 5000 m from the end of authority, the trains start tobrake. Finally, [ 82] reports that a high speed train can accel-
erate from 0to300 km/h in 316 s.
Accordingly, we report the following declarations of the
LU template and the function for computing the acceleration
of the train, tuned with the above data (we omit declarations
of temporary variables).
This function computeAcceleration() computes
a train’s acceleration and deceleration based on the current
location, the current speed, the MA, and the arrival loca-tion of the train. The acceleration_constant is used
to model the steepness of the speed curve: the lower the
value, the more abrupt the acceleration. The if conditionsin lines 11–12 are used for the case when the train is starting
or arriving, based on its speed. Instead, the if condition in
line 15 is used to decide whether to accelerate or to deceler-ate, based on the headway and the braking distance. Usuallythe headway is given in seconds [ 31] (e.g., 1 min headway
at 300 km/h corresponds to roughly 5 km), whereas the vari-
able in line 8 is the remaining space (in meters) to the end ofthe MA. To decelerate, the function -1.32/log(speed)
Fig. 3 Acceleration scenario: trajectory of speed
is used to model the braking curve, while the acceleration is
modelled with the function:
((average_speed-speed)/acceleration_constant) .
Note that while computeAcceleration() is determin-
istic, the acceleration and deceleration behaviour depends on
the headway of the train. Due to the presence of stochastic
delays in the communications of locations and MAs betweenthe RBC and the trains, each train may accelerate and decel-
erate at different times with respect to other trains and in
different simulations.
Validating the Physical Model Here, we report simulation
data validating the model to respect the above data retrievedfrom the literature, with an average speed of 84m per second
(i.e.,302.4 km/h). These simulations validate the accelera-
tion model to mimic complex physical models retrieved fromthe literature [ 62] for these speciﬁc target values of time,
speed, and space.
The ﬁrst is an acceleration scenario with a single train and
the LU template instantiated as follows:
LU_MAIN1 = LU_MAIN_T(0, 0.0,50000 .0,0.0,84.0).
Figure 3shows a simulation with the speed trajectory of the
train. It needs around 300 s to reach a speed of 84m per
second.
Concerning braking, Figs. 4and 5show the space and
speed for the following braking scenario:
LU_MAIN1 = LU_MAIN_T( 0,0.0,0.0,84.0,84.0).
In this scenario, the train has a starting speed of 84m per
second and the starting location is equal to the arrival loca-tion, i.e., the train starts to decelerate from the ﬁrst seconds
123

--- Page 8 ---
358 D. Basile et al.
Fig. 4 Braking scenario: location trajectory (space)
Fig. 5 Braking scenario: speed trajectory
of the simulation. Figures 4and5show the space and speed
trajectories: around 4600 m and 94s are required for the
train to stop. Finally, even though these ﬁgures only show a
single simulation with a single speed proﬁle, Figs. 11and12
display different simulations with different speed proﬁles (cf.Sect. 5).
We remark that the purpose of the analysis is to explore and
validate early requirements for the novel ERTMS/ETCS L3
moving block system, and in particular of an RBC generatingMAs according to the location of trains; hence, more concrete
representations of physics are out of the scope of this paper.
OBU Send Location Depicted in Fig. 6, this template automa-
ton is the main component of the OBU. It has only one
parameter const int id_T , and it performs a variety
of operations. The ﬁrst operation is the reception of the posi-tion by the LU. Subsequently, with a certain periodicity andin the presence of a fresh location received by LU, this com-
ponent sends the received position to the RBC. The samecomponent moreover receives the MA from the RBC (after
sending its position). Finally, it implements one of the safety
mechanisms present in the system speciﬁcation. In particu-lar, at each instant of time, the model checks that the train’sposition has not exceeded the MA received from the RBC; if
it has, it will enter a Failure state.
The automaton has four states. The nominal state
WatingLocFromLU is the initial state. State Failure
is entered when a failure is triggered by this automaton or by
another OBU component. The remaining states are commit-ted, and are used to link different transitions as one atomic
operation with different ordered synchronisations.
StateWatingLocFromLU has an invariant to guarantee
that the MA is always positive and the received location isalways within the MA. This guarantees that a failure may only
be triggered when receiving either a fresh maor location.
The invariant condition is a disjunction contemplating theinitialisation of operations, by means of a ﬂag boot .T h e
initialisation is ﬁnalised when the ﬁrst MA is received.
In a potential order of execution, the ﬁrst transition
performed is the one with signal LU_send_location
[id_T]? . It represents the reception of the position from
the LU; loc=z represents the assignment of the variable
loc that reads from the buffer variable zused to implement
value passing. A ﬂag newloctosend initialised to false
is used to signal the presence of a new location to be trans-
mitted. The buffer is immediately reset to reduce the statespace and the ﬂag is set to true. The intermediate committed
location is used as a choice. If the invariant is violated by
the new received value, a failure is triggered with the signalOBU_fail[id_T]! . At any instant a failure may be trig-
gered by another OBU component, so the committed location
has also an outgoing transition OBU_fail[id_T]? .I n
case of failure, values are reset, and a variable whofailed
is used for logging who triggered the failure. In case the new
value that is received is valid, the main state is reached again.
The transition with guard c>=freqOBU && new
loctosend=true is activated when the guard is satis-
ﬁed, i.e., when the clock reaches and exceeds the freqOBU
parameter and a fresh location is ready to be transmittedto the RBC. Once enabled, the time to ﬁre this transi-
tion is sampled from an exponential distribution with rate
rateOBU , used to model potential delays in communica-
tion between trains and the RBC. This transition implementsa periodic operation which is carried out with periodicity
freqOBU . The action is that of sending the position data
to the RBC. The sending operation is transmitted via thesignal OBU_send_location_to_RBC[id_T]! , while
the assignment of variables is
z=l o c ,c=0.0 ,
lastlocsent=loc ,newloctosend=false , i.e., the
value loc of the location is stored in the buffer variable,
123

--- Page 9 ---
Exploring the ERTMS/ETCS full moving block speciﬁcation 359
Fig. 6 OBU send location template
Fig. 7 RBC template (before formal analysis)
the clock cis reset, the variable lastlocsent is used to
log the last known location sent to the RBC, and the ﬂag
newloctosend is set to false. Note that the ﬂag not only
prevents the sending of a location that is not fresh, but it also
prevents the corner case in which freqOBU>freqLU and
the ﬁrst location send to the RBC is undeﬁned.
The transition with the synchronisation OBU_rec_
MA[id_T]? models the reception from the RBC of the MA,
w h i c hi ss t o r e di nt h ev a r i a b l e ma. Similar to the reception of a
location, the reception of a new MA leads to a choice, where itis tested whether or not the new value is satisfying the invari-
ant and due operations take place. As stated above, the ﬁrst
reception of a MA causes the assignment boot=false to
terminate the initialisation procedure. Note that the interac-
tions with the RBC are happening at the index of the channel
id_T , which corresponds to the train’s identiﬁer.
RBC This template automaton, depicted in Fig. 7, is a model
of one RBC thread. It has two parameters: const int
id_RBC is the identiﬁer (id) of the RBC and const int
id_Train that of its associated train. It has three states:
I_WaitingLoc ,SendingMA , plus an initial committed
state. From I_WaitingLoc , the RBC is ready to receive a
location, with synchronisation OBU_send_location_to_RBC[id_Train]? and the actions loc[id_Train]=z ,
c=freqRBC ,ma=computeMA() , andz=0.0 . The loca-
tion value in buffer zis stored in the shared array loc[] ,a t
the position that is the train’s id. The buffer is instantaneously
reset to reduce the state-space. The clock cis initialised to
freqRBC , so that the ﬁrst operation in the next state is that of
sending the MA. The MA, stored in variable ma, is computed
with the function computeMA() described next.
This function basically checks the minimum location that
is greater than the location of the associated train (lines 2–
7). If such a location exists, then this becomes the MA,
which is exactly the location of the train ahead of the trainwith id id_Train (line 8). Otherwise, if no train is ahead,
a ﬁxed constant value maIfNoTrainAhead is used to
extend the MA, similar to [ 11]. In state SendingMA ,t h e
RBC attempts to send the MA to the train for a number
of times equal to the constant MaxAttemptsToSendMa .
Each attempt is performed periodically, with periodicityfreqRBC . Since this interaction is with a remote train
computer, the delay is sampled exponentially with rate
rateRBC . The sending operation is done with synchroni-
sation OBU_rec_MA[id_Train]! and the value stored
in buffer x=ma . The clock is reset and the counter of attempts
is incremented. When the number of attempts is exceeded,
they are reset ( attempts=0 ) and state I_WaitingLoc
123

--- Page 10 ---
360 D. Basile et al.
Fig. 8 OBU receive MA template
is reached. Similarly, if an ack is received from the train
concerning reception of the MA, with OBU_send_MA_ack
[id_RBC]? , state I_WaitingLoc is reached. The loca-
tion has invariant attempts <= MaxAttemptsTo
SendMA to guarantee that no more than the declared number
of attempts is performed.
OBU Receive MA The last template automaton, depicted
in Fig. 8, models the logic of the OBU. It has one
parameter: const int id_T . It consists of one state
I_WaitingMAfromRBC and a Failure state. It receives
an MA from the RBC and returns a corresponding acknowl-
edgement message, via the channels OBU_rec_MA[id_T]
?andOBU_send_MA_ack[id_T]! , respectively. The
parameter rateOBU is used to model delays in com-
munication with the RBC. A Boolean ﬂag sendack is
used to enable the sending of the ack once the MAis received. This ﬂag allows to model communication
delays in between receiving the MA and sending the ack.
This component implements an additional safety mecha-nism of the system speciﬁcation by means of an invarant
c<=OBU_out_timer . The clock cis reset each time an
MA is received. In case the clock reaches the threshold, afailure is triggered. Indeed, the MA must be received within
a given amount of time.
5 Formal analysis
In this section, we discuss the analysis of the model by means
of SMC. We only use probability estimation, and the param-eters are set to 0 .05 for both probability of false negatives
(α) and probability uncertainty ( /epsilon1oru). The probabilistic
deviation is 0 .01 (δ). We emphasise that SMC is particu-
larly useful for a quick, non-costly, and preliminary modelanalysis. This is possible with due setup of the above statis-
tical parameters, to avoid a huge number of simulations. Afull and costly state-space exploration can be performed at a
later stage. We remark that different data conﬁgurations anddifferent instantiations of the templates can be performed.
Indeed, in this section we discuss various experiments con-
ducted with different parameter setups and different numbersof trains.
We anticipate that the model in Fig. 7contains issues that
were detected during the formal analysis phase. We opted to
report the direct experience of modelling and analysis withUppaal rather than reporting only the mitigated model, i.e.,
we report how some problematic issues were detected and
subsequently mitigated. For a matter of space and presenta-tion, we do not report all issues that were found and mitigated
in detail. In particular, the use of the Boolean ﬂags boot
andnewloctosend was not originally planned during the
requirements elicitation and modelling phase. Their use wasintroduced after model checking detected that failures could
happen due to undeﬁned initial values of location (before it
is actually computed by LU) and MA (before it is actuallycomputed by RBC). The mitigated model is reported at the
end of this section. The default parameters of the model are
set to those described in Sect. 4under global declarations. If
not stated otherwise, the average speed is 84 m/s.
Location Freshness We start with a scenario with only one
train and therefore one RBC thread. We start with the fol-
lowing requirement:
Pr[<=1000]
(<> OBU_MAIN_SendLocationToRBC1.lastlocsent!=loc[0]
&& OBU_MAIN_SendLocationToRBC1.lastlocsent!=zero) ≈0
where zero is a constant with value zero and 1000 is the
time bound. The right part of the conjunction is used to avoidthe dummy initial state in which no location has been sent
yet. The left part of the conjunction checks whether the last
location sent by the OBU is different from the last one storedby the RBC. Basically, the probability that the location of theRBC is not fresh is measured. The requirement asks whether
this measure is close to zero. In only 29 runs, the formula
is evaluated to lie in the interval [0.901855 ,1]with conﬁ-
dence 0 .95.
Indeed, the RBC model in Fig. 7violates such a require-
ment. This is because in state SendingMA the RBC is
ignoring new locations that could arrive from the train in
case of delays in sending the MA. To meet the requirement,
the RBC model is updated. The transition for receiving thelocation from the train is duplicated in a new transition whosesource and target are both state SendingMA . Since there are
only two states, no location message from OBU will be lost.
Message Loss The previous analysis has showed that, due to
the usage of broadcast channels, potential loss of important
messages may be undetected. We use the so-called demonic
123

--- Page 11 ---
Exploring the ERTMS/ETCS full moving block speciﬁcation 361
completion for input-enabledness to overcome this issue.
This consists in adding a transition that leads to a sink state foreach non-expected input in each state of each automaton, as
opposed to angelic completion , according to which unspec-
iﬁed inputs are discarded (modelled by adding self-loops)[28]. We do not perform any completion of failure states, as
the analysis always terminates if a failure is triggered. What
happens after a failure is triggered is not signiﬁcant in this
model. Similarly, we do not complete any initial committedstate: all these states will be exited before any interaction
occurs. By statically analysing the model, we note that both
LU and OBU Receive MA have only two inputs, namelyOBU_rec_MA[id_T]? andOBU_fail[id_T]? , which
are already enabled in their only signiﬁcant state. Hence
no completion is necessary for them. On the converse,RBC has an input OBU_send_MA_ack[id_RBC]? not
enabled in state I_WaitingLoc . This message could
potentially be lost. Similarly, OBU Send Location has two
committed states where two inputs are not enabled, namelyLU_send_location[id_T]? and OBU_rec_MA
[id_T]? . Thus, a total of four transitions are added to OBU
Send Location.
The next step is to check if there exists a path where one of
the sink states is reached. We actually measure the probability
that this happens. We perform the analysis on the scenariowith three trains, assuming to ﬁnd values close to zero. Thesetrains have their starting positions duly spaced, but the same
terminating position and speed. We start by analysing the
sink states of the OBU, with the following formula:
Pr[<=1000] (<> OBU_MAIN_SendLocationToRBC1.sink
|| OBU_MAIN_SendLocationToRBC2.sink|| OBU_MAIN_SendLocationToRBC3.sink)
In 29 runs, as expected, the formula is evaluated to be in
the interval [0,0.0981446 ]with conﬁdence 0 .95. Thus, the
probability of losing those messages is indeed close to zero.Next, we analyse sink states of the RBC:
Pr[<=1000]
(<> RBC_MAIN1.sink || RBC_MAIN2.sink || RBC_MAIN3.sink)
Surprisingly, using 145 simulations, the formula is evalu-
ated to be in the interval [0.851567 ,0.951396 ]with con-
ﬁdence 0 .95. The reason this was not expected is that
MaxAttemptsToSendMA=3 and the rates of message
delays are set to 0.5 . We thus analysed the trace provided
by Uppaal , using the message sequence chart automatically
generated by the tool. We noted that the trace is a sequence
of≈800 transitions, not easily reproducible using manual
simulation driven by a human user. A relevant portion of thischart is displayed in Fig. 9.
Fig. 9 The message sequence chart generated by Uppaal revealing the
issue in the RBC
By analysing the terminal part of the trace, an incorrect
interaction of the RBC is detected: after only one attempt ofsending an MA in state SendingMA , the state WaitingMA
is reached before receiving any ack from the OBU. This
is only possible if the number of attempts has reached thethreshold MaxAttemptsToSendMA , which is equal to 3.
However, only one attempt was performed in the analysed
trace, and this should not be possible. This trace has detected
a bug that was present in the RBC: the counter of attemptsis only reset (i.e., attempts=0 ) when such threshold is
reached, and never when an ack is received from the OBU.
Basically, after a series of correct interactions between theOBU and the RBC, the threshold is reached and all further
ack messages are ignored by the RBC.
We ﬁxed this issue by adding the effect attempts=0
in the transition with synchronisation OBU_send_MA_ack
[id_RBC]? . The bug was introduced by the modeller
in an attempt to reduce the state space. Indeed, in the
model in [ 11] this counter was reset when entering state
SendingMA , rather than when leaving it. Resetting the
counter attempts when leaving state SendingMA reduces
the state space. Indeed, with this solution in stateI_WaitingLoc ,t h ev a l u eo f attempts will always
be zero. However, only one transition is entering state
SendingMA , whereas two are leaving it. Thus, in [ 11]t h e
counter was reset in only one transition. With the new ﬁx,
123

--- Page 12 ---
362 D. Basile et al.
the counter reset should occur in two transitions rather than
one.
After amending the model, the probability of the RBC
entering a sink state is close to zero. Note that with a dif-
ferent parameter setup, i.e., by reducing MaxAttemptsTo
SendMA and incrementing the message delays, it is possible
that the RBC receives the OBU ack in state
I_WaitingLoc . This is however not harmful and com-
pliant with the RBC speciﬁcation. Indeed, the fact that theRBC may ignore missing acks and change state is a require-
ment of the original semi-formal model in [ 11]. Finally, we
remark that the demonic completion has only been used forthis speciﬁc analysis and it is not present in the model.
Verifying Movement Authorities One of the novel contribu-
tions of our model is the RBC logic, whose computation ofMAs is based on the locations of other trains. Although thecomputation with computeMA() may look simple, man-
ually reviewing the code of it is not enough to ascertain
correctness of this functionality. We will show that subtleissues may arise only upon analysing the system as a whole,
i.e., not evident in case of an isolated MA computation. The
requirement that the RBC must satisfy is expressed usingﬁrst-order logic:
loc[id_Train]<=ma && forall (id:int[0,nTrain-1])
( loc[id]<=loc[id_Train] || (loc[id]>=ma
&& exists (id1:int[0,nTrain-1]) ma==loc[id1]) )
The formula is rendered as a state invariant of the RBC model.
This invariant is assigned to state SendingMA of the RBC
template. Indeed, this is the only state where the MA is com-
puted, while in state WaitingLoc the RBC is waiting for
a new location.
Recall that id_Train is the identiﬁer of the train asso-
ciated to the RBC. The above formula states that wheneveran RBC is in state SendingMA , trivially, the MA must be
ahead of the train, and for all trains, either their location is
smaller than that of id_Train , i.e., they are behind, or one
such a train has a location greater than the computed MA. Inthis last case, where at least one train is ahead of id_Train ,
there must exist one train whose location is equal to the ma.
In other words, the formula states that either the assigned
train is ahead of all other trains, or if this is not the case, then
there is no other train whose location is between id_Train
and its MA, and the MA is equal to one such a train ahead.
After testing the model against the invariant using the
scenario with three trains, Uppaal ﬁnds that the invariant
is violated in some trace. However, after carefully review-ing the function computeMA() , whose returned values are
stored in variable ma, no issues were found. Indeed, as pre-
viously anticipated, we found out that the violation was notdue to an error in computing the MA. Rather it is due to
the concurrent nature of the RBC, where different threads
share the same memory. The invariant is satisﬁed only whenstateSendingMA is entered, but after some execution steps,
the other RBC threads receive new locations and modify the
shared array of locations loc . As a result, the MA computed
and stored in variable mabecomes outdated and the invariant
is violated. This is possible in case of delays in communicat-
ing the MA to the OBC. Note that an outdated MA may lead
to issues such as emergency braking, which can be avoided ifthe MA is guaranteed to be freshly computed before sending
it to the OBU.
To mitigate this issue, the RBC automaton is further mod-
iﬁed such that no temporary variable mais used, and each
occurrence of ma(including also occurrences in the invari-
ant) is substituted with a call to the function computeMA() .
The mitigated model is reported to never violate the stateinvariant in all subsequent analyses that were performed. The
stable version of the RBC model that was obtained is reported
in Fig. 10.
Probability of Exceeding Movement Authority We conclude
the formal analysis of the model by analysing the probabilityof failure due to a train exceeding its MA. Note that in [ 11],
only one train was present on a railway line. Here, we analyse
several trains, and since the MA can be computed as the tail of
the train ahead, this failure may result in a collision between
Fig. 10 The amended RBC template automaton
123

--- Page 13 ---
Exploring the ERTMS/ETCS full moving block speciﬁcation 363
Fig. 11 A scenario in which two trains crash
Fig. 12 A scenario with a slower leading train
two trains. The formula to be analysed is as follows:
Pr[<=1000] (<> whofailed==SENDLOC)
The requirement is as usual to evaluate the query with a value
close to zero. As before, we ﬁrst try a scenario with degradedvalues and two trains. To do so, the two LUs are set as follows:
LU_MAIN1 = LU_MAIN_T(0,1000.0,80000.0,0.0,84.0) ;
LU_MAIN2 = LU_MAIN_T(1,2000.0,40000.0,0.0,84.0) .Basically, the ﬁrst train starts at position 1000, followed by a
second train that starts at position 2000. However, the secondtrain stops at position 40000, whereas the ﬁrst train should
proceed its trip to its stop position at 80,000 m along its
route. To observe the crash, we change the braking distanceparameter of the LU from 5000 to4000 . All other param-
eters have their default values. As expected, after 29 runs,
the query is evaluated to be in the interval [0.901855 ,1]with
conﬁdence 0 .95.
Figure 11reports a plot with 10 simulations running for
800 s, plotting the location of the two trains as seen by the
OBU. In all simulations, we observe that the train behindhas not enough space to brake and crashes against the train
ahead. This is visible because the train detecting the failure
resets its location. Of course, right after the crash, the dataof the simulations are no longer signiﬁcant.
In the next scenario, we simulate three trains with the
default values for all parameters, including braking distance
set to 5000 . The three LUs are set as follows:
LU_MAIN1 = LU_MAIN_T(0,1000.0,80000.0,0.0,84.0) ;
LU_MAIN2 = LU_MAIN_T(1,2000.0,70000.0,0.0,42.0) ;
LU_MAIN3 = LU_MAIN_T(2,0.0,80000.0,0.0,84.0) .
In this particular scenario, the leading train is the one with
index 2, because its starting position is at 2000 m. The other
two trains are behind, with the train with index 1 in the
middle. Moreover, the train with index 2 ahead has half theaverage speed of the trains behind and its arrival position is
at an earlier position than the other trains. The requirement
is satisﬁed, and the query is evaluated, in 29 runs, to be inthe interval [0,0.0981446 ]with conﬁdence 0 .95. One simu-
lation is depicted in Fig. 12to show the locations of the three
trains. The analysis conﬁrms that the default parameters aresafe: the trains behind both succeed in lowering their speedwhen approaching the braking distance and to stop in time to
avoid crashing against the train ahead, even if their mission
is not yet completed (i.e., reaching the arrival position).
We conclude this section with a summary of the analyses
that have been assessed and the takeaway messages of the
results that have been identiﬁed for each experiment. It isreported in Table 1. We refer to the respective paragraphs
earlier in this section for the formulae associated with the
properties veriﬁed and their intuitive meaning.
6 Considerations
In this section, we draw some considerations based on our
experience in modelling and analysing the speciﬁcation of the
next generation ERTMS L3 moving block system reported inthis paper, as well as our experience gained in the Shift2Rail
123

--- Page 14 ---
364 D. Basile et al.
Table 1 Summary of the analyses carried out, the results obtained, and the lessons learned
Analysis Results Lessons learned
Location freshness The RBC shall always be ready to receive new
locations from the OBUA communication mismatch due to modelling errors
between the OBU and the RBC has been identiﬁed inan earlier model, by comparing the last locationreceived by the RBC with the last location sent by theOBU
Message loss In the model, all unexpected messages received
from the RBC, LU, and OBU can safely bediscardedAn error introduced by refactoring the model has been
identiﬁed, by analysing all possible messageexchanges
Verifying MA At each attempt, the RBC shall compute the MA
the moment it is sent to the OBUFormalising the requirements of multiple trains has led
to detect ﬂaws in communication of the MA, due tothe interplay between delays in communications andconcurrent RBC threads
Exceeding MA Under the given assumptions, the model conﬁrms
that trains can travel with a headway of 1 minA model has been identiﬁed with a parameter setup that
has conﬁrmed the values in the literature aboutheadway in high-speed trains
projects ASTRail and 4SECURail.4We shed some light on
the interplay of semi-formal and formal notation, and provide
some feedback on future improvements of real-time formalmodelling tools such as Uppaal .
It is important to note that the aforementioned speciﬁca-
tion is currently under investigation and ofﬁcial requirementsdo not yet exist. The model presented in this paper is based on
two earlier Uppaal models, presented in [ 9,11]. Both mod-
els were in turn based on two semi-formal speciﬁcations. Theﬁrst was a Simulink/ StateFlow model, used for requirementselicitation with railway stakeholders, discussed in [ 11]. The
second was a more simple Real-Time UML model directly
provided by railway stakeholders, discussed in [ 9].
The mapping from these two semi-formal models to
Uppaal models was done manually by the ﬁrst author.
These semi-formal models were used as informal speciﬁ-cations, with no assumptions on their precise semantics.
Indeed, for an automatic translation, a standard and ofﬁ-
cial formal semantics should be available for both the sourceand the target models. This is required to formally provetheir behavioural equivalence and thus the correctness of the
translation. However, semi-formal modelling languages are
not equipped with formal semantics. Any attempt in ﬁllingthis gap suffers either from semantic aspects intentionally
left open by the standards or from unintentional ambigui-
ties [ 20,25,29]. For instance, the literature contains several
attempts to provide a formal semantics for a fragment of
Simulink/Stateﬂow [ 3,17,23,68,74], together with mappings
to timed automata [ 46], with discording results.
In this paper, SMC was used as a means to analyse and
discover potential corner cases, which has led to an accurate,
more reﬁned speciﬁcation with respect to the earlier models.
Of course, the usage of a rigorous notation equipped with
4https://www.4securail.eu/well-deﬁned formal semantics comes with further beneﬁts.
Indeed, requirements expressed using either natural language
descriptions or semi-formal modelling languages may suf-fer from ambiguities in the description of the system and
the semantics of the used semi-formal language. Our for-
mal speciﬁcation is free of such ambiguities. The functionalrequirements could be unambiguously described in a state
machine formalism, thus overcoming the ambiguities of nat-
ural language requirements. Of course, the converse is alsopossible, and from the state machine it is possible to derivestructured natural language requirements. Moreover, since it
is an executable formal model, it allowed us to automatically
detect and mitigate corner cases that were overlooked in ear-lier speciﬁcations. Thus, the bugs in the model are related
and traceable to missing or ambiguous requirements. If, by
contradiction, the interface between the train (i.e., the OBU)and the RBC for exchanging locations and MA messages
were not part of the requirements (but instead referred to
as implementation details), then different implementationsfrom different vendors of the OBU and RBC sub-systemscould not be interoperable with each other, due to these
aspects left unspeciﬁed in the requirements.
Level of Abstraction It is important to underline that the
results presented in this paper are strongly based on the
assumptions present in the model and on the adopted abstrac-
tion level. A matter of future research is the investigation ofguidelines to distinguish correct from too coarse abstractionsfor a given formal analysis to be carried out.
For example, while concrete parameters (e.g., speed and
braking distance) cannot be abstracted away when evalu-ating certain (quantitative) properties (e.g., probability of
exceeding the MA), these can be abstracted away for other
(qualitative) properties. As another example, the violationof the state invariant of the RBC concerning the MA as
described in Sect. 5is observed if delays in communica-
123

--- Page 15 ---
Exploring the ERTMS/ETCS full moving block speciﬁcation 365
tions between the RBC and the OBU have been modelled,
but it is independent from the speciﬁc values of rateRBC ,
freqRBC , andmaxAttemptsToSendMA .
Validating the level of abstraction of a formal speciﬁca-
tion to be the appropriate one for the analysis to be carriedout would provide further conﬁdence in the results. Thedegree of such abstracted away aspects could be considered a
measure of the level of abstraction of the speciﬁcation. How-
ever, such measures can only be estimated by an a posteriorianalysis, i.e., when the implementation has been produced
and it becomes possible to measure how much details were
abstracted away.
Ideally, the target aspects of the analysis (i.e., the require-
ments) should not be abstracted away, whereas, to be as
general as possible, all other unnecessary details should beabstracted from. Attempts to provide guidelines for designingformal speciﬁcations are present in the literature [ 81]. They
are inspired by design patterns as used in software engineer-
ing, but the correct level of abstraction is not addressed. Agiledevelopment of formal speciﬁcations with tight interactions
with software developers by means of user interaction, as
proposed in [ 70], could also be a solution to address the right
level of abstraction.
Note that we only target abstractions used in formal
speciﬁcation models (i.e., abstracting away details not auto-matically realisable). Formal speciﬁcation models are not tobe confused with other Model-Based Systems Engineering
(MBSE) models, where the abstraction is on the underlying
execution support (e.g., models that are automatically com-piled into implementations and which are used to graphically
depict the source code).
Since the ERTMS/ETCS L3 moving block requirements
are currently under investigation, validating whether the level
of abstraction is adequate is difﬁcult. Our analysis has how-
ever been useful in identifying corner cases not previouslyevident, formalising the identiﬁed requirements, and verify-ing them in the model.
We provide a ﬁnal consideration on a possible future
improvement of formal tools, in the direction of MBSE.Even though formal tools account for state-of-the-art for-
mal veriﬁcation not currently available in mainstream MBSE
tools (e.g., temporal logic properties evaluated on simulationstatistics), we believe that the relation between the formal
speciﬁcation and its implementation should be improved.
This would help in identifying what would be the aforemen-tioned more appropriate level of abstraction.
Separation of Concerns Hybrid stochastic formalisms (as
used in Uppaal ) allow to model both physics (e.g., using
ordinary differential equations) and discrete logic in one sin-
gle automaton. While this can be of help to the modeller,
there is no neat separation of concerns between the modelof the external physical environment and the model of thesoftware. If the modelled algorithm is using, e.g., predictive
physical models to perform choices (e.g., the braking force toapply), distinguishing them from external physical models of
the environment becomes even more cumbersome. Ideally,
the software implementation should only be derived from thesoftware models.
We argue that this separation could be improved. For
example, the LU model in this paper describes a software
component that is reading location values from sensors, send-ing them to the OBU with a certain periodicity, and receiving
the MA. The LU also models the physics of the train, i.e., how
actuators affect position, speed, acceleration and decelera-tion. Accurate modelling of physics and of software are two
very distinct problems. Ideally, software modellers should
not focus on accurate physical modelling. External supportshould be made available to formal tools for such aspects.
Constraining a modeller to clearly separate the software
speciﬁcation from the physics would generally result in a
clearer design and a clearer relation with the implementa-tion. For example, MBSE tools using, e.g., SysML, allow
to express hierarchical blocks to divide the physical model
from the software model, and indicate their interfaces.
Deployment Another important and somewhat related aspect
in the design and veriﬁcation of real-time distributed systemsis the deployment of logical units to physical units. While it is
reasonable to assume that communications occurring among
units executing on the same computer can be modelled with-out stochastic delays (e.g., with a certain ﬁxed periodicity),
wireless communications among remote computers should
account for possible stochastic delays in communication. Adesirable feature in formal tools for real-time systems, suchasUppaal , would be the declaration of deployment of such
units. This would enforce a correct design, where entities
deployed in remote units can only communicate by meansof stochastic delayed channels. Moreover, this would help
the modeller to avoid potential errors in modelling real-time
systems due to, e.g., instantaneous communications amongremote objects. In MBSE, deployment models are used to
map logical units to physical units.
For instance, in our model we assume that the LU and
the OBU are two logical units residing in the same physi-cal board, whereas the RBC is a separate, remote computer.
Accordingly, there are no stochastic delays between the OBU
and the LU, whereas all communications between a train andthe RBC are affected by stochastic delays. Since a new loca-
tion is read every 0 .5 s, the requirement that the location must
be fresh and not older than one second is satisﬁed by con-struction. In earlier models, delays were not modelled also
in communications among remote units. We argue that not
modelling delays led to a model that was too coarse for theanalysis to be performed.
123

--- Page 16 ---
366 D. Basile et al.
Finally, our model assumes that no messages are lost; they
can only be delayed. As such, the model is relying on anunderlying transportation layer ensuring that all messages are
correctly delivered. Such a transportation layer is abstracted
away in the model. Another useful feature to have would beprimitive support to enforce stochastic delayed lossy chan-nels.
We conclude this section by framing the modelling and
analysis carried out in this paper inside the Railway Devel-opment Process, speciﬁcally considering the tool Uppaal .
Uppaal in the Railway Development Process One of the
main challenges of introducing formal methods in railways
is understanding how to integrate tools and practices in the
existing process [ 42,43], and how to adapt the overall work-
ﬂow to accommodate the innovation. The railway process is
standardised according to the CENELEC norms [ 19,32–34],
and when introducing a new technique, one should considerat least the following main factors:
1. In which phase of the process is the technique applied?
2. What is the level of qualiﬁcation that is expected from
the tools that support the speciﬁc technique?
3. How are the produced artefacts affected by the introduc-
tion of the technique?
4.Who is expected to apply the technique, who is expected
to use its results, and how?
In the case of our work, we did not perform a structured case
study within a company, but rather performed a set of exper-
iments to identify the potential beneﬁts of using SMC and
Uppaal . In this setting, the above-mentioned issues cannot
be addressed in full, but we can at least provide some reﬂec-
tions based on our experience.
1.Phase The CENELEC norms indicate different devel-
opment phases, structured according to the well-knownV-process, namely Concept, Requirements, Architecture
and Design, Detailed Design, Coding, Testing, Integra-
tion, Validation, and Maintenance. Formal methods aregenerically recommended, or highly recommended, in
most of the phases, without providing any speciﬁc guid-
ance on their usage.Quoting [ 19], “the use of a model without a textual
requirement is tantamount to discovering our require-
ments without having expressed them”.
Considering our experience, we argue that Uppaal can
be exploited in the Requirements phase, for the identiﬁca-
tion and consolidation of both qualitative and quantitative
requirements to be used. Section 5reports candidate
functional requirements identiﬁed through our model.
Uppaal has been proved useful in formalising such
requirements in rigorous mathematical notation and inconstructing a formal model, and has been an aid forexploring novel requirements of the envisioned system.
SMC has been useful to perform quick veriﬁcations toprovide early feedback to engineers for requirements dis-
covering, leaving a full state-space generation to a later
phase when the requirements and the models have beenfully established. Moreover, starting from input parame-ters (e.g., communication delays), which are assumptions
to be validated in a separate process, the values resulting
from the simulations and the veriﬁcation could indeedbe included in the non-functional system requirements.
This would lead to a radical decrease in terms of costs
for a company, since these parameters, although stronglydependent on physical aspects, can be ﬁne tuned on
a common laptop, thus reducing the need for time-
consuming ﬁeld experiments. Following the analysiswith Uppaal , experiments with real trains or hardware-
based simulators can be dedicated to conﬁrmation of the
results produced by the tool.
2.Tool Qualiﬁcation Tool qualiﬁcation, as common also
in the avionic sector [ 63], consists of producing tests
and documents that ensure that a certain tool was devel-
oped following the high-quality standards required by therailway process for safety-critical systems [ 6,41]. The
highest standard is of course required for those tools
that manipulate code, such as, e.g., compilers (normallyreferred as T3 tools) and that can therefore affect thesafety of the ﬁnal product by introducing errors, while
the T2 category is for tools where a fault could lead to an
error in the results of the veriﬁcation or validation, and the
T1 category is reserved for tools which have no impact
on the veriﬁcation nor on the ﬁnal executable ﬁle. Intu-
itively, Uppaal can be regarded as a T1 or T2 tool for the
Requirements phase. In this paper, we addressed Uppaal
as an aid for exploring novel requirements. In this case,
requirements must pass through the same veriﬁcation andvalidation process used also without the aid of Uppaal .
As such, no speciﬁc certiﬁcation is required for the tool.
However, if Uppaal is meant to be introduced in the
current industrial process as T2 tool, evidence shall beprovided by the vendors that the results produced by the
tool are actually reliable, and that the tool has followed
a documented process of development and maintenance.To our knowledge, this is currently lacking for Uppaal ,
and this could seriously hamper its adoption as T2 tool.
As reported in [ 19], the question of qualiﬁcation of formal
methods tools is “absolutely crucial”. This is in contrastwith a recent survey on formal methods among high-
proﬁle academic experts [ 51], reporting that academia
“should not spend time on polishing the things that mat-ter for acceptance in industry, such as user interfaces,
have round-the-clock available help desks, liability, etc.”,
thus “leaving the development of professional tools toindustry” because “there is no business case for long
123

--- Page 17 ---
Exploring the ERTMS/ETCS full moving block speciﬁcation 367
term support of (academic) tools; industry needs stability
and performance, academics need to innovate”. Hence, itseems more likely that this technology transfer will even-
tually be completed by industry rather than by academia,
of course exploiting decades of public research and col-laborations with academia.
3.Artefacts Implications When using Uppaal in the
Requirements phase, speciﬁc artefacts are created that
need to be reported and documented as part of the pro-cess. In particular, models and properties, together with
an accurate explanation of the results, should be provided
in a standardised format that can be reviewed by an asses-sor and submitted in the form of a paper-like document,
to validate the process and certify the product. Producing
and maintaining these documents, whenever changes areapplied to the model, can be extremely time consuming.Therefore, means are required to support the automatic
generation of documentation that can be easily inspected
and understood also by subjects who are not necessarilyexperts in formal modelling and veriﬁcation, like rail-
way system assessors. This is however a limited process
accommodation required if compared to the ones thathave been documented in previous work [ 41,42], where
the introduction of modelling and code generation led
to a complete refactoring of the development process.Therefore, we argue that the process impact for Uppaal ,
when used in the Requirements phase, can be considered
limited.
4.Involved Roles The models presented in this paper were
developed by a single subject, viz., the ﬁrst author, who
had previous expertise with Uppaal . The use of graphical
diagrams makes the language of the tool rather under-standable by a subject with a background in computer
science or engineering [ 44,45]. On the other hand, the
creation of such models, the deﬁnition of properties,and the use of Uppaal in general may require more
advanced formal methods and logic skills. We recom-
mend, also considering the limited uptake of formal
languages by railway practitioners [ 10,44,45], to have a
formal methods expert, or an external consultant, develop
the models, while railway system experts interact with
them to provide the required background, e.g., in terms ofstandard parameter values, or existing physical models.
Of course, this has process implications in itself—roles
need to be speciﬁed, and input-output artefacts shall bedeﬁned—that further increase the level of complexity ofintroducing the tool in an established workﬂow.
7 Conclusion
We have presented an Uppaal model of the ERTMS L3
moving block speciﬁcation currently under investigation inseveral European projects within the H2020 Shift2Rail ini-
tiative. The model is a reﬁned version of earlier models. Theformal analysis has helped to shed light on novel require-
ments, necessary to deal with corner cases such as start-up
operations, message loss, and concurrency issues. In fact, wehave formalised new requirements that a movement author-ity computed by a radio block centre should satisfy. These
requirements have been expressed using rigorous, mathemat-
ical notations. The formal model has moreover been formallyveriﬁed to satisfy several requirements against various sce-
narios with multiple trains on a single railway line, with
a given conﬁdence level computed by means of statisticalmodel checking. From the gained experience, we have dis-
tilled future research lines to improve the formal speciﬁcation
and veriﬁcation of real-time systems and discussed some bar-riers concerning a possible uptake in the railway industry.
The moving block speciﬁcation considered in this paper
could be extended in various directions: modelling the
explicit handover between radio block centres, consideringpositioning errors, differentiating between freight trains and
passenger trains, to mention a few. It would also be of inter-
est to provide a prototypical implementation of the currentspeciﬁcation, and formally establish their relation.
CRediT author statement D. Basile (ﬁrst author): conceptu-
alisation,methodology, validation, formal analysis, investi-
gation, writing - original draft, visualisation. M.H. ter Beek:
investigation, writing - original draft, visualisation, supervi-sion, project administration. A. Ferrari: writing - review &
editing, visualisation. A. Legay: project administration.
Acknowledgements Research partially funded by ASTRail and
4SECURail. The ASTRail and 4SECURail projects received fundingfrom the Shift2Rail Joint Undertaking under the European Union’sHorizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agree-ments 777561 (ASTRail) and 881775 (4SECURail) in the context ofthe open call S2R-OC-IP2-01-2019, part of the “Annual Work Planand Budget 2019”, of the programme H2020-S2RJU-2019. The con-tent of this paper reﬂects only the authors’ view and the Shift2RailJoint Undertaking is not responsible for any use that may be made ofthe included information. We also acknowledge funding from the ItalianMIUR PRIN 2017FTXR7S project IT MaTTerS (Methods and Toolsfor Trustworthy Smart Systems).
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adap-tation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, aslong as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and thesource, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indi-cate if changes were made. The images or other third party materialin this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence,
unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material
is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and yourintended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds thepermitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copy-right holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecomm
ons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ .
123

--- Page 18 ---
368 D. Basile et al.
References
1. Abrial, J.: The ABZ-2018 case study with Event-B. Int. J. Softw.
Tools Technol. Transf. 22(3), 257–264 (2020). https://doi.org/10.
1007/s10009-019-00525-3
2. Agha, G., Palmskog, K.: A survey of statistical model check-
ing. ACM Trans. Model. Comput. Simul. 28(1), 6:1-6:39 (2018).
https://doi.org/10.1145/3158668
3. Agrawal, A., Simon, G., Karsai, G.: Semantic Translation of
Simulink/Stateﬂow Models to Hybrid Automata Using GraphTransformations. In: Proceedings of the 4th International Work-shop on Graph Transformation and Visual Modeling Techniques(GT-VMT 2004), ENTCS , vol. 109, pp. 43–56 (2004). https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.entcs.2004.02.055
4. Arcaini, P., Kofroˇ n, J., Ježek, P.: Validation of the hybrid
ERTMS/ETCS level 3 using SPIN. Int. J. Softw. Tools Technol.
Transf. 22(3), 265–279 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10009-
019-00539-x
5. Arnold, A., Baleani, M., Ferrari, A., Marazza, M., Senni, V ., Legay,
A., Quilbeuf, J., Etzien, C.: An Application of SMC to continuousvalidation of heterogeneous systems. EAI Endorsed Trans. Ind.Netw. Intell. Syst. (2017). https://doi.org/10.4108/eai.1-2-2017.
152154
6. Ayoub, A., Kim, B., Lee, I., Sokolsky, O.: A systematic approach
to justifying sufﬁcient conﬁdence in software safety arguments.In: Tonetta, S., Schoitsch, E., Bitsch, F. (eds) Proceedings of the31st International Conference on Computer Safety, Reliability, andSecurity (SAFECOMP 2012), LNCS, vol. 7612, pp. 305–316.Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-33678-2_26 (2012)
7. Baier, C., Katoen, J.P.: Principles of Model Checking.
The MIT Press (2008). http://mitpress.mit.edu/books/principles-
model-checking
8. Bartholomeus, M., Luttik, B., Willemse, T.: Modeling and
analysing ERTMS hybrid level 3 with the mCRL2 toolset. In:Howar, F., Barnat, J. (eds) Proceedings of the 23rd InternationalConference on Formal Methods for Industrial Critical Systems(FMICS 2018), LNCS, vol. 11119. Springer. https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-3-030-00244-2_7 (2018)
9. Basile, D., ter Beek, M.H., Ciancia, V .: Statistical model check-
ing of a moving block railway signalling scenario with Uppaal
SMC. In: Margaria, T., Steffen, B. (eds) Proceedings of the 8th
International Symposium on Leveraging Applications of FormalMethods, Veriﬁcation and Validation: Veriﬁcation (ISoLA 2018),LNCS, vol. 11245, pp. 372–391. Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-030-03421-4_24 (2018)
10. Basile, D., ter Beek, M.H., Fantechi, A., Gnesi, S., Mazzanti, F.,
Piattino, A., Trentini, D., Ferrari, A.: On the industrial uptake offormal methods in the railway domain. In: Furia, C.A., Winter,K. (eds) Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on Inte-grated Formal Methods (iFM 2018), LNCS, vol. 11023, pp. 20–29.Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-98938-9_2 (2018)
11. Basile, D., ter Beek, M.H., Ferrari, A., Legay, A.: Modelling
and analysing ERTMS L3 moving block railway signalling withSimulink and Uppaal SMC .I n :L a r s e n ,K . G . ,W i l l e m s e ,T .
(eds) Proceedings of the 24th International Conference on FormalMethods for Industrial Critical Systems (FMICS 2019), LNCS,vol. 11687. Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-27008-
7_1 (2019)
12. Basile, D., ter Beek, M.H., Legay, A.: Strategy synthesis for
autonomous driving in a moving block railway system withUppaal Stratego . In: Gotsman, A., Sokolova, A. (eds) Proceed-
ings of the 40th IFIP WG 6.1 International Conference on FormalTechniques for Distributed Objects, Components, and Systems(FORTE 2020), Held as Part of the 15th International Feder-ated Conference on Distributed Computing Techniques (DisCoTec2020), LNCS, vol. 12136, pp. 3–21. Springer. https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-3-030-50086-3_1 (2020)
13. Basile, D., Fantechi, A., Rosadi, I.: Formal analysis of the UNISIG
safety application intermediate sub-layer: applying formal methodsto railway standard interfaces. In: Lluch-Lafuente, A., Mavridou,A. (eds.) Proceedings of the 26th International Conference on For-mal Methods for Industrial Critical Systems (FMICS 2021), LNCS,vol. 12863, pp. 174–190. Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
030-85248-1_11 (2021)
14. Basile, D., Fantechi, A., Rucher, L., Mandò, G.: Analysing an
autonomous tramway positioning system with the UPPAAL sta-tistical model checker. Form. Asp. Comp. (2021). https://doi.org/
10.1007/s00165-021-00556-1
15. Behrmann, G., David, A., Larsen, K.G., Håkansson, J., Pettersson,
P., Yi, W., Hendriks, M.: UPPAAL 4.0. In: Proceedings of the 3rdInternational Conference on the Quantitative Evaluation of Sys-Tems (QEST 2006), pp. 125–126. IEEE. https://doi.org/10.1109/
QEST.2006.59 (2006)
16. Beugin, J., Marais, J.: Simulation-based evaluation of depend-
ability and safety properties of satellite technologies for railwaylocalization. Transp. Res. C-Emerg. 22, 42–57 (2012). https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.trc.2011.12.002
17. Bouissou, O., Chapoutot, A.: An operational semantics for
Simulink’s simulation engine. ACM SIGPLAN Not. 47(5), 129–
138 (2012). https://doi.org/10.1145/2345141.2248437
18. Boulanger, J.L. (ed.): Formal Methods Applied to Industrial Com-
plex Systems: Implementation of the B Method. Wiley, New York(2014). https://doi.org/10.1002/9781119002727
19. Boulanger, J.L.: Tool Qualiﬁcation. In: CENELEC 50128 and IEC
62279 Standards, chap. 9, pp. 287–308. Wiley, New York.
https://
doi.org/10.1002/9781119005056.ch9 (2015)
20. Broy, M., Cengarle, M.V .: UML formal semantics: lessons learned.
Softw. Syst. Model. 10(4), 441–446 (2011). https://doi.org/10.
1007/s10270-011-0207-y
21. Butler, M., Hoang, T.S., Raschke, A., Reichl, K.: Introduction to the
special section on the ABZ 2018 case study: hybrid ERTMS/ETCSlevel 3. Int. J. Softw. Tools Technol. Transf. 22(3), 249–255 (2020).
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10009-020-00562-3
22. Cappart, Q., Limbrée, C., Schaus, P., Quilbeuf, J., Traonouez, L.,
Legay, A.: Veriﬁcation of interlocking systems using statisticalmodel checking. In: Proceedings of the 18th International Sym-posium on High Assurance Systems Engineering (HASE 2017),pp. 61–68. IEEE. https://doi.org/10.1109/HASE.2017.10 (2017)
23. Caspi, P., Curic, A., Maignan, A., Sofronis, C., Tripakis, S.: Trans-
lating discrete-time Simulink to Lustre. In: Alur, R., Lee, I. (eds.)Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on EmbeddedSoftware (EMSOFT 2003), LNCS, vol. 2855, pp. 84–99. Springer.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-45212-6_7 (2003)
24. Clarke, E.M., Henzinger, T.A., Veith, H., Bloem, R.: Handbook of
Model Checking. Springer, Berlin (2018). https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-319-10575-8
25. Cook, S.: Looking back at UML. Softw. Syst. Model. 11(4), 471–
480 (2012). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10270-012-0256-x
26. Cunha, A., Macedo, N.: Validating the hybrid ERTMS/ETCS level
3 concept with Electrum. Int. J. Softw. Tools Technol. Transf. 22(3),
281–296 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10009-019-00540-4
27. David, A., Larsen, K.G., Legay, A., Mikuˇ cionis, M., Poulsen, D.B.:
Uppaal SMC tutorial. Int. J. Softw. Tools Technol. Transf. 17(4),
397–415 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10009-014-0361-y
28. De Nicola, R., Segala, R.: A process algebraic view of input/output
automata. Theor. Comput. Sci. 138(2), 391–423 (1995). https://doi.
org/10.1016/0304-3975(95)92307-J
29. Derezi´ nska, A., Szczykulski, M.: Interpretation problems in code
generation from UML state machines: a comparative study. In:Kwater, T., Zuberek, W.M., Ciarkowski, A., Kruk, M., Pe ˛kala, R.,
Twaróg, B. (eds) Proceedings of the 2nd Scientiﬁc Conference on
123

--- Page 19 ---
Exploring the ERTMS/ETCS full moving block speciﬁcation 369
Computing in Science and Technology (STI 2011), Monographs
in Applied Informatics, pp. 36–50. Warsaw University of Life Sci-ences (2012)
30. Dghaym, D., Dalvandi, M., Poppleton, M., Snook, C.: Formalising
the hybrid ERTMS level 3 speciﬁcation in iUML-B and Event-B.Int. J. Softw. Tools Technol. Transf. 22(3), 297–313 (2020). https://
doi.org/10.1007/s10009-019-00548-w
31. Émery, D.: Headways on high speed lines. In: Proceedings of
the 9th World Congress on Railway Research (WCRR 2011), pp.1–9. http://www.railway-research.org/IMG/pdf/f2_emery_daniel.
pdf(2011)
32. European Committee for Electrotechnical Standardization: CEN-
ELEC EN 50128—Railway applications—Communication, sig-nalling and processing systems—Software for railway control andprotection systems (2011)
33. European Committee for Electrotechnical Standardization: CEN-
ELEC EN 50126-1—Railway applications–The speciﬁcation anddemonstration of Reliability, Availability, Maintainability andSafety (RAMS)—Part 1: Generic RAMS process (2017)
34. European Committee for Electrotechnical Standardization: CEN-
ELEC EN 50126-2—Railway applications—The speciﬁcation anddemonstration of Reliability, Availability, Maintainability and
Safety (RAMS)—Part 2: Systems approach to safety (2017)
35. Falco, G., Nicola, M., Falletti, E.: An HW-in-the-loop approach
for the assessment of GNSS local channel effects in the railwayenvironment. In: Proceedings of the 31st International TechnicalMeeting of the Satellite Division of The Institute of Naviga-tion (ION GNSS+ 2018), pp. 3463–3477. Institute of Navigation.https://doi.org/10.33012/2018.15866 (2018)
36. Fantechi, A.: Twenty-ﬁve years of formal methods and railways:
what next? In: Counsell, S., Núñez, M. (eds) Software Engineer-ing and Formal Methods—Revised Selected Papers of the SEFM2013 Collocated Workshops: BEAT2, WS-FMDS, FM-RAIL-Bok, MoKMaSD, and OpenCert, LNCS, vol. 8368, pp. 167–183.Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-05032-4_13 (2013)
37. Fantechi, A., Ferrari, A., Gnesi, S.: Formal methods and safety
certiﬁcation: challenges in the railways domain. In: Margaria, T.,Steffen, B. (eds) Proceedings of the 7th International Sympo-sium on Leveraging Applications of Formal Methods, Veriﬁcationand Validation: Discussion, Dissemination, Applications (ISoLA2016), LNCS, vol. 9953, pp. 261–265. Springer. https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-3-319-47169-3_18 (2016)
38. Fantechi, A., Fokkink, W., Morzenti, A.: Some trends in formal
methods applications to railway signaling. In: Gnesi, S., Margaria,T. (eds) Formal Methods for Industrial Critical Systems: A Surveyof Applications, chap. 4, pp. 61–84. Wiley. https://doi.org/10.1002/
9781118459898.ch4 (2013)
39. Ferrari, A., ter Beek, M.H.: Formal methods in railways: a system-
atic mapping study. ACM Comput. Surv. (2022). https://doi.org/
10.1145/3520480
40. Ferrari, A., ter Beek, M.H., Mazzanti, F., Basile, D., Fantechi, A.,
Gnesi, S., Piattino, A., Trentini, D.: Survey on formal methodsand tools in railways: the ASTRail approach. In: Collart-Dutilleul,S., Lecomte, T., Romanovsky A. (eds) Proceedings of the 3rdInternational Conference on Reliability, Safety, and Security ofRailway Systems: Modelling, Analysis, Veriﬁcation, and Certiﬁ-cation (RSSRail 2019), LNCS, vol. 11495, pp. 226–241. Springer.https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-18744-6_15 (2019)
41. Ferrari, A., Fantechi, A., Gnesi, S.: Lessons learnt from the
adoption of formal model-based development. In: Goodloe, A.E.,Person, S. (eds) Proceedings of the 4th International NASA FormalMethods Symposium (NFM 2012), LNCS, vol. 7226, pp. 24–38.Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-28891-3_5 (2012)
42. Ferrari, A., Fantechi, A., Gnesi, S., Magnani, G.: Model-based
development and formal methods in the railway industry. IEEESoftw. 30(3), 28–34 (2013). https://doi.org/10.1109/MS.2013.4443. Ferrari, A., Fantechi, A., Magnani, G., Grasso, D., Tempestini, M.:
The Metrô Rio case study. Sci. Comput. Program. 78(7), 828–842
(2013). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scico.2012.04.003
44. Ferrari, A., Mazzanti, F., Basile, D., ter Beek, M.H.: Systematic
evaluation and usability analysis of formal tools for railway systemdesign. IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng. (2021). https://doi.org/10.1109/
TSE.2021.3124677
45. Ferrari, A., Mazzanti, F., Basile, D., ter Beek, M.H., Fantechi, A.:
Comparing formal tools for system design: a judgment study. In:Proceedings of the 42nd International Conference on SoftwareEngineering (ICSE 2020), pp. 62–74. ACM. https://doi.org/10.
1145/3377811.3380373 (2020)
46. Filipovikj, P., Mahmud, N., Marinescu, R., Seceleanu, C.,
Ljungkrantz, O., Lönn, H.: Simulink to UPPAAL statistical modelchecker: analyzing automotive industrial systems. In: Fitzgerald,J., Heitmeyer, C., Gnesi, S., Philippou, A. (eds) Proceedings ofthe 21st International Symposium on Formal Methods (FM 2016),LNCS, vol. 9995, pp. 748–756. Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-319-48989-6_46 (2016)
47. Flammini, F. (ed): Railway Safety, Reliability, and Security: Tech-
nologies and Systems Engineering. IGI Global. https://doi.org/10.
4018/978-1-4666-1643-1 (2012)
48. Flammini, F., Marrone, S., Nardone, R., Vittorini, V .: Compo-
sitional modeling of railway virtual coupling with stochasticactivity networks. Form. Asp. Comp. (2021). https://doi.org/10.
1007/s00165-021-00560-5
49. Fränzle, M., Hahn, E.M., Hermanns, H., Wolovick, N., Zhang, L.:
Measurability and safety veriﬁcation for stochastic hybrid sys-tems. In: Proceedings of the 14th International Conference onHybrid Systems: Computation and Control (HSCC 2011), pp. 43–52. ACM. https://doi.org/10.1145/1967701.1967710 (2011)
50. Furness, N., van Houten, H., Arenas, L., Bartholomeus, M.:
ERTMS level 3: the game-changer. IRSE News 232, 2–9 (2017)
51. Garavel, H., ter Beek, M.H., van de Pol, J.: The 2020 expert survey
on formal methods. In: ter Beek, M.H., Niˇ ckovi´ c, D. (eds) Pro-
ceedings of the 25th International Conference on Formal Methodsfor Industrial Critical Systems (FMICS 2020), LNCS, vol. 12327,pp. 3–69. Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58298-2_1
(2020)
52. Ghazel, M.: Formalizing a subset of ERTMS/ETCS speciﬁcations
for veriﬁcation purposes. Transp. Res. C-Emerg.
42, 60–75 (2014).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trc.2014.02.002
53. Ghazel, M.: A control scheme for automatic level crossings under
the ERTMS/ ETCS level 2/3 operation. IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp.Syst. 18, 2667–2680 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1109/TITS.2017.
2657695
54. Gilmore, S., Tribastone, M., Vandin, A.: An analysis pathway
for the quantitative evaluation of public transport systems. In:
Albert, E., Sekerinski, E. (eds) Proceedings of the 11th Inter-national Conference on Integrated Formal Methods (iFM 2014),LNCS, vol. 8739, pp. 71–86. Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-319-10181-1_5 (2014)
55. Groves, P., Jiang, Z., Rudi, M., Strode, P.: A portfolio approach to
NLOS and multipath mitigation in dense urban areas. In: Proceed-ings of the 26th International Technical Meeting of the SatelliteDivision of The Institute of Navigation (ION GNSS+ 2013), pp.3231–3247. Institute of Navigation (2013)
56. Gu, R., Enoiu, E., Seceleanu, C., Lundqvist, K.: Probabilistic mis-
sion planning and analysis for multi-agent systems. In: Margaria,T., Steffen, B. (eds) Proceedings of the 9th International Sympo-sium on Leveraging Applications of Formal Methods, Veriﬁcationand Validation: Veriﬁcation Principles (ISoLA 2020), LNCS, vol.12476, pp. 350–367. Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-
61362-4_20 (2020)
57. Han, X., Kazim, S.A., Tmazirte, N.A., Marais, J., Lu, D.:
GNSS/IMU tightly coupled scheme with weighting and FDE for
123

--- Page 20 ---
370 D. Basile et al.
rail applications. In: Proceedings of the 2020 International Tech-
nical Meeting of The Institute of Navigation (ION ITM 2020), pp.570–583. Institute of Navigation. https://doi.org/10.33012/2020.
17162 (2020)
58. Hansen, D., Leuschel, M., Körner, P., Krings, S., Naulin, T., Nayeri,
N., Schneider, D., Skowron, F.: Validation and real-life demonstra-tion of ETCS hybrid level 3 principles using a formal B model. Int.J. Softw. Tools Technol. Transf. 22(3), 315–332 (2020). https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10009-020-00551-6
59. Herde, C., Eggers, A., Fränzle, M., Teige, T.: Analysis of hybrid
systems using HySAT. In: Proceedings of the 3rd International Con-ference on Systems (ICONS 2008), pp. 196–201. IEEE. https://doi.
org/10.1109/ICONS.2008.17 (2008)
60. Jansen, D.N., Hermanns, H.: Dependability checking with
StoCharts: is train radio reliable enough for trains? In: Proceed-ings of the 1st International Conference on Quantitative Evaluationof Systems (QEST 2004), pp. 250–259. IEEE. https://doi.org/10.
1109/QEST.2004.1348039 (2004)
61. Jensen, P.G., Jørgensen, K.Y ., Larsen, K.G., Mikucionis, M.,
Muñiz, M., Poulsen, D.B.: Fluid model-checking in UPPAAL forCovid-19. In: Margaria, T., Steffen, B. (eds) Proceedings of the9th International Symposium on Leveraging Applications of For-
mal Methods, Veriﬁcation and Validation: Veriﬁcation Principles
(ISoLA 2020), LNCS, vol. 12476, pp. 385–403. Springer. https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-61362-4_22 (2020)
62. Jin, Y ., Xie, G., Chen, P., Hei, X., Ji, W., Zhao, J.: High-speed
train emergency brake modeling and online identiﬁcation of time-varying parameters. Math. Probl. Eng. 2020 (2020). https://doi.org/
10.1155/2020/3872852
63. Krauss, S.S., Rejzek, M., Hilbes, C.: Tool qualiﬁcation consid-
erations for tools supporting STPA. In: Proceedings of the 3rdEuropean STAMP Workshop (ESW 2015), Procedia Engineering,vol. 128, pp. 15–24. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proeng.2015.11.500
(2015)
64. Legay, A., Lukina, A., Traonouez, L., Yang, J., Smolka, S.A.,
Grosu, R.: Statistical model checking. In: Steffen, B., Woeginger,G.J. (eds) Computing and Software Science: State of the Art andPerspectives, LNCS, vol. 10000, pp. 478–504. Springer. https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-91908-9_23 (2019)
65. Mammar, A., Frappier, M., Tueno Fotso, S.J., Laleau, R.: A for-
mal reﬁnement-based analysis of the hybrid ERTMS/ETCS level3 standard. Int. J. Softw. Tools Technol. Transf. 22(3), 333–347
(2020). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10009-019-00543-1
66. Marais, J., Beugin, J., Berbineau, M.: A survey of GNSS-based
research and developments for the European railway signaling.IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. 18(10), 2602–2618 (2017). https://
doi.org/10.1109/TITS.2017.2658179
67. Mazzanti, F., Ferrari, A., Spagnolo, G.O.: Towards formal methods
diversity in railways: an experience report with seven frameworks.Int. J. Softw. Tools Technol. Transf. (2018). https://doi.org/10.
1007/s10009-018-0488-3
68. Minopoli, S., Frehse, G.: SL2SX Translator: from Simulink
to SpaceEx models. In: Proceedings of the 19th Interna-tional Conference on Hybrid Systems: Computation and Control(HSCC 2016), pp. 93–98. ACM. https://doi.org/10.1145/2883817.
2883826 (2016)
69. Nardone, R., Gentile, U., Benerecetti, M., Peron, A., Vittorini, V .,
Marrone, S., Mazzocca, N.: Modeling railway control systems inPromela. In: Artho, C., Ölveczky, P.C. (eds) Formal Techniquesfor Safety-Critical Systems—Revised Selected Papers of the 4thInternational Workshop on Formal Techniques for Safety-CriticalSystems (FTSCS 2015), CCIS, vol. 596, pp. 121–136. Springer.https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-29510-7_7 (2016)
70. Nummenmaa, T., Tiensuu, A., Berki, E., Mikkonen, T., Kuittinen,
J., Kultima, A.: Supporting agile development by facilitating nat-ural user interaction with executable formal speciﬁcations. ACMSIGSOFT Softw. Eng. Notes 36(4), 1–10 (2011). https://doi.org/
10.1145/1988997.2003643
71. Paigwar, A., Baranov, E., Renzaglia, A., Laugier, C., Legay, A.:
Probabilistic collision risk estimation for autonomous driving: val-idation via statistical model checking. In: Proceedings of the IEEEIntelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV 2020), pp. 737–743. IEEE.https://doi.org/10.1109/IV47402.2020.9304821 (2020)
72. Puch, S., Fränzle, M., Gerwinn, S.: Quantitative risk assessment
of safety-critical systems via guided simulation for rare events.In: Margaria, T., Steffen, B. (eds) Proceedings of the 8th Interna-tional Symposium on Leveraging Applications of Formal Methods,Veriﬁcation and Validation: Veriﬁcation (ISoLA 2018), LNCS, vol.11245, pp. 305–321. Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-
03421-4_20 (2018)
73. Rispoli, F., Castorina, M., Neri, A., Filip, A., Di Mambro, G.,
Senesi, F.: Recent progress in application of GNSS and advancedcommunications for railway signaling. In: Proceedings of the 23rdInternational Conference Radioelektronika (RADIOELEKTRON-IKA 2013), pp. 13–22. IEEE. https://doi.org/10.1109/RadioElek.
2013.6530882 (2013)
74. Ryabtsev, M., Strichman, O.: Translation Validation: From
Simulink to C. In: A. Bouajjani, O. Maler (eds.) Proceedings of
the 21st International Conference on Computer Aided Veriﬁca-
tion (CA V 2009), LNCS, vol. 5643, pp. 696–701. Springer (2009).https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-02658-4_57
75. Siemens: X2Rail-1 Deliverable D5.1: Moving Block Sys-
tem Speciﬁcation (2019). https://projects.shift2rail.org/download.
aspx?id=a81c93c2-36a5-46cf-8bd8-4924ae612dd7
76. ter Beek, M.H., Legay, A., Lluch Lafuente, A., Vandin, A.: Statis-
tical model checking for product lines. In: Margaria, T., Steffen, B.(eds) Proceedings of the 7th International Symposium on Leverag-ing Applications of Formal Methods, Veriﬁcation and Validation:Foundational Techniques (ISoLA 2016), LNCS, vol. 9952, pp.114–133. Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-47166-2_8
(2016)
77. ter Beek, M.H., Borälv, A., Fantechi, A., Ferrari, A., Gnesi, S.,
Löfving, C., Mazzanti, F.: Adopting formal methods in an industrialsetting: the railways case. In: ter Beek, M.H., McIver, A., Oliveira,J.N. (eds) Formal Methods–The Next 30 Years—Proceedings ofthe 3rd World Congress on Formal Methods (FM 2019), LNCS,vol. 11800, pp. 762–772. Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
030-30942-8_46 (2019)
78. ter Beek, M.H., Gnesi, S., Knapp, A.: Formal methods for trans-
port systems. Int. J. Softw. Tools Technol. Transf. 20(3), 355–358
(2018). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10009-018-0487-4
79. Tueno Fotso, S.J., Frappier, M., Laleau, R., Mammar, A.: Mod-
eling the hybrid ERTMS/ETCS level 3 standard using a formal
requirements engineering approach. Int. J. Softw. Tools Technol.
Transf. 22(3), 349–363 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10009-
019-00542-2
80. UNISIG: FIS for the RBC/RBC handover, version 3.1.0 (2016)81. van der Poll, J.A., Kotzé, P.: What design heuristics may enhance
the utility of a formal speciﬁcation? In: Proceedings of the 2002Annual Research Conference of the South African Institute ofComputer Scientists and Information Technologists on Enable-ment through Technology (SAICSIT 2002), pp. 179—194. SouthAfrican Institute for Computer Scientists and Information Tech-nologists (2002)
82. World’s Fastests High-speed Trains in Commercial Opera-
tion in 2020. https://www.maglev.net/worlds-fastest-high-speed-
trains-in-commercial-operation
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to juris-
dictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
123
