--- Page 1 ---
V erication of m ultiple mo dels of a safet y-critical
motor con troller in railw a y systems
José Pro ença1[0000−0003−0971−8919], Sina Borrami2[0000−0003−1737−6509], Jorge
Sanc hez de No v a2, Da vid P ereira1[0000−0002−7561−6649], and Giann Spilere
Nandi1[0000−0002−3206−0599]
1CISTER, P olytec hnic Institute of P orto, P ortugal
{pro,drp,giann}@isep.ipp.pt
2Alstom SA
{sina.borrami,jorge.sanchez-de-nova}@alstomgroup.com
Abstract. Motor con trollers, suc h as the ones used in signalling sys-
tems, include critical em b edded soft w are. Alstom is a compan y that pro-
duces suc h em b edded systems, whic h m ust follo w complex certication
pro cesses that require formal mo delling and analysis. The formal analy-
sis of these real-time systems ha v e to balance b et w een including enough
details to b e useful and abstracting a w a y enough details to b e v eriable.
This pap er describ es our w ork in the con text of the Europ ean V ALU3S
pro ject to in tegrate the analysis of suc h systems with the Uppaal mo del
c hec k er during the dev elopmen t cycle, in v olving b oth dev elop ers from
Alstom and academic partners. W e use sp ecial Excel tables to cong-
ure the underlying Uppaal mo dels and requiremen ts, bridging these t w o
stak eholders. W e follo w Soft w are Pro duct Line Engineering principles,
e.g., allo wing features to b e turned on and o and p erio dicities to b e
c hanged, and v erify dieren t prop erties for eac h of suc h conguration.
W e automate the instan tiation and v erication in Uppaal of a set of
selected congurations via an op en-source protot yp e to ol named Upp ex .
Keyw ords: V erication, V ariabilit y , Railw a y , Real-Time Automata
1 In tro duction
In railw a y systems, motor con trollers pla y a crucial and safet y-critical role in
p oin t switc h mac hines. Guaran teeing its correct design and dev elopmen t is a
c hallenging but essen tial task to a v oid catastrophic acciden ts that could cause
sev ere damage to the en vironmen t and prop ert y , or ev en result in the loss of h u-
man liv es. Most state of the art approac hes address this safet y concerns using for-
mal mo delling and v erication, including abstract in terpretation [15] and Ev en t
B [1,7], to enforce compliance with certication pro cesses and railw a y-sp ecic
safet y standards, suc h as EN-50126 [10], EN-50128 [11], and EN-50129 [12]. In
these systems, safet y means that faults are detected with v ery high probabilit y ,
leading to a fallbac k state.
The design of motor con trollers is usually p erformed b y m ultidisciplinary
teams comp osed of exp erts in hardw are, em b edded soft w are, and v erication.

--- Page 2 ---
2 J. Pro ença, S. Borrami, J.S. No v a, D. P ereira, and G.S. Nandi
Guaran teeing that all stak eholders with dieren t bac kgrounds ha v e the same un-
derstanding of the critical asp ects of the system dev elopmen t can b e c hallenging.
W e mo del the b eha viour of a railw a y motor con troller using the Uppaal mo del
c hec k er [8], in the con text of the Europ ean pro ject V ALU3S ( https://valu3s.eu ).
This pap er rep orts on ho w w e in tegrate and automate the formal v erication of
this con troller during its dev elopmen t b y the rail man ufacturer Alstom, while
impro ving the trade-o b et w een ne-grained details in the formal mo dels and
its v eriabilit y , and ecien tly in v olving all team mem b ers in this pro cess.
Our use-case uses a con troller with soft w are comp onen ts that in teract with a
dash b oard and a circuit b oard (Fig. 1). In termediate comp onen ts are used to p oll
the circuit, to add and v erify CR C error co des, etc. W e compiled a set of safet y
requiremen ts for the con troller's soft w are to b e v eried using mo del c hec king.
Ho w ev er, when trying to build a net w ork of automata to mo del the con troller
with enough details to co v er all requiremen ts, w e concluded that it generated a
state-space to o large to b e feasible when mo del-c hec king. F or example, the re-
quiremen t the c ontr ol ler c omp onent should take less than 100ms to send a given
c ommand to the cir cuit should not need to consider all com binations of states
in v olving the sending of messages to the dash b oard. Similarly , the requiremen t
if the c ontr ol ler c omp onent r e c eives an err or message it should go to a fal lb ack
state and the dashb o ar d should b e informe d within 100ms should not need to
consider the mec hanisms to in teract with the circuit.
This lead to a family of formal mo dels with dieren t parameters and lev els
of detail, eac h targetting dieren t requiremen ts. This lead us to 3 c hallenges:
C1: main tain the mo del , to k ept it up-to-date with the system under dev el-
opmen t; C2: manage v ariabilit y , as to o man y mo dels with commonalities are
needed; and C3: impro v e the collab oration b et w een dev elop ers and mo d-
ellers of the formal sp ecications.
Our approac h uses a high-lev el represen tation of the congurations of the
family of formal mo dels for real-time systems. This represen tation consists of
Microsoft Excel spreadsheets with parameters and requiremen ts to b e used in
the formal mo dels, read b y our protot yp e to ol Upp ex that automatically gener-
ates and v eries the full family of mo dels and requiremen ts. These spreadsheets
include, for example, the time-b ounds of certain comp onen ts, the size of buers,
and the initial v alues of certain v ariables. F urthermore, these v alues v ary ac-
cording to the set of activ e fe atur es ; for example, b y activ ating a feature named
SelfT esting , a v ariable named TSelfTest is set to 200, otherwise it is set to 0. A
sp ecial table compiles a set of c ongur ations , eac h listing its activ e features. F or
example, a giv en conguration could activ ate SelfT esting , deactiv ate unrelated
monitoring features, and activ ate its asso ciated requiremen ts.
Organisation of the pap er. Section 2 describ es the motor con troller use-case
and its requiremen ts, formalised in Section 3 using the Uppaal mo del c hec k er.
Section 4 describ es ho w w e congure and v erify man y v ariations of a Uppaal
mo del. Section 5 summarises what w e ha v e learned during this pro cess and the
plans for future dev elopmen ts, and Section 6 concludes this pap er.

--- Page 3 ---
V erication of m ultiple mo dels of a safet y-critical motor con troller 3
Dashb oa rd
 Controller
 Circuitcommands commands
status status
Fig. 1. Arc hitecture of the motor con troller system under v erication
2 Use-case: Motor con troller
Our running use-case consists of a motor con troller, or controller for short, run-
ning in a resource constrain t device with a Real Time OS. This con troller is
connected b oth to a ph ysical circuit and to a dashb oa rd , as depicted in Fig. 1.
The circuit includes a DC motor that is b eing con trolled, receiv es simple com-
mands from the controller to turn left, turn righ t, or to stop, and sends bac k a
status rep ort, including the information of whether the limit of a rotation has
b een reac hed or if a problem has b een found. The dashb oa rd sends instructions
to the controller , including commands to b e sen t to the circuit , whic h in turn
informs the dash b oard of in ternal state up dates.
W e fo cus on the b eha viour of the soft w are part of the controller , and on its
formal v erication via mo del-c hec king of timed-b eha viour. This is complemen-
tary to other analysis and tests p erformed b y other stak eholders in v olv ed in the
same use-case, e.g., to inject faults in hardw are and to generate batc hes of tests
with enough co v erage. W e exp ect our underlying formalizations and to ols to also
b enet, directly or after repurp osed, the other stak eholders in this use-case.
This pap er includes b eha vioural details only of the core controller comp onen t,
and the full Uppaal mo dels are not publicly a v ailable since they are in tellectual
prop ert y of Alstom.3W e b eliev e that these descriptions, supp orted b y our op en-
source protot yp e to ol, are ric h enough to con v ey our approac h and its b enets.
Safet y-critical b eha viour Hazard analysis for the controller has b een p er-
formed to justify the desired criticalit y lev els. This analysis guided the arc hitec-
ture of the soft w are comp onen ts deplo y ed on the controller b oard. Most comp o-
nen ts are replicated and executed in t w o div ersied pro cessing units a v ailable in
the selected b oard, to detect when their b eha viour div erges. Also, CR C co des
are applied to incoming and outgoing pac k ages to ensure message consistency .
The replicated comp onen ts are: a core c ontr ol ler , a monitor to c hec k if the
state of the con trollers are consisten t, a de c o der to compare incoming messages
against their CR C error co de and against the messages from the neigh b our de-
co der, a buer to store messages to b e sen t to the dashb oa rd , an enc o der to add
CR C co des to messages to b e sen t to the dashb oa rd , and a r e ader of messages
receiv ed from the circuit . Non-replicated comp onen ts are: a sche duler to start
run time self-tests, a sim ulator of the dashb oa rd , a sim ulator of the circuit , and a
fault-injecto r to cause some comp onen ts to fail. The sim ulators exist only on the
3These can b e made a v ailable to the review ers if needed.

--- Page 4 ---
4 J. Pro ença, S. Borrami, J.S. No v a, D. P ereira, and G.S. Nandi
Check
HWIdle
Self
T estReadyLeft
RightF all-
backall-oksta rtleft
righterro rerro r
erro r
reseterro r
stop
stop
Fig. 2. General b eha viour of the controller comp onen t
formal mo dels, to mimic the en vironmen t, while capturing the minim um infor-
mation required to p erform formal analysis, represen ted as predened sequences
of messages to b e sen t.
The b eha viour of the core con troller task is depicted in Fig. 2. The con troller
p erforms some initialisation in Check-HW , tests the in teraction with the circuit
in Self-T est , and can trigger the rotation of the motor to the left or to the righ t.
A t an y momen t, it can receiv e an error and go to a F all-back state.
P arameterised requiremen ts F ollo wing the hazard analysis, w e compiled a
set of requiremen ts to b e v eried using mo del c hec king based on Uppaal. The
most relev an t ones are listed in T able 1. Requiremen ts follo w some syn tactic
structure to tigh ten the gap b et w een formal and informal requiremen ts, fol-
lo wing the EARS approac h [17]. F or example, the 3rd requiremen t reads  In
Conf 3 , when controller 1 fails the controller 2 shal l go to a fal lb ack state within
100ms. Congurations sp ecify the parameters of the mo del when v alidating the
requiremen t. This co v ers b oth general parameters of the system, suc h as the
time to deco de messages and the frequency of op eration of monitors, and the
scenario consisting of the messages sen t b y the dashb oa rd , b y the circuit , and b y
the fault-injecto r . In our example Conf 3 denes a scenario where the dash b oard
sends a start and a left command after 20ms and 100ms, resp ectiv ely , and the
fault-injecto r causes controller 1 to fail after 120ms.
T able 1. Some functional and non-functional requiremen ts for the motor con troller
Cong. State T rigger Comp. Exp ected
Conf 1controller 1 is
readydeco der receiv es a
left commandcontroller 1send a left
command within 100ms
Conf 2monito r 1 or
reader 1 failcontroller 2go to a fallbac k
state within 100ms
Conf 3controller 1
failscontroller 2go to a fallbac k
state within 100ms
Conf 4controller 1 receiv es
an error messagecontroller 1send immediately a stop
command to the circuit
Conf 4controller 1 receiv es
an error messageenco der 1notify the dashb oa rd
within 100ms
Conf 5dashb oa rd can
send messagesfull system nev er get stuc kIn
while
when
the
shall

--- Page 5 ---
V erication of m ultiple mo dels of a safet y-critical motor con troller 5
When formalising requiremen ts (c.f. T able 1) using the temp oral logic sup-
p orted b y Uppaal, the notions of state , c omp onent , and exp e cte d observation
follo w ed in a relativ ely straigh tforw ard manner. Sp ecifying the triggers often re-
quired man ually enric hing the mo del with new v ariables, since the logic do es not
express ev en ts. Sp ecifying c ongur ations w ere the most complex op erations, and
the core c hallenge addressed b y this pap er and our protot yp e to ol. T raditionally
for eac h conguration a new mo del w ould ha v e to b e sp ecied, ne-tuning v alues
of v ariables spread throughout the mo del, often deactiv ating some comp onen ts
to simplify the mo del-c hec king of more complex prop erties. Main taining a col-
lection of suc h mo dels, in a con text where neither the system sp ecication nor
the full set of requiremen ts are xed, quic kly b ecomes infeasible. W e pro vide
supp ort to sp ecify all congurations and prop erties in a single Excel le, and to
automatically use these with a single annotated Uppaal mo del.
3 F ormal sp ecication in Uppaal
Uppaal [8] is a w ell-kno wn mo del-c hec k er for real-time systems, successfully used
in man y industrial applications and in the con text of em b edded systems [5].
Systems are sp ecied as a set of timed-automata that in teract b oth b y using
sync hronisation on actions and b y using shared v ariables. In a n utshell, eac h
timed-automaton is a state mac hine whose edges are lab elled b y a guard and an
up date o v er shared v ariables, and b y an optional action name used to sync hronise
with neigh b our automata. Sp ecial v ariables named clo c ks capture the time that
has passed since they w ere last reset, and are incremen ted automatically b y the
rules that guide the automata ev olution.
The top ology of the timed automata net w ork used in the sp ecication of our
use-case is depicted in Fig. 3, one for eac h task men tioned in Section 2. This
top ology is built iterativ ely b y b oth dev elop ers and formal mo dellers, during the
dev elopmen t of the system. Eac h no de depicts the timed-automaton of a com-
p onen t, and arro ws depict in teractions b et w een no des: denote sync hronous
in teractions that blo c k un til b oth automata can trigger the asso ciated action;
and denote sync hronous in teractions that do not blo c k the sender  the
former requires the receiv er to b e alw a ys ready and the latter discards data if the
receiv er is not ready; and denotes async hronous comm unication b y atomic
writes and reads to a shared v ariable.
The dashb oa rd , circuit , and fault-injecto r comp onen ts are parameterised b y
a scenario, i.e., a sequence of actions with timestamps. The dashb oa rd sends
commands to the enco der s, the circuit sends rep orts to the reader s describing if
there are errors and if the motor reac hed a limit, and the fault-injecto r sends
messages that cause some comp onen ts to go to a fault y state with no b eha viour.
F urthermore, the circuit rep orts errors for a predened time-windo w during the
self-test phase, and the con trollers v alidate that an error is indeed rep orted.
The b eha viour of the comp onen ts in v olv ed is expressed using Uppaal's notion
of timed automata. W e depict the automata of the con troller's b eha viour in

--- Page 6 ---
6 J. Pro ença, S. Borrami, J.S. No v a, D. P ereira, and G.S. Nandi
Buer 1 Monito r 1 Controller 1 Reader 1
Buer 2 Monito r 2 Controller 2 Reader 2Dashb oa rd
Simulato rCircuit
Simulato rSelf-T est Scheduler
Enco der 1
Enco der 2Deco der 1
Deco der 2
F ault Injecto rfail failfailw a rn w a rn,up ddo self-test
to
erro rw a rn,up d
w a rn up d
actionw a rn
actionerro r
commandrep o rt
up d up derro rlimit
Fig. 3. T op ology of the net w ork of comm unicating timed-automata of the use-case
Fig. 4. All the 5 states of Fig. 2 app ear in this automata, extended with extra
details. The arro ws p oin ting to and from the Controller s in Fig. 3 app ear in this
diagram either as c hannels in the lab els, represen ted b y names prexed with
` ?' or ` !', or as shared v ariables suc h as limit , whic h is read to detect if the
motor reac hed its target p osition. The non-blo c king b eha viour of the erro r and
fail c hannels is captured b y including an extra transition lab elled b y this c hannel
in ev ery no de where time can pass.
Uppaal supp orts imp erativ e co de using a C-lik e language inside a global
Decla rations blo c k, accessible b y all automata in the net w ork. These v ariables and
functions can b e used b y the expressions in the timed-automata. F or example,
the concrete actions (e.g., goLeft ), time-b ounds ((e.g., TLeft[id][max] )), shared
v ariables (e.g., limit ), and c hannel names (e.g., action ) are declared in this blo c k.
4 P arameterisation and v erication with Upp ex
In order to cop e with the m ultiple congurations of Uppaal's mo dels, w e dev el-
op ed Upp ex to pro vide a mec hanism based on annotations to customise man y
asp ects, including c hannels, shared v ariables, data t yp es, time-b ounds, and re-
quiremen ts. Upp ex is an op en-source to ol that uses the w orko w depicted in
Fig. 5: it reads b oth an Excel le with the congurations and an Uppaal le
with annotations, and it creates a new Uppaal mo del for eac h conguration
found. Either one of the new mo dels is used to replace the original Uppaal le,
or they are v eried b y Uppaal and a rep ort is pro duced. Upp ex is dev elop ed
in Scala, uses the Apac he POI libraries for Microsoft do cumen ts [13], and is
a v ailable at https://cister-labs.github.io/uppex .
4.1 Annotating Uppaal mo dels
Declarations in the input Uppaal mo del are annotated with sp ecial blo c ks starting with
// @Name , whic h act as ho oks that Upp ex uses to inject and up date the v alues that
congure the mo del. XML blo c ks from  <Name>  un til  </Name>  also act as ho oks for
annotations, whic h w e use to inject and up date the prop erties b eing v eried in the
<queries> blo c k. W e call these @-annotations and xml-annotations , resp ectiv ely .

--- Page 7 ---
V erication of m ultiple mo dels of a safet y-critical motor con troller 7
Fig. 4. Sp ecication in Uppaal of the a con trollers' timed-automata with iden tier id
Uppex
C3C2C1
Apply a conguration
V erify 1 conguration
V erify all congurations
Fig. 5. Upp ex w orko w: up dating and v erifying mo dels based on conguration tables
Eac h annotation can b e dened in the Excel le in a sheet named with the same
name (c.f. Fig. 6). The rst line of these sheets describ e the pattern used to pro duce
co de that will b e injected for eac h line of the table, follo w ed b y a table with a he ader
of names in ro w 2 and their v alues b elo w. E.g., in the @TimeBounds table (Fig. 6), ro w 4
injects the line  const int TCheck[Ids][Intrv] = {{4,4},{6,6}};...  to the Uppaal
co de in the corresp onding blo c k. The rst column acts as unique iden tier: if m ultiple
lines are found, the last one prev ails. The column named Features asso ciates feature
names that m ust b e active , otherwise the line is discarded. In our example, when the
feature SelfTesting is activ e the v ariable for SelfTest is set to 200, otherwise it is set
to 0. The <queries> table on the top-left of Fig. 6 depicts some of the requiremen ts
from T able 1.
4.2 V erifying m ultiple congurations
Using Upp ex it is p ossible to sp ecify a list of c ongur ations , eac h regarded as a set of
features that can b e activ e or not. These feature selection guides whic h ro ws from

--- Page 8 ---
8 J. Pro ença, S. Borrami, J.S. No v a, D. P ereira, and G.S. Nandi
Fig. 6. Sp ecial Excel tables: @-annotation, xml-annotation, and congurations
annotation should b e included. The list of congurations is sp ecied in an Excel
sheet named @Configurations , suc h as the one in the b ottom of Fig. 6. In this ex-
ample the conguration SelfTest includes the features ReadCircuit ,SelfTesting ,
and StartWithSelfTest , among others, and not the feature SyncMon norHeartbeats .
Hence, when selecting the SelfTest conguration, the SelfTesting will b e activ e, trig-
gering the last ro w visible in the @TimeBounds table to b e used to dene the SelfTest
v ariable. When selecting instead the conguration JustHeartBeat , the SelfTesting
feature will not b e activ e, th us the previous ro w will b e used instead. Similarly , the
selected features will also inuence whic h queries will b e used during v erication.
Upp ex can b e used as a command line to ol to mo dify the annotated blo c ks of an
Uppaal mo del according to a giv en conguration, or to v erify one or all congurations.
F or example, the command  java -jar uppex.jar -runAll motorController.xlsx 
will v erify all congurations in the giv en Excel le using the Uppaal mo del with the
same name, pro ducing a rep ort suc h as the one in T able 2. This rep ort states that
3 prop erties of conguration SelfTest passed and the v erication timed-out while
v erifying the 4th prop ert y . This prop ert y w ould pass using a slighly larger timeout
when calling Upp ex. W e write ellipsis ` . . . ' to omit parts of the rep ort. Congurations
Monitor and JustHeartBeat also passed and failed some prop erties.
T able 2. Rep ort pro duced when v erifying all prop erties and all congurations
> Reading Uppaal file ’motorController.xml’
--Verifying ’SelfTest’--
[OK] @SelfTest: the Controller1 shall be able to
start the self-tests.
[OK] @ChkSelfTest1: when Self-test ends, the Reader
shall have received some error.
[OK] @ChckDeadlock: while Dashboard can send
messages, the full system shall not deadlock.
| Time-out. Missing 1 properties.
| Failed on property:
| "@SelfTest, StartWithSelfTest: the Controller1
shall be able to end the self-tests."--Verifying ’Monitor’--
[OK] @SyncMon: the Monitor1 shall be able
to send a warning.
[OK] @ChkB0NeverOverflows: the Buffer1
shall never overflow.
...
--Verifying ’JustHeartBeat’--
[OK] @ChkDecoding: the Decoder1 shall be
able to send a warning.
[FAIL] @ChkB0NeverOverflows: the Buffer1
shall never overflow.
...

--- Page 9 ---
V erication of m ultiple mo dels of a safet y-critical motor con troller 9
5 Lessons learned and future w ork
During the dev elopmen t of the motor con troller system at Alstom in collab oration with
ISEP and other academic partners, w e iterated o v er core design arc hitectural decisions
and agreed up on dieren t sync hronisation mec hanisms. Using the mo del-c hec king ca-
pabilities of Uppaal, w e v eried dieren t prop erties, including the p ossibilit y of sending
w arnings, of buer o v ero ws, and of reac hing deadlo c ks (or timelo c ks). These mo dels
are useful b oth to predict p ossible problems and b ottlenec ks, and to b e used in certi-
cation pro cesses. Our conguration-driv en approac h using Excel spreadsheets emerged
as a solution to the gro wth in complexit y of the underlying formal mo dels, whic h t ypi-
cally m ust remain simple in order to b e useful. W e w ere able to nd time-b ounds that
satisfy our requiremen ts, e.g., the p erio dicit y at whic h monitors and deco ders c hec k
consistency , or the p erio dicit y at whic h rep orts should b e p olled from the circuit, under
dieren t scenarios sim ulated b y the dashb oa rd .
Upp ex adds a negligible o v erhead o v er the mo del-c hec king pro cess, in v olving the
parsing of the conguration tables and the Uppaal le, and the writing of an up dated
set of Uppaal les. In our use-case w e use the 16 automata from Fig. 1 in a le with
∼ 1.7K lines excluding queries. Our tables curren tly include around 25 requiremen ts,
15 congurations, and 135 dieren t en tries (including scenarios, time parameters, data
c hannels, and data constructors). In v oking Ja v a to pro duce a concrete instance tak es
less than 5s in our 1.4 GHz Quad-Core In tel Core i5 mac hine.
Related w ork The v erication of complex em b edded systems has b een in v estigated,
e.g., b y Basten et al. [3] who generate Uppaal mo dels (and P etri net mo dels) using a
mo del-driv en approac h with the Octopus to olset, fo cusing on design-space exploration
and sc hedule optimisation. Gario et al. [14] and Dureja and Rozier [9] pro vide an
exhaustiv e analysis of a large air trac con trol, in a join t eort with NASA team of
engineers, using 3 concrete mo dels sp ecied in the OCRA arc hitectural language with
SMV comp onen t mo dels. They v alidate the 3 mo dels using a com bination of dieren t
tec hniques based on the prop ert y at hand, and analyse dep endencies among prop erties
to a v oid the v erication of unnecessary queries. In con trast to these approac hes, Upp ex
allo ws the man ual denition and ne-tuning of mo dels in the host mo del-c hec k er instead
of using generated mo dels, and pro vides mec hanisms to con trol the v ariabilit y of the
mo dels in a w a y that can b e p erceiv ed b y b oth to ol- and formal-dev elop ers.
The v ariabilit y in Upp ex is giv en as a set of tables that inject co de in the annotated
sp ecications, but it is not reasoned up on. Other approac hes, suc h as the formal frame-
w ork b y Kim et al. [16] in the con text of em b edded systems, can b e used to analyse
v alid congurations based on feature mo dels [4].
F uture w ork W e are pursuing the follo wing t w o directions of w ork.
1. V alid congurations. Curren tly one can sp ecify an y com bination of features,
sometimes leading to incorrect congurations b ecause of missing dep endencies or in-
compatibilities. These restrictions can b e captured b y a set of constrain ts, usually
taking the form of a F eature Mo del [4] in the con text of Soft w are Pro duct Lines. One
could, for example, mak e the feature StartWithSelfTest dep enden t on SelfTesting ,
marking an y conguration with only the rst one as in v alid. F ollo wing existing w ork in
this comm unit y , w e could further exploit these v alidit y constrain ts o v er features, e.g.,
b y considering all congurations that satisfy these constrain ts, or to aim at nding the

--- Page 10 ---
10 J. Pro ença, S. Borrami, J.S. No v a, D. P ereira, and G.S. Nandi
b est conguration using some cost function. In the con text of this w ork, the prop erties
v alidated b y Uppaal could also pla y a role in the v alidit y of a conguration.
2. Other bac k ends. Our w ork targets Uppaal mo dels using a fron tend for dev elop-
ers based on Excel spreadsheets. Ho w ev er, these tables can also b e used with dieren t
bac k ends b esides Uppaal. F or example, to generate conguration les used in the imple-
men tation, or to use a dieren t mo del-c hec k er for v erication, suc h as Imitator [2] for
real-time systems, whic h supp orts the optimisation of some parameters, or mCRL2 [6]
that supp orts a temp oral logic o v er ev en ts and can handle v ery large state-spaces. W e
are also w orking on an in termediate domain sp ecic language that can generate Uppaal
mo dels, among other analysis, with a b etter supp ort to reason o v er the arc hitectural
top ology , suc h as the one in Fig. 3, whic h emerges only implicitly in Uppaal.
Uppaal is free to use only for non-commercial purp oses. It is curren tly b eing used b y
academic partners, and our use-case is not b eing commercialised and is represen tativ e
of other ongoing pro jects. This w ork ma y lead to the adoption of Uppaal in commercial
pro jects of Alstom, or to a dieren t bac k end supp orted b y Upp ex.
6 Conclusions
This pap er presen ts our approac h to formalise the timed-b eha viour in Uppaal of a motor
con troller system, under dev elopmen t b y the Alstom railw a y compan y , in the con text of
the V ALU3S Europ ean pro ject. W e use parameterised conguration tables that adapt
a core Uppaal mo del, facilitating the customisation of the mo del so it can b etter suit
dieren t requiremen ts. This pap er also describ es ho w w e in tegrated the usage of mo del-
c hec king within the dev elopmen t cycle of a safet y-critical system, in v olving stak eholders
with dieren t bac kground, relying on in telligible tables and arc hitectural top ologies.
W e pro duced a protot yp e op en-source to ol Upp ex to automatise the extraction of
parameters and adaptation of the formal mo dels, and to v erify man y congurations on
a single run. In the future w e plan to further exploit the v alidit y of congurations and
to exp erimen t with dieren t bac k ends.
A c kno wledgmen ts. This w ork w as partially supp orted b y National F unds through
F CT/MCTES (P ortuguese F oundation for Science and T ec hnology), within the CIS-
TER Researc h Unit (UIDP/UIDB/04234/2020); also b y the Norte P ortugal Regional
Op erational Programme (NOR TE 2020) under the P ortugal 2020 P artnership Agree-
men t, through the Europ ean Regional Dev elopmen t F und (ERDF) and also b y na-
tional funds through the F CT, within pro ject NOR TE-01-0145-FEDER-028550 (RE-
ASSURE); also b y COMPETE 2020 under the PT2020 P artnership Agreemen t, through
ERDF, and b y national funds through the F CT, within pro ject POCI-01-0145-FEDER-
029946 (DaVinci); also b y F CT within pro ject ECSEL/0016/2019 and from the EC-
SEL Join t Undertaking (JU) under gran t agreemen t No 876852 (V ALU3S). The JU
receiv es supp ort from the Europ ean Union's Horizon 2020 researc h and inno v ation
programme and Austria, Czec h Republic, German y , Ireland, Italy , P ortugal, Spain,
Sw eden, T urk ey .
References
1. Rob ert Ab o and Lauren t V oisin. F ormal implemen tation of data v alidation for
railw a y safet y-related systems with o v ado. In Stev e Counsell and Man uel Núñez,
editors, SEFM , pages 221236. Springer, 2014.

--- Page 11 ---
V erication of m ultiple mo dels of a safet y-critical motor con troller 11
2. Étienne André. IMIT A TOR 3: Syn thesis of timing parameters b ey ond decidabilit y .
In Alexandra Silv a and K. Rustan M. Leino, editors, CA V 2021 , v olume 12759 of
LNCS , pages 552565. Springer, 2021.
3. T w an Basten, Emiel v an Ben th um, Marc Geilen, Martijn Hendriks, F red Houb en,
Georgeta Igna, F rans Rec k ers, Sebastian de Smet, Lou J. Somers, and Egb ert
T eeselink. Mo del-driv en design-space exploration for em b edded systems: The o c-
topus to olset. In Tiziana Margaria and Bernhard Steen, editors, ISoLA 2010 ,
v olume 6415 of LNCS , pages 90105. Springer, 2010.
4. Da vid Bena vides, Sergio Segura, and An tonio Ruiz Cortés. Automated analysis of
feature mo dels 20 y ears later: A literature review. Inf. Syst. , 35(6):615636, 2010.
5. Timoth y Bourk e and Arcot So wm y a. Automatically transforming and relating
Uppaal mo dels of em b edded systems. In Luca de Alfaro and Jens P alsb erg, editors,
EMSOFT 2008 , pages 5968. A CM, 2008.
6. Ola v Bun te, Jan F riso Gro ote, Jero en J. A. Keiren, Maurice La v eaux, Thomas
Neele, Erik P . de Vink, Wieger W esselink, An ton Wijs, and Tim A. C. Willemse.
The mCRL2 to olset for analysing concurren t systems - impro v emen ts in expressiv-
it y and usabilit y . In T omás V o jnar and Lijun Zhang, editors, T A CAS 2019 , v olume
11428 of LNCS , pages 2139. Springer, 2019.
7. Mathieu Comptier, Mic hael Leusc hel, Luis-F ernando Mejia, Julien Molinero P erez,
and Mareik e Mutz. Prop ert y-based mo delling and v alidation of a CBTC zone
con troller in ev en t-b. In Simon Collart Dutilleul, Thierry Lecom te, and Alexan-
der B. Romano vsky , editors, RSSR ail 2019 , v olume 11495 of LNCS , pages 202212.
Springer, 2019.
8. Alexandre Da vid, Kim G. Larsen, Axel Lega y , Marius Miku£ionis, and Dann y Bøg-
sted P oulsen. Uppaal SMC tutorial. STTT , 17(4):397415, Aug 2015.
9. Rohit Dureja and Kristin Y v onne Rozier. More scalable L TL mo del c hec king via
disco v ering design-space dep endencies ( d3). In Dirk Bey er and Mariek e Huisman,
editors, T A CAS 2018 , v olume 10805 of LNCS , pages 309327. Springer, 2018.
10. Railw a y Applications. The Sp ecication and Demonstration of Reliabilit y , A v ail-
abilit y , Main tainabilit y and Safet y (RAMS). Generic RAMS Pro cess. Standard
(N), CENELEC, Dec. 2017.
11. Railw a y applications. Comm unication, signalling and pro cessing systems - Soft w are
for railw a y con trol and protection systems. Standard (N), CENELEC, Jul. 2020.
12. Railw a y applications. Comm unication, signalling and pro cessing systems. Safet y
related electronic systems for signalling. Standard (N), CENELEC, No v. 2018.
13. Apac he Soft w are F oundation. Apac he POI - the Ja v a API for Microsoft do cumen ts.
https://poi.apache.org , 2021. A ccessed: 2021-11-30.
14. Marco Gario, Alessandro Cimatti, Cristian Mattarei, Stefano T onetta, and
Kristin Y v onne Rozier. Mo del c hec king at scale: Automated air trac con trol
design space exploration. In Sw arat Chaudh uri and Azadeh F arzan, editors, CA V
2016 , v olume 9780 of LNCS , pages 322. Springer, 2016.
15. Daniel Kästner and Christian F erdinand. Applying abstract in terpretation to v erify
EN-50128 soft w are safet y requiremen ts. In Thierry Lecom te, Ralf Pinger, and
Alexander Romano vsky , editors, RSSR ail 2016 , pages 191202. Springer, 2016.
16. Jin Hyun Kim, Axel Lega y , Louis-Marie T raonouez, Mathieu A c her, and Sungw on
Kang. A formal mo deling and analysis framew ork for soft w are pro duct line of
preemptiv e real-time systems. In Sasc ha Osso wski, editor, SA C 2016 , pages 1562
1565. A CM, 2016.
17. Alistair Ma vin, Philip Wilkinson, A drian Harw o o d, and Mark No v ak. Easy ap-
proac h to requiremen ts syn tax (EARS). In RE 2009 , pages 317322. IEEE Com-
puter So ciet y , 2009.
