--- Page 1 ---
Formal Verication of Human-Robot Interaction
in Healthcare Scenarios
Livia Lestingi1, Mehrnoosh Askarpour2, Marcello M. Bersani1, Matteo Rossi1
1Politecnico di Milano, ffirstnameg.flastnameg@polimi.it
2McMaster University, askarpom@mcmaster.ca
Abstract. We present a model-driven approach for the creation of for-
mally veried scenarios involving human-robot interaction in healthcare
settings. The work oers an innovative take on the application of formal
methods to human modeling, as it incorporates physiology-related as-
pects. The model, based on the formalism of Hybrid Automata, includes
a stochastic component to capture the variability of human behavior,
which makes it suitable for Statistical Model Checking. The toolchain is
meant to be accessible to a wide range of professional gures. Therefore,
we have laid out a user-friendly representation format for the scenario,
from which the full formal model is automatically generated and veried
through the Uppaal tool. The outcome is an estimation of the probability
of success of the mission, based on which the user can rene the model
if the result is not satisfactory.
Keywords: Human-Robot Interaction ·Service Robots ·Healthcare
Robotics ·Model-Driven Approach ·Statistical Model Checking
1 Introduction
Robots are becoming increasingly widespread in non-industrial contexts. Future
applications range from autonoumous means of transportation [28] to personal
assistants [14]. If on one hand factory workers are specically trained to interact
with this type of machinery and grow familiar with safety practices over time, on
the other hand a much wider range of users awaits robots in the near future [22]
and this poses a new set of challenges. In the area of safety, strong guarantees
of people's health preservation will be required, beginning from compliance with
the standards. ISO 12100 [18] and ISO 13849-1 [20] provide general guidelines,
whereas ISO 13482 [19] is specically targeted to service robots. It is common
knowledge for researchers in the eld that testing techniques are not sucient
given the complexity of these systems [25], and there already exist works in lit-
erature that resort to formal verication for safety-critical scenarios [16,30].
In this paper, we focus on human-related aspects in scenarios involving interac-
tions between humans and robots. Service robots will support people in everyday
life situations, and it is, therefore, crucial that human factors are accounted for
in the robot decision-making process. To this end, we have developed a model-
driven approach for the creation and formal verication of scenarios related to

--- Page 2 ---
2 L. Lestingi et al.
human-centric robotic applications. Target scenarios feature mobile robots and
their controllers interacting with humans in a dened environment. Separate sce-
narios tackle dierent interaction strategies, depending on what specic service
the human is requesting. To ease the modeling process, we have identied a set
of usual coordination patterns involving a human and a robot, which the user
of the approach can customize and re-use with minimum eort. The mission of
the robot, as more thoroughly discussed in Section 4, will be to provide all the
services requested in a specic scenario, and the purpose of the approach is to
allow the designer of the application to verify the feasibility of the mission.
The approach considers some physiological features of humans that make it par-
ticularly suited for the healthcare domain, but it is still general enough to bet
a broader range of applications. The policies of the robot controller that drive
the mission to success are designed to prioritise human needs over eciency.
This can make a dierence when robots interact with people in discomfort or
in pain, or when human lives are at stake and the controller has to make a
decision|something that can happen in healthcare settings. Another key is-
sue for practitioners is that modeling the volatility of human behavior is often
considered beyond the capabilities of formal methods [25]. As a rst step to-
wards solving this issue, in our approach humans are not treated as rational
agents that unmistakably execute their mission. Instead, their model features
a stochastic component to simulate free will, that causes them to occasionally
make autonomous decisions.
In our approach, scenarios are formally modeled through Hybrid Automata [4],
with the addition of stochastic components. The model is formally veried
through Statistical Model Checking (SMC) [3] against a set of relevant prop-
erties. The toolchain is meant to be used by professional gures with a technical
background, though not necessarily in robotics nor in formal models. Therefore,
the entry point is a user-friendly representation of the key parameters of the sce-
nario that the application designer can smoothly produce and rene. The tool
processes this input, automatically generates the complete formal models, and
performs verication through the Uppaal tool [11,24].
We have selected a use case from the healthcare domain to evaluate the eec-
tiveness of the approach. Some signicant experimental results drawn from the
use case are presented in the paper. The experiments are run using a publicly
available prototype of the tool [1].
The paper is structured as follows: Section 2 surveys related works; Section 3
outlines the background; Section 4 presents the approach; Section 5 describes
the formal model; Section 6 presents the use case and the experimental results;
nally, Section 7 concludes. Appendix A presents additional details about the
formal model, and Appendix B describes additional experiments.
2 Related Work
Formal modeling and verication of systems that involve interactions between
humans and robots is a long-standing issue. The work by Webster et al. [31]

--- Page 3 ---
Formal Verication of Human-Robot Interaction in Healthcare Scenarios 3
analyses the dynamics of a person assisted by a personal care robot in a smart
home. All the elements of the scenario are modeled as agents using Brahms, and
then veried through the SPIN model-checker: in particular, the human non-
deterministically selects the action to perform from a pre-determined set, and
the robot must act accordingly. Vicentini et al. [30] focus on the risk assessment
procedure of industrial collaborative tasks. The authors propose a framework
based on LTL formulae to verify that the overall level of risk of the system does
not exceed a certain threshold. The work has been extended to also include
manifestations of erroneous human behavior, handled in a black-box manner [7].
Bersani et al. [9] address applications involving robots and humans working in a
shared environment, modeled as networks of Timed Game Automata. Humans
are modeled as uncontrollable agents, to capture the uncertainty of the real
world. A robot controller that also accounts for unpredictable human moves is
then automatically synthesized through the Uppaal-TIGA tool.
Porrio et al. [27] explore how formal verication can be used to ensure that
robots adhere to social norms while interacting with humans. Norms, expressed
as LTL formulae, constitute the properties to be veried, whereas the sequence
of interactions is modeled as a composition of state machines. Concerning the
social robotics eld, Adam et al. [2] propose a framework based on the BDI
architecture to make human-robot interaction feel more natural. The authors
build upon models of human cognition to develop a perception and deliberation
process that drives the robot towards making decisions in a human-like fashion.
Some works exploit SMC to verify robotic systems. Arai and Schlinglo [6] use
SMC to make predictions on the performance of autonomous transport robots
in production plants. Foughali et al. [13] apply SMC to formally verify real-time
properties, like schedulability and readiness, of robotic software. Herd et al. [17]
focus on multi-agent systems, and on swarm robotics in particular: in this case,
SMC helps deal with the size of the problem, which cannot be handled by tra-
ditional model checking techniques.
Finally, Zhao et al. [12] perform probabilistic model-checking of UAV missions,
focusing on advanced aspects of battery prognostics and health management.
As this brief survey shows, although the issue of verifying human-robot interac-
tion has been tackled with dierent techniques, the combination of sound formal
methods with the modeling of human behavior unpredictability is still an open
question. To the best of the authors' knowledge, the work in this paper is the
rst attempt at formally verifying an explicit model of human-related aspects,
such as free will. In addition, as mentioned in Section 1, service robots will come
into contact with people with dierent backgrounds, who may not be able to
create complex models while designing their application. Therefore, the accessi-
bility of a tool is a key factor in assessing its eectiveness. The work presented
in this paper addresses these issues and is a rst step towards lling the gaps.

--- Page 4 ---
4 L. Lestingi et al.
3 Background
The formal models presented in this work are expressed through Hybrid Au-
tomata (HA) enriched with a stochastic component, indicated as HA+ in the
rest of the paper. HA are an extension of Timed Automata. In Timed Automata,
time is modeled through variables ( clocks ), whose value increases linearly with
time unless they are reset [5]. Conditions on clocks govern the transitions between
states. In HA, locations are also endowed with sets of dierential equations ( ow
conditions ) that constrain the derivatives of real-valued variables of the model,
thus allowing for the modeling of systems with complex dynamics [4].
Automata can be organized in networks , where synchronization between dierent
automata occurs through channels . Given a channel eand two automata with
complementary enabled transitions labelled as e? ande!|whose guards are both
satised|the two transitions re at the same time and the two automata syn-
chronously change their locations. Non-deterministic choices in the model can be
rened by probabilistic distributions. These constitute the stochastic component
of the formalism and are modeled via probabilistic transitions, as exemplied in
Fig. 1. This type of transition is marked with a probability weight, that deter-
mines how much the system will be biased to evolve in a certain direction rather
than its alternatives.
The stochastic component of the formalism enables the application of statistical
techniques, and SMC in particular. As opposed to traditional model checking,
SMC relies on Hypothesis Testing or Estimation to evaluate the probability that
a property holds on paths starting from a generic state sof the system [3]. There-
fore, it does not fully explore the state space, and is feasible also for complex
systems. The properties to be checked are expressed in the PCTL logic, whose
syntax, shown in Table 1, allows us to express quantitative constraints on prob-
abilities through the P() operator. Given a HA+ automaton and a PCTL
property , the possible outcomes of SMC are: (a) a binary value, 1 or 0, de-
pending on whether P( )holds or not, where P( ) is the probability of
 holding, and is a threshold; or (b) a probability interval to which P( ) is
guaranteed to belong. Section 6 presents some examples of SMC experiments.
The features of HA+ are used for the robot and human models presented in
detail in Section 5. In particular, given the emphasis of the work on human
physiology, the model of the human includes dierential equations describing the
time-dynamics of fatigue. Although human fatigue can take dierent forms [21],
at the moment we focus on the physical strain originated from non-stop walking.
According to Konz [23], the alternate fatigue/recovery cycles can be modeled as
exponential curves, as in Eq.1. Low values of coecients andmean slower
Fig. 1: Automaton with probabilistic transitions:
0:4 and 0:6 are the probabilities of reaching s2
ands3starting from s1.::=aj:j_0j^0
 ::=jXjU0jP( )
a2AP atomic proposition
2[0;1]probability bound
Table 1: PCTL Syntax

--- Page 5 ---
Formal Verication of Human-Robot Interaction in Healthcare Scenarios 5
fatigue accumulation and recovery, while F0corresponds to the value of fatigue
at the start of the current cycle (it is 0 when the human starts walking for the
rst time). Full exhaustion corresponds to F(t) = 1, full recovery to F(t) = 0.
F(t) =(
1 (1 F0)e t(walking)
F0e t(resting)(1)
Concerning the model of robot velocity, we use the typical trapezoidal veloc-
ity prole [10] with three phases: acceleration, constant maximum speed, and
deceleration. Maximum acceleration amaxand maximum velocity vmaxare de-
sign parameters of the robot. For the robot battery, we assume an exponential
charge/discharge cycle typical of electronic devices with lithium batteries [29].
Eq.2 shows the battery charge time-dynamics: andrepresent the charge/dis-
charge rates, whereas C0is the starting charge value for the current cycle. The
times required for a full charge and a full discharge cycle ( Tchgand Tdchg) are
known a-priori given the battery model, therefore rates andare approximated
with precision as in the following: =1
Tdchgln(100
100 ),=1
Tchgln(100
100 ).
C(t) =(
100 (100 C0)et(discharging)
100 (100 C0)e t(charging)(2)
4 Approach
The main contribution of this paper is a model-driven approach for the analysis
of human-robot interaction through formal verication. The approach is tailored
to non-industrial settings, and in particular to the healthcare environment. In-
deed, we focus on scenarios in which the volatility of human behavior is at its
peak, which may not be the case for industrial workers who are methodically
trained to perform a set of actions during their shift. Furthermore, modeling
physiology-related aspects is crucial for healthcare applications, since people in
need of a medical service may nd themselves in diverse, even critical, physi-
cal conditions. The toolchain is meant to be used by professionals possibly with
some technical background, but not necessarily in robotics or in formal methods.
Hospitals are subject to a tremendous ow of people on a day-to-day basis, and
this requires dedicated professional gures to be eciently handled. For example,
clinical workow analysts [26], who design and analyze work shifts for medical
facilities, perfectly t this prole.
The application designer is in charge of assigning each of the currently requested
services to one of the available robots. Therefore, a group of humans served by
a robot will constitute the atomic operational unit (referred to as the scenario
hereinafter). Serving everybody in the group will constitute the mission , i.e.,
the high-level goal [8], for the robot. The boundaries of the mission also include
any other parameters that, were they to be modied, the overall outcome would
change accordingly, e.g., the enclosed environment where the agents operate or
the robot starting conditions. Through the tool, the designer can try dierent

--- Page 6 ---
6 L. Lestingi et al.
Fig. 2: Diagram representing all the phases of the approach. Dierent shades of gray in-
dicate the current progress of implementation: the darker phases are fully implemented,
the lighter ones are to be expanded in the future.
congurations until the estimated probability of success is reasonable. Fig. 2 de-
picts the steps of the design process: (i) conguration of the scenario, performed
by the designer; (ii) automated model generation; (iii) execution of the SMC
experiment; (iv) critical assessment of the verication results, followed by appli-
cation deployment if the results are satisfactory, otherwise by model renement.
In this paper, we focus on the scenario conguration and on the formal model,
whereas the deployment phase will be elaborated in future works.
4.1 Conguration
The user of the toolchain has the option to customize all the parameters of the
scenario depicted in Fig. 3 and described in the following.
A scenario includes Nhhumans to be served and a robot from the eet that
will serve them. Robots are characterized by maximum speed and acceleration
(vmaxandamaxin Fig. 3) and are each associated with a battery. An association
between a robot and a battery constitutes a robotic system with its own id.
Batteries possess an initial charge value Cstart2[0;100], and the two parameters
TchgandTdchgthat determine the duration of full charge/discharge cycles. For
each scenario, it is also essential to model the environment in which services
Fig. 3: Class Diagram of the user-customizable portion of the model.

--- Page 7 ---
Formal Verication of Human-Robot Interaction in Healthcare Scenarios 7
Table 2: Human-Robot Interaction Patterns
Pattern Description
Human
FollowerThe human follows the robot while the robot moves towards the destina-
tion. Because of free will , the human can decide to walk freely and whether
to follow or not when the robot issues its command. If they get too far,
the robot stops and waits for them.
Human
LeaderThe robot follows the human that moves towards the destination (un-
known to the robot). The human is free to start and stop whenever they
want and the robot follows accordingly.
Human
RecipientThe human waits for the robot to fetch an item from a specic location.
While the robot is delivering the object, the human is free to move and
the robot has to track them. Synchronization occurs when the human and
the robot are close and the human stops to pick up the item.
will be carried out. Specically, the operational environment is modeled as a
two-dimensional layout. The designer may specify the Cartesian coordinates of
specic points of interest|e.g., wall corners and doorposts. The model capturing
robot navigation takes these elements into account to drive the agent towards
their correct destination and to prevent collisions with walls or humans.
Together with robots, humans are a basic component of the scenario that needs
to be congured by the designer. Each human is identied by a unique idthat
determines the order in which they will be served. Furthermore, the user can
specify the human's walking speed vand the destination point dest. A funda-
mental aspect of humans in the scenario is the way in which they are going to
interact with the robot. We have identied a set of patterns for recurrent human-
robot synchronization mechanisms, focusing on a particular subset suitable for
the mobile robots with a predened set of functionalities covered by our work.
Currently implemented patterns are described in Table 2. Dierent patterns im-
pact how the system will evolve while a certain service is being carried out and
the condition that the system needs to verify to state that the service has been
provided. As shown in Fig. 3, the designer can specify the parameter pfor each
human to set up how the interaction with the robot will play out.
Finally, it is also possible for the designer to customize the physiological traits
of the humans in the scenario through the pfparameter (see Fig. 3). This draws
from a set of proles that aggregate potential subjects by ageandmedical condi-
tion. Since the physiological property currently included in the model is fatigue,
particular care is given to conditions that specically target the respiratory func-
tions of patients, thus their ability to walk. Providing the designer with this
predetermined set of proles allows them to match the specic individuals from
their scenario with medically recognized signicant cases. This also allows them
to save time while designing the application, although the manual specication
of a dierent set of parameters is still possible if necessary. Referring to the

--- Page 8 ---
8 L. Lestingi et al.
model of fatigue introduced in Section 3, dierent proles mean dierent values
for parameters and. Therefore, they determine the time needed by a spe-
cic subject to reach full exhaustion and full recovery. With this feature, the
professional assessing the results has the guarantee that the physical condition
of the patient has been taken into account while estimating the outcome of the
mission.
4.2 Model Generation and SMC Experiment
The HA+ models are handled as templates customizable by the user. This sub-
set is, indeed, the result of the conguration phase. By doing so, the designer is
only required to arrange the main elements of the application in a user-friendly
format, which is more suited to their technical background than creating formal
stochastic models from scratch. This input is fed to a script that automatically
generates the formal model with the values laid down by the designer. Once the
generation of the model is completed, the tool initiates the verication process.
The user also has the option to choose whether the tool should produce a simu-
lation of the system or estimate the probabilities of the mission ending in failure
or success|i.e., a typical SMC experiment.
4.3 Result Analysis and Renement
If the user decides to run an SMC experiment, this yields a probability value.
If the probability of success is smaller than a desirable threshold, the user may
rene the model in one of the following ways: (a) reduce the workload of a
robot, for example, if its current battery charge value is not sucient to carry
out all the requested services; (b) change the order in which humans are to
be served, which could improve the overall eciency, e.g., by reducing robot
movements between a service and the next one; (c) choose dierent services to
be included in the scenario; (d) choose a dierent robot from the eet, with
dierent speed/acceleration parameters or with a dierent battery charge value.
A dierent robot model may be useful in case the previous one moved too fast for
the human, whereas issues related to the battery may involve complete discharge
before the mission is done.
5 Model
In this section, for each type of component of a scenario (robots, batteries, hu-
mans) we present the corresponding HA+. The model also features an orches-
trator , which plays the pivotal role of managing the synchronization among all
other components through channels (see Section 3). The decisions of the orches-
trator are based on the state of the system. In particular, specic features of the
model capture the behavior of sensors measuring physical properties of the sys-
tem, which drive the decisions of the orchestrator. Each property is modeled via
adense counter variable that changes over time as a result of update instructions

--- Page 9 ---
Formal Verication of Human-Robot Interaction in Healthcare Scenarios 9
on transitions, but does not possess an explicit time-dependency. We also assume
that these sensors periodically repeat the measurement: constant Tpollcaptures
the refresh period and clock tupdmeasures the time elapsed since the last update.
As mentioned in Section 3, the robot movement follows a trapezoidal velocity
prole, whereas the human moves with constant speed. As for human free will,
we have chosen the straightforward approach [15] of modeling it as a random
phenomenon whose behavior is comparable to a Bernoulli variable X. Finally,
to dampen the complexity of the model, we assume that humans are only free to
choose when to start or stop, and not an arbitrary trajectory. Interested readers
can nd additional details about the models in Appendix A.
Robot: the HA+ in Fig. 4 represents the three operating conditions of the
robot, corresponding to idleness, motion and battery recharging. We introduce
two time-dependent variables Vandrdistthat model, respectively, the velocity
of the robot at a generic time instant tand the distance covered since the be-
ginning of the motion. The automaton features locations ridle,rstart,rmov,rstop,
andrreccorresponding, respectively, to: (1) the idleness of the robot with V= 0;
(2) the acceleration phase of the motion, thus _V=amax; (3) the travel phase with
constant speed, V=vmax; (4) the deceleration phase with _V= amax; (5) the
battery recharging phase, thus V= 0. In every location, _ rdist=Vholds. When
the orchestrator res the commands to start or stop recharging ( bstartandbstop),
if the robot is at the recharging station, the automaton transitions from ridleto
rrecand back. The switch from ridletorstarttakes place when the command to
start moving ( rstart) is issued. Similarly, the automaton switches from rmovto
rstopwhen rstopis red. It is also possible to start and stop the robot while it
is accelerating or decelerating, so two transitions are added between rstartand
rstop. In location rstart, velocity is increasing linearly from 0 to vmax, thus when
V=vmaxthe automaton switches to rmov. While decelerating, the robot stays
inrstopas long asV > 0 and goes back to ridlewhenV= 0. We model as dense
counters the Cartesian coordinates of the robot in space ( rposxandrposy), and
the anglerfor the orientation with respect to the x-axis. On every self-loop,
and on all transitions in Fig. 4 marked with a R, the corresponding update
instruction of Table 3 is executed.
Robot Battery: Fig. 5 shows the HA+ representing the behavior of the bat-
tery. The time-dependent variable in the model is the charge value C. The robot
Fig. 4: Robot automaton.

--- Page 10 ---
10 L. Lestingi et al.
battery can be in one of three states, modeled by as many locations: discharging
(bdchg), charging ( bchg), and fully discharged ( bempty ) in which case the robot
cannot move autonomously. The constraints on the derivative of charge Cstem-
ming from the model introduced in Section 3 are shown in Eq.3.
_C=(
 (100 C0)et(bdchg)
(100 C0)e t(bchg)(3)
The switch from bdchgtobchgand vice versa occurs when the orchestrator de-
cides that a robot needs to start/stop recharging, ring events bstartandbstop,
respectively. An additional location bfullis needed to model the case in which
the battery is back to full charge (condition C= 100) and immediately stops
recharging. This happens thanks to the urgent channel bfull[24] that res as soon
as the automaton enters location bfull. The sampled charge value is modeled by
dense-counter bch, whose update instructions BCandBDare shown in Table
3 and correspond, respectively, to the charge and discharge operating conditions.
Human-Follower: the model is depicted in Fig. 6. The time-dependent vari-
ables arehdist, which represents the distance covered by the human, and F,
which corresponds to the value of the fatigue at a generic time instant. Their
temporal dynamics are given in Eq.4: hdistis either constant, or it increases lin-
early with time (with coecient v, which is the human's constant speed) when
the human is moving, whereas Fadheres to the model in Eq.1.
hidle=(_F= F0e t
_hdist= 0hbusy=(_F=F0e t
_hdist=v(4)
The operating conditions modeled for this component are the idleness of the hu-
man (location hidle) or walking ( hbusy). The switch from hidletohbusy, and back,
occurs when the orchestrator orders it or as a result of the human's free will. In
the rst case, the orchestrator res hstartorhstop. This leads to a probabilistic
transition (the dashed arrows in Fig. 6) whose possible outcomes represent the
human obeying the order, thus reaching the prescribed destination, or disobey-
ingit, thus staying in the same location. The transition is governed by the two
constant weights obey anddisobey . In the second case, two additional transitions
betweenhidleandhbusy capture autonomous decisions as a result of free will:
Fig. 5: Battery automaton.

--- Page 11 ---
Formal Verication of Human-Robot Interaction in Healthcare Scenarios 11
Fig. 6: Human-Follower automaton.
Table 3: Update Instructions
R:r0
posx:=rposx+V(t)Tpollcos(r)H:h0
posx:=hposx vTpollcos(h)
r0
posy:=rposy+V(t)Tpollsin(r)h0
posy:=hposy vTpollsin(h)
BC:b0
ch:= 100 (100 bch)e TpollBD:b0
ch:= 100 (100 bch)eTpoll
HI:h0
ftg:=hftgeTpoll HB:h0
ftg:= 1 (1 hftg)e Tpoll
thus, the human res hstartandhstop. Sample points of the random variable Xare
observations of local variable fw. Asuccess is the decision of the human to start
or stop freely and it occurs when fw>FW th, which is the guard condition of the
transitions between hidleandhbusy.FW this a constant threshold, and variable fw
is updated every Tpollinstants with a random value in range [0 ;FW max]. There-
fore, the probability of making an autonomous decision is E[X] =p= 1 FW th
FW max.
If thep-value is close to 1, humans will behave more erratically, and vice versa
if it is close to 0. Location hfaint models the case in which the human is too
exhausted to proceed: it is reached when F1, where 1 corresponds to the
maximum value of fatigue, and it causes urgent channel hfaintto re immedi-
ately. The dense counters are hftg(for the fatigue), and hpos x,hpos y,hfor the
Cartesian coordinates and orientation of the human with respect to the x-axis.
Table 3 shows the update instructions ( HI,HB) for the fatigue, which adhere
to the model in Eq.4, and also those ( H) of the position, where hpos x,hpos y
represent the projections of the displacement since the last update.
Orchestrator: the automaton is displayed in Fig. 7a. The purpose of this com-
ponent is to orchestrate the synchronization among the other agents and drive
the system towards mission accomplishment. This is realized by monitoring the
sensor outputs described in previous sections, and deciding whether the current
state of the system requires a certain event to be red. We have identied three
operational paradigms implemented by as many sub-machines: rrech controls
the recharging phase of the robot; rmove controls the start and the end of the
movement when, based on the interaction pattern between the human and the
robot carrying out the service, it is initiated by the robot; hmove controls the
dual case, in which the movement is initiated by the human. The orchestrator
features both rmove andhmove since both designs can be included in the same

--- Page 12 ---
12 L. Lestingi et al.
(a)
(b)
Fig. 7: Orchestrator automaton and hopichkhxipattern.
scenario. Sub-machines in Fig. 7a are endowed with ports : these are not part of
the formalism, but a visual representation of the transitions entering and leaving
the component (arrows in and out of a port constitute the same transition).
Figure 8 shows the details of the sub-machines. They are all built using the
hopichkhxipattern of Fig. 7b, which includes a location modeling the current
operating condition of the entire system (e.g., orrech,orflw), generically identied
byoop, and a location ochkxmodeling the orchestrator monitoring the state of
the system, where xis a numerical index. Ports highlight the transitions entering
and leaving the pattern sub-component, guarded by start,stop,failandscs,
where each condition is associated with a component-specic formula. The
semantics of the pattern is described in the following.
The orchestrator moves to operating condition oopwhen the corresponding con-
ditionstartis true. The transition from ooptoochkxis governed by clock tact,
and it periodically occurs every Tinttime instants. Upon entering ochkx, the or-
chestrator runs the monitoring routine ( Oof Fig. 8). If condition stopholds,
the orchestrator moves to the following operating condition|i.e., a dierent sub-
component|otherwise it goes back to oop. Table 4 shows the guards for each
sub-machine. Locations ofailandoscsof Fig. 7a correspond to the end of the
mission with failure or success, respectively, and are reached when conditions
failandscshold. Failure occurs if the battery charge drops to 0 (event bdead),
hence the robot cannot recover autonomously, or if the human fatigue exceeds
1 (event hfaint). Location oscsis reached when the mission has been successfully
completed|i.e., when all humans in the scenario have been served.
The rst instance of the pattern is idle chk 1in Fig. 7a, which models the
situation in which the system is idle and periodically checks whether an action
can start. The system enters this component rst when the execution starts, and
returns to it whenever an action stops (and the corresponding sub-component is
left). Similarly, the orchestrator exits this component if one of the startcondi-
tions for the other sub-machines is true.
The recharging routine of Fig. 8a starts when a robot is idle and its current
battery charge bchis below a threshold Bth1. Sub-machine rrech models two

--- Page 13 ---
Formal Verication of Human-Robot Interaction in Healthcare Scenarios 13
(a)rrech sub-automaton.
(b)rmove sub-automaton.
 (c)hmove sub-automaton.
Fig. 8: Sub-Machines of the Orchestrator automaton.
Table 4: Orchestrator Guard Conditions
start stop
idle chk 1rrech:stop_rlead:stop_rflw:stoprmov:start_rlead:start_rflw:start
rmovchk 2ridle^(bch<Bth1) (rposx=RSx)^(rposy=RSy)
rrechchk 3tactTint (bch>Bth2)^rrec
rleadchk 4ridle^:(hp=1) (hftg>Hth1)_(bch<Bth1)_(hsvd^:8hhsvd)
rflwchk 5hbusy^(hp=1) hidle
hopichkhxiscs:8hhsvd fail:bdead?_hfaint?
operating conditions: the movement of the robot towards the charging station
(rmovchk 2), and the robot recharging its battery ( rrechchk 3). Upon entering
rrech , the orchestrator res rstartto instruct the robot to reach the charging
station (Cartesian coordinates RSxandRSy), then rstopwhen the dock has been
reached. Location ostopbridges the two operating conditions and models the de-
celeration phase of the robot ( rstop): this is why the orchestrator waits Tinttime
instants before moving on, with Tint>vmax=amax. When the robot has stopped
completely, it can start recharging, and the orchestrator res bstart. The robot
stops recharging, thus bstopis red, when variable bchis above a threshold Bth2,
then the orchestrator switches back to oidle.
The rmove sub-machine of Fig. 8b is entered to initiate the robot movement
when the robot is idle and the human is not a leader. Upon entering rmove , the
orchestrator res rstartandhstartsince the human is a follower. The only operat-
ing condition modeled by this sub-component is the robot movement (component

--- Page 14 ---
14 L. Lestingi et al.
rleadchk 4in Fig. 8b). The robot movement stops (events rstopand hstopre,
since the human is a follower) if: (a) human fatigue hftgexceeds a maximum
tolerable value Hth1, or (b) the battery charge drops below a value Bth1that calls
for recharging, or (c) the human has been served, but they were not the last one.
If the human is a leader and starts moving, hence its automaton is in loca-
tionhbusy, the orchestrator enters sub-machine hmove (Fig. 8c). Upon entering
hmove ,rstartis triggered and the robot starts moving. The only operating con-
dition is the robot following the human, modeled by rflwchk 3. The orchestrator
exits hmove when the human has stopped, and stops the robot with rstop.
As per Fig. 7a and Fig. 8, failure is possible for all sub-components. Instead,
only rmove andhmove have outgoing transitions towards oscs, since recharging
the robot has no impact on service provision: this explains why the scsports in
Fig. 8a are not connected to the outer component.
6 Experimental Results
As previously discussed, use cases are conveniently found within the healthcare
domain, specically for the purposes of ecient patient ow handling. The ex-
perimental setting chosen to test the approach involves a human patient who
needs to reach a doctor's oce. The mobile robot is aware of the oor plan and
the patient's characteristics, and it is able to guide the human towards the desti-
nation. When the service is successfully provided, the robot will have achieved its
mission . Instances of classes and attributes of Fig. 3 are provided by the designer
through a JSON le. The portion of the model that is not customizable by the
user is stored in an XML template. The tool automatically processes the input
of the user to generate a verication-ready version of the HA+ model. The tool
selected for the verication is Uppaal and its extension for SMC [11,24]. In this
work we use Uppaal version 4 :1:24 to implement the automata, and run SMC
experiments3with the default set of statistical parameters. Each experiment
yields the probability for mission success: formula P
(osuccess ) is veried,
with probability bound and time-bound .
With this experiment, we are able to test how dierent fatigue proles impact
the completion of the mission. The experimental setting features a mobile robot
with vmax=20cm=s,amax=5cm=s2, with a fully charged battery ( Cstart=100)
and approximately 2:5hof full charge/discharge time ( Tchg=Tdchg=9000s ).
Listing 1.2 shows the portion of the JSON le dening these parameters. The
oor plan used for this experiment, depicted in Fig. 9a, reproduces a T-shaped
hallway of a hospital, with doors leading to dierent oces. The entrance and
starting point for both agents is on the left-end side (coordinates ( 200;300)) close
to the charging station ( RSx= 250;RSy= 375). Listing 1.3 shows a snippet of
the JSON le dening the coordinates for the points of the layout.
The mission for this robot is to lead a single human to their destination in
(1300;500). Therefore, the interaction pattern is Human-Follower . To test the
3On a machine with 128 cores, 515GB of RAM and Debian Linux version 10.

--- Page 15 ---
Formal Verication of Human-Robot Interaction in Healthcare Scenarios 15
(a) Floor plan and trajectories.
 (b) Fatigue curves.
Fig. 9: On the left, the oor layout for Exp A, with initial positions and destination
marked by a, and intermediate points by a . On the right, the fatigue curves for
all the proles tested in this experiment (colors as in the legend). Location markers
indicate the time each human has reached the corresponding point of the trajectory.
eectiveness of the fatigue-related policies of the orchestrator, we repeat the ex-
periment with three dierent versions of the human, with dierent fatigue proles
and values of walking speed. Listing 1.1 shows how these data are specied. In
the rst case, the human is young and in ne health ( pf=1). Their Maximum
Endurance Time (MET)|i.e., how long they can walk non-stop before F= 1|
is approximately 23minutes (with reference to Eq.1, it leads to == 0:005)
and their walking speed is v=18cm=s. In the second case, the human is an el-
der in good health ( pf=3), with MET =14min (= 0:008,= 0:0035) and
v=8cm=s. In the third case, the human is aected by a severe respiratory dis-
ease ( pf=5,v=5cm=s) with MET =4:6min (= 0:025,= 0:001).
Listing 1.1: Humans
1"humans":[
2f"id": 1,
3 "v": 5,
4 "p": "follower",
5 "p_f": 5,
6 "dest":f
7 "x": 1300,
8 "y": 500gg,[..]]Listing 1.2: Robot
"robots": [
f"id": 1,
"v_max": 20,
"a_max": 5,
"c_start": 100,
"T_chg": 9000,
"T_dchg":9000g,
[..]]Listing 1.3: Floor Plan
"floorPlan": [
f"name":"HALL1",
"x": 200,
"y": 400g,
f"name":"HALL2",
"x": 1200,
"y": 400g,
[..]]
For the rst case study, we have veried through the tool that P(osuccess )2
[0:717;0:817] with= 300s. With the second setting, the property that has
been veried is P(osuccess )2[0:8;0:9] with= 300s, and in the last case
P(osuccess )<0:098 with= 1000s. Furthermore, a simulation trace with
= 2000shas also been produced for each test case. These results prove that in
the rst two cases the destination can be reached in approximately 5 minwith a
high degree of condence. In the last case, instead, it is practically impossible to

--- Page 16 ---
16 L. Lestingi et al.
Table 5: Experiments Performance Data
Exp. States Time [min]Virtual Memory [KiB]Resident Memory [KiB]
pf= 1 2125701 166488 120800
pf= 3 3913111:5 166484 122376
pf= 5292700911:5 166484 123068
complete the mission even in 16 min. The reason behind this result is highlighted
by the simulations in Fig. 9: Fig. 9a shows the trajectories of the two agents,
whereas Fig. 9b shows the fatigue curves for the three test cases and the time
instants in which the destination or intermediate points of the trajectory have
been reached within the simulation. The orchestrator commands every agent to
stop walking if human fatigue exceeds a certain threshold, set to Hth1= 0:9. In
the last test case, motion stops at t= 200s, it resumes at t= 1200swhen fatigue
drops to an acceptable value ( Hth2= 0:3) and stops again at t= 1400swhen
the destination is yet to be reached. This behavior is caused by the orchestrator
trying to prevent human exhaustion, which inevitably slows down the entire mis-
sion. In the other two cases, thanks to the dierent pfparameter values, when
the human reaches the destination the value of fatigue is still acceptable, thus
they are not stopped by the orchestrator.
Performance data for each experiment can be found in Table 5. The experiment
demonstrates how the tool can predict the outcome of the mission for various
scenarios with little eort on the designer-side. Moreover, it constitutes a prelim-
inary step towards assessing the soundness of the models presented in Section 5,
specically the ability of the orchestrator to enable corrective actions if required
by the state of the system.
7 Conclusion
We have presented a model-driven approach for the verication, through SMC,
of human-robot interactions in healthcare scenarios. There are two main future
development directions for the approach presented here. The model can be en-
riched with new interaction patterns to widen the range of applications that can
be assessed. It is also possible to rene the model of human behavior by creating
a correlation between environmental factors and the likelihood of autonomous
decisions, which are a purely random phenomenon in the current version of the
work. The maximum degree of scenario exibility could also be enhanced by
having the human and the robot dynamically shift from one pattern to another
in particular situations as a result of the orchestrator's policies. We envisage
the creation of a Domain-Specic Language that designers can use to model
the mission, with ner-grained details and a richer set of physiological factors.
Simultaneously, we plan on developing the deployment phase of the toolchain.
Through a code generation procedure, the orchestrator could be transformed into

--- Page 17 ---
Formal Verication of Human-Robot Interaction in Healthcare Scenarios 17
executable code to be deployed on real mobile platforms. This would allow us
to test if the robot can eectively accommodate real people's needs and comply
with the human-oriented nature of the work. The deployment-ready controller
could also be simulated in a 2D/3D environment: beyond the testing purposes,
this could also help professionals with a dierent or non-technical background
in visualizing the potential capabilities of the approach.
Aknowledgements
The Italian Ministry of Education, University and Research is acknowledged for
the support provided through the Project "Department of Excellence LIS4.0 -
Lightweight and Smart Structures for Industry 4.0".
We would also like to thank the reviewers for their comments and suggestions
for the improvement of our work.
References
1. HRI Toolchain. https://github.com/LesLivia/hritoolchain (2020)
2. Adam, C., Johal, W., Pellier, D., Fiorino, H., Pesty, S.: Social human-robot inter-
action: A new cognitive and aective interaction-oriented architecture. In: Inter-
national conference on social robotics. pp. 253{263. Springer (2016)
3. Agha, G., Palmskog, K.: A survey of statistical model checking. ACM Transactions
on Modeling and Computer Simulation (TOMACS) 28(1), 1{39 (2018)
4. Alur, R., Courcoubetis, C., Halbwachs, N., Henzinger, T.A., Ho, P.H., Nicollin,
X., Olivero, A., Sifakis, J., Yovine, S.: The algorithmic analysis of hybrid systems.
Theoretical computer science 138(1), 3{34 (1995)
5. Alur, R., Dill, D.L.: A theory of timed automata. Theoretical computer science
126(2), 183{235 (1994)
6. Arai, R., Schlinglo, H.: Model-based performance prediction by statistical model
checking an industrial case study of autonomous transport robots. In: Concurrency,
Specication and Programming (2017)
7. Askarpour, M., Mandrioli, D., Rossi, M., Vicentini, F.: Formal model of human
erroneous behavior for safety analysis in collaborative robotics. Robotics and
Computer-Integrated Manufacturing 57, 465{476 (2019)
8. Askarpour, M., Menghi, C., Belli, G., Bersani, M., Pelliccione, P.: Mind the gap:
Robotic mission planning meets software engineering. In: Proceedings of the 8th
International Conference on Formal Methods in Software Engineering
9. Bersani, M.M., Soldo, M., Menghi, C., Pelliccione, P., Rossi, M.: Pursue-from spec-
ication of robotic environments to synthesis of controllers. Formal Aspects of
Computing pp. 1{41 (2020)
10. Chettibi, T., Haddad, M., Lehtihet, H., Khalil, W.: Suboptimal trajectory genera-
tion for industrial robots using trapezoidal velocity proles. In: IROS. pp. 729{735.
IEEE (2006)
11. David, A., Larsen, K.G., Legay, A., Miku cionis, M., Poulsen, D.B.: Uppaal SMC
tutorial. STTT 17(4), 397{415 (2015)
12. Flynn, D., Huang, X., Fisher, M., Papacchini, F., Ferrando, A.: Towards integrat-
ing formal verication of autonomous robots with battery prognostics and health
management. In: Proc. of Software Engineering and Formal Methods. vol. 11724,
p. 105. Springer Nature (2019)

--- Page 18 ---
18 L. Lestingi et al.
13. Foughali, M., Ingrand, F., Seceleanu, C.: Statistical model checking of complex
robotic systems. In: Proc. of SPIN. pp. 114{134. Springer (2019)
14. de Graaf, M.M., Ben Allouch, S., van Dijk, J.A.: Why would I use this in my home?
a model of domestic social robot acceptance. Human{Computer Interaction 34(2),
115{173 (2019)
15. Hadley, M.: A deterministic model of the free will phenomenon. Journal of Con-
sciousness Exploration & Research 9(1) (2018)
16. Halder, R., Proen ca, J., Macedo, N., Santos, A.: Formal verication of ROS-based
robotic applications using timed-automata. In: International FME Workshop on
Formal Methods in Software Engineering (FormaliSE). pp. 44{50. IEEE (2017)
17. Herd, B., Miles, S., McBurney, P., Luck, M.: Quantitative analysis of multia-
gent systems through statistical model checking. In: Int. Workshop on Engineering
Multi-Agent Systems. pp. 109{130. Springer (2015)
18. ISO 12100: Safety of machinery - General principles for design - Risk assessment
and risk reduction. ISO (2010)
19. ISO 13482: Robots and robotic devices - Safety requirements for personal care
robots. ISO (2014)
20. ISO 13849-1: Safety of machinery { Safety-related parts of control systems { Part
1: General principles for design. ISO (2006)
21. Jaber, M.Y., Givi, Z., Neumann, W.P.: Incorporating human fatigue and recovery
into the learning{forgetting process. Applied Mathematical Modelling 37(12-13),
7287{7299 (2013)
22. Jacobs, T., Virk, G.S.: ISO 13482 - The new safety standard for personal care
robots. In: Intl. Symp. on Robotics. pp. 1{6. VDE (2014)
23. Konz, S.: Work/rest: Part ii-the scientic basis (knowledge base) for the guide 1.
Ergonomics Guidelines and Problem Solving 1(401), 38 (2000)
24. Larsen, K.G., Pettersson, P., Yi, W.: Uppaal in a nutshell. vol. 1, pp. 134{152.
Springer-Verlag (1997)
25. Luckcuck, M., Farrell, M., Dennis, L.A., Dixon, C., Fisher, M.: Formal specica-
tion and verication of autonomous robotic systems: A survey. ACM Computing
Surveys (CSUR) 52(5), 1{41 (2019)
26. Payne, P., Lopetegui, M., Yu, S.: A review of clinical workow studies and methods.
In: Cognitive Informatics, pp. 47{61. Springer (2019)
27. Porrio, D., Saupp e, A., Albarghouthi, A., Mutlu, B.: Authoring and verifying
human-robot interactions. In: Proc. of ACM Symposium on User Interface Software
and Technology. pp. 75{86 (2018)
28. Rasouli, A., Tsotsos, J.K.: Autonomous vehicles that interact with pedestrians:
A survey of theory and practice. IEEE transactions on intelligent transportation
systems (2019)
29. Sinkaram, C., Rajakumar, K., Asirvadam, V.: Modeling battery management sys-
tem using the lithium-ion battery. In: International Conference on Control System,
Computing and Engineering. pp. 50{55. IEEE (2012)
30. Vicentini, F., Askarpour, M., Rossi, M.G., Mandrioli, D.: Safety assessment of
collaborative robotics through automated formal verication. IEEE Transactions
on Robotics (2019). https://doi.org/10.1109/TRO.2019.2937471
31. Webster, M., Dixon, C., Fisher, M., Salem, M., Saunders, J., Koay, K.L., Daut-
enhahn, K.: Formal verication of an autonomous personal robotic assistant. In:
AAAI Spring Symposium Series (2014)

--- Page 19 ---
Formal Verication of Human-Robot Interaction in Healthcare Scenarios 19
Appendix A Additional Models
A.1 Human-Leader Model
Fig. 10: Human-Leader automaton.
The automaton modeling the second pattern in Table 2 is depicted in Fig.
10. Operating conditions, time-dependent variables and dense counters are the
same as the ones described for the Human-Follower pattern in Section 5. In
this pattern, the human is leading the task, thus they are in charge of checking
when the task is complete, and, in that case, end it. This checking mechanism
is modeled by location hchk. The automaton enters this location every time the
value of clock tupdequals Tpoll. The model includes a boolean variable hsvd,
which has value 1 when the service requested by human hhas been provided,
0 otherwise. Upon entering location hchk, the automaton checks whether the
destination has been reached or not (update indicated by in Fig. 10). If this
is the case, hsvdis set to true, hstopis triggered and the automaton switches
back tohidle. Otherwise, the automaton returns to hbusyand the human keeps
walking. If the human is a leader, their free will manifests itself by stopping even
if the destination is yet to be reached, which is modeled through a transition
fromhbusytohidle, with the guard condition fw>FW th. Free will is modeled
as described in Section 5. Similarly, what is stated about update instructions in
Table 3 for the Human-Follower pattern stands correct for this pattern as well.
A.2 Human-Recipient Model
Fig. 11 represents the automaton for the Human-Recipient pattern. Locations
hidleandhbusymodel the same situations described for the previous two patterns.
In this case, there is an additional contingency corresponding to the moment in
which the human collects the item from the robot, modeled by location hrec. This
occurs when the robot has fetched the item and reached the human location: at
this point, the orchestrator triggers hstartto prompt the synchronization. Event
hstopis then triggered to signal the end of the task. Free will is also taken into
account for this pattern, with the same characteristics described in Section 5. The

--- Page 20 ---
20 L. Lestingi et al.
Fig. 11: Human-Recipient automaton.
human can freely decide to walk or stop while the robot is fetching the object.
Therefore, two transitions are added between hidleandhbusy, enabled by the
condition fw>FW th, which trigger events hstartandhstop. All variables (time-
dependent, dense counters and parameters) have the same semantics described
for the rst pattern.
Appendix B Additional Experiments
The additional experimental setting, presented in the following, demonstrates
how the two patterns in Appendix A work in practice, and how the robot bat-
tery is managed by the orchestrator. The oor layout is the same as in Fig. 9a.
In this case study, the robot needs to serve two humans: one adhering to the
Human-Recipient (see A.2) pattern, and one to the Human-Leader pattern
(see A.1). The specic parameters for the rst human are: v = 15cm =s, pf= 3
and dest = (1250 ;100). Since this is a recipient pattern, in this case the dest
parameter represents the location of the item needed by the human. For the
second human, they are: v = 10cm =s, pf= 1 and dest = (1250 ;500). The robot
has the same characteristics as the one used for the experiment in Section 6, but
we are going to run two versions of the experiment: one with C start= 100% and
one with C start= 11%.
The experiments are run on the same machine used for the experiment in Sec-
tion 6, with the same version of Uppaal and the same statistical parameters.
Performance data can be found in Table 6.
Fig. 12 and Fig. 13 show two simulation traces, one for each value of C start.
When the battery is fully charged, the robot immediately moves towards the
location of the object to fetch and then returns to the location of the rst hu-
man, who never moves from the starting point (Fig. 12a). As in Fig. 12a, the
Table 6: Experiments Performance Data
Exp. States Time Virtual Memory [KiB] Resident Memory [KiB]
Cstart= 100% 11383434:5min 166972 126304
Cstart= 11% 753392676:5hr 166968 124752

--- Page 21 ---
Formal Verication of Human-Robot Interaction in Healthcare Scenarios 21
(a) First human served (recipient).
(b) Second human served (leader).
Fig. 12: Simulation trace of the experiment with C start= 100%: robot trajectory is in
both plots, human 1 is in (a) and human 2 in (b).
rst human is served (h svd= 1) att= 150s. Fig. 12b shows the behavior of the
second interaction pattern: since the second human is a leader, they immediately
start moving as soon as their turn comes. The robot follows and, when it ends
up ahead of the human (e.g., t190s), it steps back and resumes the trailing.
The whole mission ends successfully after approximately 270 s(see Fig. 12b).
In the second case with low battery charge, the robot initially starts moving
towards the location of the object, but, as soon as bch<Bth1, with B th1= 10%,
the orchestrator orders it to stop and start moving towards the recharge sta-
tion instead. This is allowed since the human is a recipient, thus the robot is
entitled to start and stop the action whenever necessary. The recharging phase
lasts untilbch>Bth2, with B th2= 70% for this experiment ( t= 1400s), as in
Fig. 13c. When the battery has suciently recharged, the robot resumes all its
operations: it fetches the item from point (1250, 100), brings it to the rst hu-
man (t1600s), then follows the second human to the destination. The whole
mission ends successfully at t1700s.
The veried property in both cases is P
(osuccess ). With C start= 100%, the
property is veried with = 500sand= 0:9. With C start = 11%, we have
veried that P(osuccess )2[0:4;0:5] with= 2000s.
The experiment demonstrates how the orchestrator successfully manages the
battery recharge policy to prevent the failure of the mission, even though this
causes a general slowdown in service provision.

--- Page 22 ---
22 L. Lestingi et al.
(a) First human served (recipient).
(b) Second human served (leader).
(c) Robot battery charge and human 2 fatigue.
Fig. 13: Simulation trace of the experiment with C start= 11%: robot trajectory is in
both plots, human 1 is in (a) and human 2 in (b), battery charge and fatigue of human
2 in (c).
