--- Page 1 ---
International Journal of Recent Technology and Engineering (IJRTE)  
ISSN: 2277 -3878,  Volume -8, Issue -2S11, September 2019    
 
177  
Published By:  
Blue Eyes Intelligence Engineering 
& Sciences Publication  Retrieval Number: B102 90982S1119/2019©BEIESP  
DOI: 10.35940/ijrte.B102 9.0982S1119  
 Abstract --- The security of voice communication over the 
Internet Protocol is a   continuously growi ng research area due to 
the rapid rise in its usage among consumers. With the advent of 
Voice -over-IP Protocols, the Real Time Protocol (RTP) was used 
to facilitate VoIP communications. To secure this 
communication, Secure Real Time Protocol (SRTP) was 
implemented to encrypt these voice packets. The SRTP requires a 
session key to be shared between the communicating entities. The 
challenging task of establishing a new, unused session key to 
secure each SRTP session was overcome by the key agreement 
protocol,  Zimmermann Real -time Transport Protocol (ZRTP) 
which ensures confidentiality as well as a shield against 
Man -in-the-Middle attack. We firstly analyze the security 
properties of this protocol. Formal analysis is a mathematical 
technique that can be used to  verify the correctness of the system. 
We simulated the complete ZRTP Protocol with the well -known 
formal analysis tool, Uppaal, and verified the existing security 
properties such as Deadlock Prevention, Liveliness, Safety and 
other protocol parameters mis match detection using the Uppaal 
model  checker engine. Temporal logic was used to design the 
queries to verify the properties . 
Index Terms --- Temporal Logic , Timed Automata, UPPAAL, 
ZRTP . 
I. INTRODUCTION  
  In today's world, we try to ensure that any technolog y that 
we use comes with the highest level of in -built security. To 
narrow down our scope, we need to ensure that any 
communication between two parties in any mode needs to be 
secured and no third party or attacker can understand or 
derive information from  the communication. Almost 
everything that we use today comes with in -built internet 
facility or extensible internet facility. An entity connected to 
the internet is vulnerable to attackers who can perform 
sniffing, eavesdropping, Man  in-the-Middle and 
Denial-of-Service (DoS) attacks.   
   We have reached the extent where even voice calls can be 
performed flawlessly over the internet. This technology is 
known as Voice -over-IP (VoIP) that is voice over the internet 
protocol. As these communications are over wireless network 
technologies, they are prone to any wireless attacks [1]. The 
very first protocol that was designed for VoIP communication 
was the RTP Protocol that just ensured unprotected wireless 
voice communication. As this was not secure, this  
commun ication was encrypted using a session key and 
protocol was then termed Secure RTP (SRTP). The freshness 
of the key generated in SRTP was questionable. If the session 
key generated for the SRTP was a repeated one, an attacker 
 
Manuscript received  September 16, 2019.  
Aishwarya Raghavan , TIFAC -Core in Cyber Security, Amrit a School 
of Engineering, Coimbatore, T.N, India.  
P.P, Amritha , TIFAC -Core in Cyber Security, Amrita School of 
Engineering, Coimbatore, T.N, India.  
M. Sethumadhavan, TIFAC -Core in Cyber Security, Amrita School of 
Engineering, Coimbatore, T.N, India.  with access to the previous key s can brute force or reuse the 
keys to decrypt the communication. Thus, Philip 
Zimmermann came up with the Zimmermann Real -time 
Transport Protocol (ZRTP) which ensured a brand new 
session key for each SRTP session.   
   To ensure the correctness of the exi sting security properties 
in the ZRTP Protocol, we need a mathematically proven 
procedure to show proof of concept that the protocol has the 
security that it claims to provide. We chose to formally 
analyze this protocol with the help of timed automata and 
transactions in the Uppaal Model Simulation. Uppaal 
simulation itself performs basic sanity checks and helps us 
find if any transaction trace leads to a deadlock situation 
where the system's availability is put to test [2]. Once the 
simulation is designed,  we use Uppaal's verifier engine that 
can check the states and their transactions and signal whether 
the model satisfies the properties or not. We formed the 
properties with the help of temporal logic to design the 
queries.  
II. SECURITY  ANALYSIS  
The ZRTP Proto col is considered to be secure due to 
features like Man -in-the-middle attack prevention using the 
SAS Authentication. In [2] and [3], we see ZRTP Protocol 
analysis is done with AVISPA and ProVerif to check for 
Man-in-the-middle protection property. The pro tocol also 
rejects fake ZRTP messages and prevents DoS attacks. In [4], 
π-calculus and ProVerif have been used to ve rify the 
protocol's efficiency.  
The session keys generated ensure that the message 
confidentiality and trust is maintained. Some researches as in 
[5], use SPIN to analyze the protocol. Even if a session's key 
is compromised, the protocol ensures forward secrecy where 
the keys of other/previous communications are unknown and 
not revealed to the attacker. The space complexity of the 
protocol is very efficient as it does not require any complex 
computations or big storage capabilities as it requires a 
feasible cache space. Any voice forgery/impersonation attack 
is curbed with the use of voice verification during SAS 
Authentication as seen in [6]. The communication in ZRTP is 
successful only when the cache which stores the session key 
on both the communication parties‟ side is empty. This 
ensures that no spoofing happens. To facilitate security 
features the protocol does not require any public key 
infrastructure or pre -shared secret  [7]. Aishwarya Raghavan, P.P. Amritha,                                   
M. Sethumadhavan   Simulation and Formal Verification of 
SIP/ZRTP Protocol Using UPPAAL  

--- Page 2 ---
 
SIMULATION AND FORMAL VERIFICATION OF SIP/ZRTP PROTOCOL USING UPPAAL  
178 Published By:  
Blue Eyes Intelligence Engineering 
& Sciences Publication  Retrieval Number: B 10290982S1119/2019©BEIESP  
DOI: 10.35940/ijrte.B102 9.0982S1119  
 
 III. ZRTP  PROTOCOL  
ZRTP Protocol is one of the best known protocols for 
encrypted voice communication over the internet. Fig. 1 
shows the establishment of the communication and further 
voice data packet transfer. The com plete protocol can be 
divided into three phases, namely, SIP Handshake, ZRTP Key 
Agreement protocol and the SRTP communication [8]. The 
caller is the entity that initiates the communication and the 
callee is the entity that the caller wants to communicate with. 
The SIP Server facilitates the initial SIP Handshake. In our 
scenario, we consider that the ZRTP Protocol is preceded 
with the SIP Telephonic Handshake. Each phase has been 
explained below.  
A. SIP Handshake  
The caller sends an invite to the SIP Server, which is then 
forwarded to the callee. Caller and Callee try to connect. Once 
connection is established, the ringing happens. Each of them 
have now joined the call and exchange an OK message, and a 
final ACK to confirm the connection establishment.  
 
Fig. 1: The SIP/ZRTP Protocol  
B. ZRTP Key Agreement Protocol  
This phase is further divided into four phases, namely, 
Discovery Phase, Commitment Phase, Diffie Hellman Key Derivation Phase and then the Confirmation Phase. In the 
Discovery Phase, the caller and the callee exchange their 
ZRTP identifiers required for the successful connection. Each 
of them acknowledges the receipt of the other's identifiers. 
The Commitment Phase finalizes the identifiers that will be 
used by both the parties for the rest of the commun ication. In 
the Diffie Hellman Key Derivation Phase, each entity shares 
their ephemeral part of the key with the other, and they derive 
the session key for the SRTP communication. Finally, the 
Confirmation Phase will decide the life span of this session 
key that will be used by the SRTP communication.  
C. SRTP Communication  
The session key generated above is always fresh and can 
now be used to encrypt voice messages for the SRTP 
communication. Just after the SRTP is established, both 
parties have to verbally ex change a string, known as the SAS 
(Short Authentication String), which defends against 
Man-in-the-middle attack. One the SAS has been verified, the 
parties communicated by encrypting their messages using the 
session key. If any party wants to terminate the  
communication, it issues a GoClear command and the SRTP 
Session changes to a RTP Session after the ClearAck is issued 
by the other party. This is the complete working of the 
SIP/ZRTP Protocol.  
IV. FORMAL  SIMULATIOM  
We have seen that the ZRTP Protocol has mult iple states 
and multiple outcomes depending on the scenario that is 
encountered. We need a mechanism to model all these 
possible outcomes in one place, analyze their behavior and 
verify the security properties. For this purpose, we will be 
formally analyzi ng the model using the Uppaal tool. This tool 
can be used for formal analysis and verification of   Cyber 
Physical and Real Time Systems by using timed automata and 
temporal logic [2]. The implementation of this tool has been 
done in Java.  
The simulation c an be performed by using state transitions 
and these state transitions can be enabled using receiver and 
sender commands. We can maintain state names and state 
variables in this part of the tool. The model is designed in the 
Editor and the transition trace  of the model is analyzed in the 
Simulator. The property verification can be done using the 
Verifier of the tool. We used temporal logic to design the 
queries that check if our requirements have been satisfied by 
the model.  
To understand the models, we ne ed to be aware of the 
notations used.  
1) A transition containing a '!' initiates another transition.  
2) A transition containing a '?' waits for a transaction 
initiation  
3) Each template consists of a single Start state 
represented by double circle . 

--- Page 3 ---
International Journal of Recent Technology and Engineering (IJRTE)  
ISSN: 2277 -3878,  Volume -8, Issue -2S11, September 2019    
 
179  
Published By:  
Blue Eyes Intelligence Engineering 
& Sciences Publication  Retrieval Number: B102 90982S1119/2019©BEIESP  
DOI: 10.35940/ijrte.B102 9.0982S1119  
 4) Single circle states represent any intermediate state  
5) States with c in the circle indicate a commit state 
which has only one outgoing transaction   
The SIP/ZRTP Protocols has three components, namely, 
the Caller, the SIPServer and the Callee. Each of these 
components fo rms a template in the Uppaal model. The three 
templates can be seen in Fig. 2, Fig. 3 and Fig. 4.  
 
Fig. 2 : Caller’s Automaton  
 
Fig. 3 : SIP Server’s Automaton  
 
Fig. 4:  Callee’s Automaton  
The detailed transaction trace(s) is explained below:  
1) A caller in vites the callee via the SIPServer using the 
caller_invite!  Command.  
2) The callee can reject the invite by issuing 
caller_config_mismatch! If it does not match the caller‟s requirements or the callee cannot connect 
with the caller at the moment. If no such s cenario, the 
callee initiate connection with the caller via the 
SIPServer using try_connection!  Command . 
Similarly, caller can disconnect with the callee if any 
requirements mismatch by issuing 
callee_config_mismatch!.  
3) If the invite has been accepted on bo th the ends, it is 
followed by the ringing ( ring_caller! ) and ok  (OK!) 
commands. The caller, then, sends the ACK!  To 
acknowledge the completion of the SIP handshake.  
4) Now, the ZRTP Phase begins and from here onward, 
there will be direct communication betwee n the 
caller and callee, with no SIPServer in the middle.  
5) Caller and Callee will verify and acknowledge each 
other‟s Hello through the zCallerHello!  And 
zCalleeAck_Hello!  Commands. The Hello 
commands contain that identifiers that need to be 
verified before  the ZRTP Key is derived. If any 
mismatch in the identifiers such as in 
caller_hello_denied!  And callee_hello_denied!,  the 
communication will go to the disconnected commit 
states in the respective templates.  
6) If the Hello‟s have been successfully verified, The 
Commit!  Command  will finalize the communication 
settings and identifiers for the secure 
communication.  
7) Both sides now exchange their Diffie -Hellman key 
part with commands send_DH1!  And send_DH2!  
8) After the exchange, the key formation confirmation 
states  may lead to disconnected commit states if 
there is any mismatch during the Diffie -Hellman key 
generation, as seen in callee_wrong_confirmation!  
or caller_wrong_  confirmation! . 
9) On successful generation of Diffie -Hellman key, the 
Conf2Ack!  marks the end of the ZRTP Key 
agreement phase and the SRTP Phase begins.  
10) Both sides will now match their SAS Authentication 
strings verbally by issuing SAS_Callee!  and 
SAS_Caller!  to ensure no Man -in-the-middle. If 
detected, MITM2_DETECTED!  and 
MITM2_DETECTED!  will lead to  disconnected 
state.  
11) If the SAS authentication Phase is successful, the 
parties can now have a secure voice communication 
DATA!  and DATA_REPLY!.  
12) To terminate the session, we can use the GOCLEAR!  
Command. The session is closed only when the other 
party resp onds with a CLEARACK! . This closes all 
the channels created for this communication. Any of 
the two parties can choos e to close the 
communication.  
13) Hence, the above explanation shows that all 
scenarios have been considered and modeled so that 
the system can handle any scenario.  

--- Page 4 ---
 
SIMULATION AND FORMAL VERIFICATION OF SIP/ZRTP PROTOCOL USING UPPAAL  
180 Published By:  
Blue Eyes Intelligence Engineering 
& Sciences Publication  Retrieval Number: B 10290982S1119/2019©BEIESP  
DOI: 10.35940/ijrte.B102 9.0982S1119  
 
 V. RESULTS  
The above simulated model is verified in the Uppaal 
verifier using temporal logic. Each condition we want to 
verify should be written using temporal logic notations such 
as 'A[]' expression, whose condition all transaction mus t 
follow and 'E<>' expression, whose condition is followed by 
at least one transaction trace. We verified the below 
mentioned seven properties of the system.  
A. Deadlock  
This query verifies that no transition trace leads to a 
deadlock situation in the model a nd any situation lands in a 
final successful/unsuccessful state.   
A[] not deadlock  
B. Safety  
Safety verifies that “something bad never happens” and in 
our model we verify that only when the caller initiates a call 
request, the callee responds with a connecti on acceptance. 
Upon caller‟s „Sent_Invite‟ state, the SIPServer will move to 
the „Invite_Callee‟ state. Then the callee tries to connect in 
state „connecting‟  and they both exchange initial Hellos in 
states „Hello_sent‟ and „Hello2 _sent‟.   
E<> (Caller.Sen t_Invite imply SIPServer.Invite_Callee) 
and (Caller.Sent_Invite imply Callee.connecting) and 
(Caller.Hello_sent imply Callee.Hello2_sent)  
C. Liveliness  
Liveliness verifies that “something good eventually 
happens” and in our model we verify that on successful caller 
communication completion, the SIPServer and the callee 
terminate. Upon caller‟s „send_clear‟, callee closes at state 
„clear_rcv‟ and SIPServer at „close_SIPserver‟.   
E<> (Caller.send_clear imply Callee.clear_rcv) and 
(Caller.send_clear imply SIPSer ver.close_SIPserver)  
D. Invitation Rejection  
This property verifies that if the caller's configurations (as 
in the first scenario) or the callee's configurations (as in the 
second scenario) are not suitable as in states 
„caller_mismatch_found‟ and „Mismatch_c alleeConfig‟ 
respectively during the initiation of SIP handshake, the model 
leads to „disconnected‟ states in the caller, callee and SIP 
Server.   
E<> (Caller.caller_mismatch_found imply 
Caller.disconnected) and (Caller.caller_mismatch_found 
imply SIPServe r.disconnected) and 
(Caller.caller_mismatch_found imply Callee.disconnected)  
E<> (Callee.Mismatch_calleeConfig imply 
Caller.disconnected) and (Callee.Mismatch_calleeConfig 
imply SIPServer.disconnected) and 
(Callee.Mismatch_calleeConfig imply Callee.disconn ected)  
E. Discovery Hello Mismatch  
This property verifies that if the caller's Hello parameters 
(as in the first scenario) or the callee's Hello parameters (as in 
the second scenario) are not compatible as in states 
„hello_caller_denied‟ and „hello_callee_den ied‟ respectively 
during the ZRTP Discovery Phase, the model leads to 
„disconnected‟ states in the caller, callee and SIP Server.   E<> (Caller.hello_caller_denied imply 
Caller.disconnected) and (Caller.hello_caller_denied imply 
SIPServer.disconnected) and  (Caller.hello_caller_denied 
imply Callee.disconnected)  
E<> (Callee.hello_callee_denied imply 
Caller.disconnected) and (Callee.hello_callee_denied imply 
SIPServer.disconnected) and (Callee.hello_callee_denied 
imply Callee.disconnected)  
F. Invalid DH Key Gener ation  
This property verifies that if the caller (as in the first 
scenario) or the callee (as in the second scenario) is not able to 
generate the DH Key as in states „callerConf_wrong‟ and 
„calleeConf_wrong‟ respectively during the ZRTP DH Phase, 
the model leads to „disconnected‟ states in the caller, callee 
and SIP Server.  
E<> (Caller.callerConf_wrong imply 
Caller.disconnected) and (Caller.callerConf_wrong imply 
SIPServer.disconnected) and (Caller.callerConf_wrong 
imply Callee.disconnected)  
E<> (Callee.cal leeConf_wrong imply 
Caller.disconnected) and (Callee.calleeConf_wrong imply 
SIPServer.disconnected) and (Callee.calleeConf_wrong 
imply Callee.disconnected)  
G. Man-in-the-Middle Detection  
This property verifies that if the caller (as in the first 
scenario) or the callee (as in the second scenario) is not able to 
show the same SAS Authentication string as in states 
„mitm1Detected‟ and „mitm2Detected‟ respectively during 
the SRTP Phase, the model leads to „disconnected‟ states in 
the caller, callee and SIP Server .  
E<> (Callee.mitm1Detected imply Caller.disconnected) 
and (Callee.mitm1Detected imply SIPServer.disconnected) 
and (Callee.mitm1Detected imply Callee.disconnected)  
E<> (Caller.mitm2Detected imply Caller.disconnected) 
and (Caller.mitm2Detected imply SIPSer ver.disconnected) 
and (Caller.mitm2Detected imply Callee.disconnected)  
VI. CONCLUSION  
The existing security of the SIP/ZRTP Protocol shows that 
with the increasing use of VoIP over traditional wired 
telephonic communication, VoIP is preferred by users due to 
the ease of use, low c ost and high security features.  
As ZRTP Protocol provides security against information 
disclosure, Man -in-the-Middle and Denial -of-Service, by 
constantly securing this protocol, we can achieve good VoIP 
security. Formal verification of  these security features assure 
that the VoIP communication provides end -to-end security 
with no req uirement for pre -shared secret.  Having said that, 
there are multiple possibilities that can occur as zero -day 
attacks.  
Hence we need to explore on possible attacks on the 
existing VoIP Protocol, harden the protocol to stay immune to  
those attacks and then formally verify it's correctness to 
provide maximum security to users on the internet.  

--- Page 5 ---
International Journal of Recent Technology and Engineering (IJRTE)  
ISSN: 2277 -3878,  Volume -8, Issue -2S11, September 2019    
 
181  
Published By:  
Blue Eyes Intelligence Engineering 
& Sciences Publication  Retrieval Number: B102 90982S1119/2019©BEIESP  
DOI: 10.35940/ijrte.B102 9.0982S1119  
 REFERENCES  
1. P. Gupta and V. Shmatikov, "Security Analysis of 
Voice -overIP Protocols," 20th IEEE Computer Security 
Foundations Symposium (CSF'07),  Venice, 2007, pp. 
49-63. 
2. Jayasri K.S., Jevitha K.P., Jayaraman B. (2018) 
Verification of OAuth 2.0 Using UPPAAL. In: Mandal J., 
Sinha D. (eds) Social Transformation – Digital Way.  CSI 
2018. Communications in Computer and Information 
Science,  vol 836. Pp. 58 -67. Springer, Singapore  
3. R. Bresciani, S. Superiore, S. Anna, and I. Pisa. The ZRTP 
protocol security considerations. Technical Report 
LSV -07-20, 2007  
4. R. Bresciani and A. Butte rfield, "A formal security proof 
for the ZRTP Protocol," 2009 International Conference 
for Internet Technology and Secured Transactions, 
(ICITST),  London, 2009, pp. 1 -6.  
5. X. Chang, Y. Qin, Z. Chen and B. Xing, "ZRTP -based 
Trusted Transmission of VoIP Traff ic and Formal 
Verification," 2012 Fourth International Conference on 
Multimedia Information Networking and Security, 
Nanjing,  2012, pp. 560 -563. 
6. Petraschek, M. and Höher, Thomas and Jung, O. and 
Hlavacs, Helmut and Gansterer, Wilfried, Security and 
Usabili ty Aspects of Man -in-the-Middle Attacks on 
ZRTP, J. UCS Journal of Universal Computer Science,  14 
(5).   pp. 673 -692   Springer Verlag (2008)  
7. O. Jung, M. Petraschek, T. Hoeher and I. Gojmerac, "Using 
SIP identity to prevent man -in-the-middle attacks on 
ZRTP," 2008 1st IFIP Wireless Days, Dubai,  2008, pp. 
1-5. 
8. Zimmermann, P., Johnston, A., Ed., and J. Callas, "ZRTP: 
Media Path Key Agreement for Unicast Secure RTP", 
RFC 6189, April 2011, 
https://www.rfceditor.org/info/rfc6189  
AUTHORS  PROFILE  
 
Aishwarya Ragh avan  Currently pursuing 
final year Masters‟ Degree at Amrita School of 
Engineering, Coimbatore, India. Interested 
research areas include Zigbee Security and 
VOIP Security.  
 
 
Amritha P. P  Currently serves as Assistant 
Professor at TIFAC -CORE in Cyber 
Secur ity, Coimbatore Campus. Research areas 
include Stegnography, Steganalysis, 
Information Hiding, Secret sharing and 
Cryptography.  
 
M. Sethumadhavan  Head of TIFAC -Centre 
of Relevance and Excellence in Cyber Security, 
an R&D centre at Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeeth am 
Coimbatore campus since its inception in the 
year 2005. He leads the R&D that focuses on the 
areas of cyber security such as Cryptology, Post 
Quantum Cryptography, Steganalysis, Secure 
Coding, Computer Network Security, Digital Forensics etc. A 
central focus of his work has been to create innovative educational 
and research programs and develop world -class expertise in Cyber 
Security as the underlying vision.  

