--- Page 1 ---
Scalable Coordinated Intelligent Trafﬁc Light
Controller for Heterogeneous Trafﬁc Scenarios
Using UPPAAL STRATEGO
Thamilselvam B, Subrahmanyam Kalyanasundaram, and M V Panduranga Rao
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad
India 502285.
Email:fcs17resch11005,subruk,mvp g@iith.ac.in
Abstract —We propose a new approach for coordinating trafﬁc
ﬂows in large cities that helps in reducing the travel time and
carbon emissions from vehicles. We use the UPPAAL STRAT-
EGO tool chain that leverages statistical model checking and
machine learning for synthesizing optimal trafﬁc coordination
strategies. Our approach employs a hierarchical view of the
city with two levels — individual trafﬁc intersections and area
controllers. While the choice of a phase at an intersection is
decided locally, the phase threshold is decided at the level of
an area consisting of several intersections. The algorithm and
models that we report in this paper are a nontrivial generalization
of previous approaches that used UPPAAL STRATEGO. This
generalization allows scaling to large cities with several trafﬁc
intersections, with improved results.
We compare our approach against other techniques including
ﬁxed-time and fully-actuated controllers. Experiments show that
the it performs better in terms of waiting time and carbon
emissions, especially in scenarios of changing trafﬁc loads. Our
approach also reduces overall and individual delays at intersec-
tions.
Index Terms —trafﬁc light controller, model checking, hierar-
chical controller, UPPAAL STRATEGO
I. I NTRODUCTION
Trafﬁc management in large cities is a universal concern.
Good coordination between trafﬁc intersections, resulting in
better trafﬁc management, has several beneﬁts: reduced indi-
vidual time, higher throughput and reduced emissions. For ex-
ample, if most vehicles encounter a “green wave”–a sequence
of green signals during their journey–so that they do not have
to stop at any intersection, we would achieve many of these
objectives. The problem is exacerbated in heterogeneous trafﬁc
scenarios. Accounting for vehicles with different acceleration,
speed proﬁles and space requirements poses unique modeling
challenges.
Due to the obvious beneﬁts, this problem has attracted a
lot of research attention in the past few decades. Several
approaches have been suggested from various standpoints.
While many earlier approaches modelled it as an optimization
problem, recent ones have also used ideas in machine learning
This work was supported by the project “M2Smart: Smart Cities for
Emerging Countries based on Sensing, Network and Big Data Analysis of
Multimodal Regional Transport System”, JST /JICA SATREPS, Japan.with varying degrees of success. Of the several approaches
that have been reported in scientiﬁc literature, some have
found their way to implementation and deployment–examples
being the Split Cycle and Offset Optimisation Technique
(SCOOT) [1] and the Sydney Coordinated Adaptive Trafﬁc
System (SCAT) [2].
The possibility of using formal methods for trafﬁc man-
agement has been explored in the past, albeit for severely
restricted scenarios. Eriksen et al. [3] used statistical model
checking and reinforcement learning (through the UPPAAL
STRATEGO tool) for reducing waiting times at a single
intersection with homogeneous trafﬁc. Thamilselvam et al. [4]
extended it to coordination between two intersections with
homogeneous trafﬁc. The idea behind the coordination was
a threshold based adjustment of the maximum phase duration
and cycle length at the two intersections. The phase threshold ,
deﬁned as the maximum time for which the same phase can
continue at an intersection, was found by trial and error based
on trafﬁc volumes at the two intersections.
For a large city with several intersections, ﬁnding such
thresholds by trial and error does not scale well. But if we
make the model to support coordination (to ﬁnd the phase
thresholds for intersections in a neighborhood) and optimisa-
tion (to optimise the ﬂow in an isolated intersection) at two
levels, scaling to large cities is possible. The present work
opens up the use of formal methods in trafﬁc management
beyond toy scenarios. While it remains to be seen how it
compares with various optimization approaches (cf [5]–[7]),
in this paper we show superiority of this approach over
some simple yet widely used trafﬁc controllers. Our proposed
approach involves coordination (phase threshold ﬁnding) and
optimization (optimizing the ﬂow locally at every intersection)
at the intersection level and the area level. In addition to
this main methodological innovation, we also incorporate
heterogeneous trafﬁc scenarios where the model is not agnostic
of the type of a vehicle. We also show that our method works
well when the trafﬁc ﬂuctuates rapidly, since we adaptively
change the phase threshold over an area.
As in the works mentioned above, we use the UPPAAL
STRATEGO tool chain that combines statistical model check-

--- Page 2 ---
ing for analysis of stochastic systems and reinforcement learn-
ing for strategy optimization, in conjunction with the urban
trafﬁc simulator SUMO. However, the generalization necessi-
tates a nontrivial algorithmic and modeling improvement. We
give evidence that the approach yields a considerable reduction
in waiting time, queue lengths, carbon emissions as well as
the overall vehicle delay and delay at intersections.
This paper is arranged as follows. The next section brieﬂy
discusses previous work in the area of coordinated trafﬁc
controllers and some preliminaries needed for this paper.
Section III describes our approach including the modeling,
analysis and implementation details. Section IV discusses
the experiment setup and results. We conclude with a brief
summary of our work and future directions in Section V.
II. R ELATED WORK
We begin this section by introducing some terminology that
is used in the rest of the paper.
Phase of an intersection: A conﬂict-free assignment to
lights in all directions at an intersection that allows ﬂow
in at least one direction.
Phase duration: The time interval for which the phase of
an intersection remains unchanged.
Phase Threshold: The maximum time for which a phase
can last at an intersection. In general, this should be
periodically reassessed for an area.
Cycle: comprises of a sequence of phases which repeats
periodically at an intersection.
Cycle time: the duration for one cycle. That is, sum of
all phase durations.
Offset: The time between the starting of green phase of
two consecutive intersections with a reference point.
We now discuss brieﬂy some existing literature addressing
the problem of trafﬁc management. Ye, Wu, and Mao [8]
developed a novel method that handles large road networks by
classifying the principal arterial roads based on their priority.
The idea behind their coordination approach is to transform
the problem of coordinating trafﬁc lights into coordinating the
principle major roads and isolated intersections. The paper
dealt with only homogeneous trafﬁc demand and did not
include uncertainty in trafﬁc ﬂow.
One of the popular ideas in trafﬁc management is to
maintain green waves on arterial roads. Zhao-Meng, Xiao-
Ming, and Wen-Xiang [9] proposed the integration of trafﬁc-
actuated control and variable cycle time of green waves. This
accommodates dynamic ﬂuctuation of trafﬁc ﬂow rate in a
particular direction or phase. Green phase is calculated based
on the vehicles arriving and waiting in each intersection. They
used two types of algorithms called green early-start and
green late-start to handle different trafﬁc scenarios such as
low or high trafﬁc demand. They showed an improvement of
expansion of green wave bandwidth and reduction in length
of queue.
Recent studies show the advantage of using reinforcement
learning to solve complex optimization problems like trafﬁc
phase calculations. Some distributed constraint optimizationapproaches have also been used in the past. Pham et al. [10]
provide a comparison of these two techniques and suggest
algorithms that were tested in real-world situations.
Van der Pol and Oliehoek [11] formulate the problem as a
Markov Decision Process and use transfer learning and Max-
Plus coordination algorithm of Kok and Vlassis [12] to scale
to large road networks. Later, van der Pol [13] showed that
a new reward function in the multi-agent deep reinforcement
learning paradigm gives a considerable reduction in travel time
in comparison to their previous work. Medina and Beneko-
hal [14] model an isolated intersection as a single agent.
The coordination mechanism of the Max-Plus algorithm is
combined with reinforcement learning to take the trafﬁc signal
decision among neighbouring intersections.
Hierarchical control techniques have been used in the past
to improve and decide the trafﬁc signal timing by dividing
geographic regions into sub-regions and improving the trafﬁc
ﬂow characteristics, see for instance [15]. They divide the sub-
regions by characterizing the trafﬁc demands between intersec-
tions. Average travel time and cycle length can be optimized
using model-based algorithms and Q-Learning. Wang et al.
[15] show that the performance of algorithm works better in
medium and heavy trafﬁc ﬂow but does not work well for low
trafﬁc ﬂows.
We mentioned earlier about SCOOT and SCAT as examples
of systems already having been deployed. SCOOT is used
to optimise signal timing by adjusting three optimisation
procedures such as Offset optimiser, Cycle time optimiser and
Split optimiser based on the sensor data collected. It is shown
that it reduces an average delay by 20% against ﬁxed-time
controller [16]. SCAT [2] supports two levels of hierarchy
of trafﬁc light control system, the local and master units.
The local unit is situated at the roadside and collects detector
data and processes the trafﬁc information. The master unit is
remotely located, and controls the local units at every cycle.
It does not optimise cycle length. Instead it adjusts the signal
timing based on changes in trafﬁc ﬂow by acting as a heuristic
feedback system.
A. Preliminaries
This work uses tools from statistical model checking and
trafﬁc simulators, which we introduce brieﬂy. The interested
reader is encouraged to read the references provided.
Model checking is a veriﬁcation paradigm to algorithmically
check if a system described in a mathematically precise
formalism, say a timed automaton [17], satisﬁes a property
expressed in a precise language, say TCTL [18], [19]. Asarin
et al. [20] and Maler et al. [21] proposed ideas to synthesize
models that satisfy certain requirements, called controllers1.
The synthesized controllers would typically be in terms of
nondeterministic or stochastic choices of actions allowed at
each state in the automaton. While these controllers would
satisfy the given property, it remained to choose a controller
1This controller is different from the trafﬁc controllers that we discuss later.
The difference will be clear from the context.

--- Page 3 ---
ScenariosFixed-Time Controller Actuated Controller
Green Time
YellowCycle
LengthGreen Time
Yellow Direction Direction
N E S W N E S W
Low 25 20 25 20 45 110 30 25 30 25 45
Med 35 25 35 25 45 120 40 30 40 30 45
High 45 35 45 35 45 160 55 45 55 45 45
TABLE I
GREEN TIME FOR FIXED -TIME AND ACTUATED CONTROLLERS
that satisﬁed additional requirements like those of perfor-
mance. The UPPAAL STRATEGO tool chain implements
these. While there exist several model checking tools available
that are appropriate to different settings, we brieﬂy discuss the
UPPAAL tool suite, which we use in this paper.
UPPAAL STRATEGO: UPPAAL is a tool for model check-
ing timed automata against properties expressed in TCTL [22].
UPPAAL-SMC was added to this tool-suite David et al. [23]
for model-checking stochastic priced timed automata. How-
ever, these were restricted to checking if a property was
satisﬁed by the system or not. UPPAAL-TIGA implements
model synthesis ideas [24]–models that satisfy functional
speciﬁcations can be synthesized. Using ideas from David et
al. [25], [26], and the previously mentioned tools in the chain,
David et al. [27] reported the addition UPPAAL STRATEGO
to the suite, which (i) uses reinforcement learning to take non-
deterministic strategies as input and give out a deterministic
strategy that is optimized for some objective functions, and (ii)
uses (statistical) model checking to check other properties.
This tool chain has been used to analyze several systems
in the past. For example, it was used to learn strategies for
controlling the ﬂoor heating in a home [28], which resulted
in a signiﬁcant reduction of a “comfort penalty”, the distance
between desired and simulated temperatures.
More relevantly to this work, UPPAAL STRATEGO was
used to ﬁnd the next phase information in controlling the trafﬁc
light at a single intersection based on trafﬁc volume [3]. It was
subsequently improved to two intersections with homogeneous
trafﬁc by Thamilselvam et al. [4].
SUMO: Simulation of Urban MObility (SUMO) [29] is
an open source, microscopic road trafﬁc simulation package.
SUMO supports the modelling and measurement of various
road network parameters like trafﬁc demand, vehicle types,
emission etc. We use TRAfﬁc Control Interface (Traci) to
control SUMO simulator. Traci [30] is a Python package which
supports to interact and retrieve all objects involved in SUMO.
SUMO also supports measurement and monitoring of a
large number of trafﬁc parameters including pollutant emis-
sions of vehicles, and details of each vehicle’s journey. Addi-
tionally, it allows simulation of various detectors and detector
outputs–the lane area detector and loop detectors. Indeed, we
use area and loop detectors for collecting the arrival and
waiting vehicles list to improve the controller as shown in
Fig 1.
For our intersections, we consider four phases–each phase
allows the left, right turn and straight of corresponding lane.
We do not consider pedestrian phase in this model. Our
Fig. 1. Area and Loop Detectors at Intersection
techniques easily generalize to other polyphasic trafﬁc models.
There are two important devices that detect vehicles on the
street: a) Loop detectors, which count the number of vehicles
crossing the detector in unit time and b) Area detectors, which
detect the waiting and arriving vehicles, along its length, which
is typically 300 meters.
Using these devices, some straightforward techniques have
been proposed for trafﬁc light controllers in the past.
In this paper, we do a comparison of ﬁve types of con-
trollers, including ours:
The Fixed-Time Controller : Here, the controller has
ﬁxed cycle length and phase duration. SUMO supports
xml ﬁle (named tll.xml) for encoding the phase informa-
tion for different trafﬁc loads. We consider Phase - 1 as
N, Phase - 2 as E, Phase - 3 as S and Phase - 4 as W
as shown in Figure 1. The phase and cycle length details
for a given direction in table I.
The Actuated Controller uses the induction loops and
area detectors for detecting the vehicles. Loop detectors
are ﬁxed in the range of 70 meters to 80 meters from
the intersections in all roads. Area detectors length of 10
meters are located 1 meter away from the intersection
to detect the presence of vehicles nearby. The minimum
green green time for the phase is 8 seconds. The con-
troller works as follows in all intersections:
–The controller normally goes green in N directions
always if no vehicles present in all other directions.
–If vehicles are detected from loop and area detectors
in any directions, green phase gets extended for 4
seconds in relevant directions until it reaches its
maximum green time. The maximum green time for
all directions is in table I
–The direction which triggers the current green time to
extend will be served as next phase. If there are more
than one directions trigger,then FCFS (First Come
First Service) will be applied.

--- Page 4 ---
UPPAAL STRATEGO based Single Intersection Con-
troller (USSIC) of Eriksen et al [3] : We consider all
vehicle types are equal and split phase into 4 phases
without changing the model mentioned in their work.
Area detector are ﬁxed in all roads.
We call the controller that we design in this paper, the
coordinated intelligent controller. We discuss this in the
next section.
UnCoordinated Intelligent Controller (UCI) : Finally,
we use our model without coordination among intersec-
tions, we call it as an UnCoordinated Intelligent Con-
troller. Considering this variant allows us to see the ad-
vantage in having an additional level of area coordination.
III. O URAPPROACH
We begin by giving an informal but intuitive description
of our approach. The main insight behind our approach is as
follows. Trafﬁc light management boils down to chieﬂy to two
activities:
Setting the phase threshold for intersections and
Deciding whether or not to increase a phase at an
intersection.
Naturally, the phase threshold has to be adaptive to the
changes in the trafﬁc patterns in an area. Therefore, this
threshold is updated periodically by UPPAAL STRATEGO
using an Area Level Timed Automata Network (ALTAN), and
data from a neighborhood of intersections. We will refer to
the duration between two consecutive updates as an epoch .
For every intersection, a decision whether to continue with
the current phase or change to another phase is taken by
UPPAAL STRATEGO using the Intersection Level Timed
Automata Network (ILTAN) model and data and parameters
pertaining to that intersection. Continuation of the same phase
cannot extend beyond the phase threshold in place for the
current epoch.
We now describe the architecture of the solution, before
moving on to the algorithm itself.
1) Trafﬁc data (from area and loop detectors) is ﬁrst
acquired from SUMO through the Traci interface.
2) This data is updated in the timed game automata model.
3) UPPAAL STRATEGO synthesizes the strategy using the
updated model and query ﬁle.
4) The current phase information from synthesized strategy
is passed to Traci, which then updates the SUMO trafﬁc
light phases.
Indeed, this architecture is followed in earlier works [3], [4]
as well.
The algorithm, listed in Algorithm 1, works by invoking the
ILTAN and ALTAN. Since ILTAN is about tactical decision
making as to whether or not to extend the current phase at
an intersection, it is invoked more frequently (e.g every 10
seconds). On the other hand, ALTAN concerns a strategic
decision regarding the phase threshold for an epoch, it is
invoked less frequently. In both cases, the strategy suggested
by UPPAAL STRATEGO is conveyed to SUMO throughthe Traci interface. If only ILTAN is used, and the phase
threshold is set manually, we get the UnCoordinated Intelligent
Controller , or the UCI.
Algorithm 1: High level algorithm for the Coordi-
nated Intelligent controller
Input: Vehicle waiting count with type, queue length
and phase from SUMO
Output: Next signal phase and updated phase
threshold from UPPAAL STRATEGO
Simulation Step 0
forAll intersections do
ExtendGreen FALSE
end for
while Simulation Step <Maximum Simulation Step do
Read detector data from SUMO
ILTAN: At every 5th Simulation Step
forAll intersections do
ifExtendGreen=TRUE then
Run Extend Green Model–To ﬁnd whether to
extend the current green phase or go to yellow
phase (Figure 2)
//Updates current phase and current green time
else
Run Yellow Model (Figure 3)–To ﬁnd which
directions green phase has to be given
//Resets current green time
end if
end for
ALTAN: At randomly chosen time steps in the
simulation:
forAll Areas do
Run the Area models in Figures 5 6, 7–Coordinate
among all trafﬁc lights within the area.
//Updates phase threshold of phases in all directions
for the next epoch
end for
Simulation step ++
end while
Now, we discuss each Timed Automata Network in detail.
A. The Timed Game Automata Model
1) the ILTAN: Each intersection is modeled by two au-
tomata:
theExtend Green automaton (Fig 2): This model
is used to ﬁnd whether the current phase at the
intersection needs to be extended or changed. UP-
PAAL STRATEGO arrives at this decision through
simulating this model and reinforcement learning.
The function Initialize() updates the direction-wise
waiting vehicle count (Bus, Car, 3-Wheeler, 2-
Wheeler), queue length and all the phases in the
model while moving to the commit location shown
at the center. From that location, it has ﬁve lo-

--- Page 5 ---
cations to explore. While these choices are non-
deterministic in the timed game automaton, UP-
PAAL STRATEGO combines statistical sampling
and reinforcement learning to choose simulation
paths. When it takes greenAgain , then it will con-
tinue ﬂow of vehicles in the current phase (say
northward), provided that the current phase green
time has not exceeded the phase threshold of that
epoch. Similarly, when it takes goYellowi, for some
1i3, then it will allow ﬂows of vehicle in
phasei. The function ﬂow(.,.) takes as input two
parameters, delay–how much time the trafﬁc ﬂow
should be, and phase–which directions the trafﬁc
ﬂow should move and calculates the ﬂow of the
trafﬁc. Once it reaches End location, it outputs the
best choice of phase.
The timer variable MAX_GREEN carries the phase
threshold and is updated by ALTAN.
The Yellow automaton (Fig 3): When the green
phase in a direction is not extended, the intersection
enters the yellow phase. At this point, a green phase
has to be chosen for one among the four directions,
including the one that just relinquished the green
phase. UPPAAL STRATEGO simulates and learns
the best strategy to decide this. Whenever a direction
is chosen for green phase, the remaining directions
will not be given green for a threshold horizon.
2) The ALTAN: As mentioned earlier, the area controller
combines some “adjacent” intersections into an “area”.
Figure 4 shows four areas, for example. The Area
Controller is modeled by three automata:
The Polling automaton (Figure 5) polls all the
intersections in the same area one by one and the
next automaton (Figure 6) is invoked to run for a
duration of a time horizon H. This is repeated until
anend horizon EH is reached, at which time, the
simulation ends.
Each intersection in the area is modeled by an
instance of the automaton shown in Figure 6 and is
identiﬁed by a unique id. The function Initialize ()
initializes all the vehicles count for this intersection.
The automaton synchronizes with the automaton
given in Figure 7, which in turn provides the max-
imum green times in a direction. At the central
committed location (labelled by C in Fig 6) in the
automaton, there are six choices (locations)–four
of them (labeled by N, E, W and S respectively)
indicate in which direction the green phase has to
be activated for this intersection in the area. The ﬁfth
location is for updating the arrival list (by invoking
theupdateArrivalList (), discussed later), the end
of the current horizon and the sixth is End location.
Maximum Green Selection (Fig 7): This automaton
is used to select the maximum green time. The main
area controller calls it and updates maximum greentime of all neighbour junctions. Every run has differ-
ent maximum green time, Area main coordination
model searches the best maximum green time by
simulating several time and updates the maximum
green time of local controller.
We now explain coordination among the neighbours.
Fig. 2. Extend Green Model
Fig. 3. Yellow Model
1) Coordination of Trafﬁc Light in Area controller: We
seek to coordinate and synchronize multiple signalised inter-
sections to enhance throughput in one or more directions.
The update rules in the Area Controller Automata are
implemented in the updateArrivalList() function. This function
updates the list of vehicles arriving at a neighboring intersec-
tion, based on the current phase and the offset value to it.
We illustrate this using an example. Fig 8 shows two
neighboring intersections J1 and J2. A sample run is shown

--- Page 6 ---
Fig. 4. City with 23 Intersections
Fig. 5. The Area Polling Automaton
in II. Time progresses from left to right in intervals of 5
seconds. The second and the seventh rows specify which phase
is active at intersection J1 and J2 respectively. Rows 3–6 and
8-11 specify the number of vehicles waiting in the North, East,
West and South directions at each junctions respectively. An
increase in the number of vehicles at an intersection due to
an inﬂow from the neighbour is showed in italics, whereas
a decrease due to an outﬂow (when the green phase occurs
in a particular direction) is shown in bold. A combination of
inﬂow and outﬂow is shown in both italics and bold.
TheupdateArrivalList() function works as follows. An area
controller has three main variables: the global variable -
EndHorizon (the time at which an area controller automata
ends), the local variables Horizon for each intersection and
Current step (current time step of an intersection). An area
controller polls an intersection one by one at the Horizon time
interval in round robin method up to the Current step reaches
the EndHorizon. The updateArrivalList() is called at every
time when the intersection is switched over and it updates
the arrival list of neighbours only if the offset(time to reach
Fig. 6. Area Controller: Main Coordination Model
Fig. 7. Area Controller: Maximum Green Selection Model
neighbour junction) value crossed the Current step.
The system will be simulated several times to choose the
best combination of phase which gives the best performance,
here minimum number of waiting vehicles. The best run is
found by the reinforcement learning subroutine of UPPAAL
STRATEGO.
UPPAAL STRATEGO ﬁnds the optimum strategy for this
Area Controller, based on the trafﬁc volume of the neighbor.
Fig. 8. Two Signalised Intersection with Detector Data

--- Page 7 ---
Time 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40Sum of Waiting
Vehicles
J1 - Phase S E S W W S W W W
J1 - E 10 10 10 10 10 10 12 13 15 100
J1 - S 8 8 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 51
J1 - W 20 17 17 14 14 14 11 11 11 129
J1 - N 15 15 15 15 12 9 9 6 3 99
J2 - Phase N W N E E S S E E
J2 - E 6 3 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 12
J2 - S 30 30 30 30 27 24 24 24 21 240
J2 - W 13 13 13 13 13 13 12 10 12 112
J2 - N 15 15 12 12 12 12 12 12 12 114
Total Number of Waiting Vehicles 857
TABLE II
ONESAMPLE RUN
FeaturesUSSIC
[3]Coordinated UPPAAL
STRATEGO [4]Coordinated Intelligent
This Paper
Heterogeneous
Vehicle TypeNo No Yes
Phases 2 - Phases 2 - Phases 4 - Phases
Number of
Intersections1 2 23
Coordination No Yes Yes
Scalability No No Yes
Input Vehicle counts Vehicle countsVehicle counts,
queue length
Optimization
ParameterDelay Delay Delay, queue length
Spatial
PriorityNo No Yes
TABLE III
FEATURE COMPARISON WITH OTHER CONTROLLERS
For example, one can now ask the following query to obtain
the optimum strategy. In the interest of space, we omit the
syntax and semantics of the query language and refer the
reader to David et al. [27].
strategy Opt = minE (globalWaitingVehicles)
[NoOfNeighbors EndHorizon ] : <>
trafficLight.End.
The query seeks to minimize the expected global total
waiting time of the vehicles over all strategies within the end
horizon. Then we simulate the model to get the phase of trafﬁc
light using the strategy obtained by query.
We employ a coordinated intelligent trafﬁc light controller,
where all the local decisions of trafﬁc lights are updated into
common and shared variable. These variables can be accessed
by neighboring lights in order to arrive at an optimized
decision. Coordination among trafﬁc lights ensures smooth
trafﬁc ﬂow and reduces the delay and emission.
B. Comparison of features
We compare our model features with two different models
designed in Eriksen et al. [3] and Thamilselvam et al. [4] in
Table III.
IV. S IMULATION SETUP AND RESULT ANALYSIS
We use the SUMO simulator for real-time
microscopic trafﬁc simulation. From the OpenStreetMap
(www.openstreetmap.org) database, we downloaded the
Ahmedabad city road map. This is converted into the SUMO
network ﬁle using the NETCONVERT application. The 23Acceleration
(m/s2)Deceleration
(m/s2)Max Speed
(km/hr)Width(m) Length(m)Space
Headway (m)
Bus 0.5 3.5 50 2.45 10.1 1.0
Car 0.8 4.5 70 1.5 3.6 0.5
3-wheeler 0.6 3.6 55 1.25 2.6 0.3
2-wheeler 0.9 3.5 60 0.7 1.85 0.15
TABLE IV
VEHICLE PHYSICAL PROPERTIES
main signalized intersections in the city of Ahmedabad, are
taken into account for the experiment mentioned in Fig 4. All
the other are set to be non-signalized intersections. The trafﬁc
ﬂow values with the various origins and destinations and
different vehicle type are taken from the Operations Document
of Ahmedabad Trafﬁc Management and Information Control
Centre [31]. In all the SUMO simulations, we use seconds as
the time unit. This can be scaled. We use this information to
generate trafﬁc demand. The discrete time interval is set to be
1 second and the whole simulation period is 1200 seconds.
We measure the following parameters.
Delay: Cumulative waiting time of vehicles. If 10 vehicles are
waiting for 10 seconds, then waiting time is 100 seconds.
Queue Length: Cumulative waiting vehicle length. If one 3
meter vehicle and one 5 meter vehicle are waiting in queue
for 10 seconds then queue length is 80 meter seconds.
Throughput: Total number of vehicles crossed in all the 23
intersections per second.
CO and CO 2emission: This is the cumulative value calcu-
lated from all individual vehicles at every time step and added
together.
The source code used for simulation is
available for download at the following URL:
https://github.com/ThamilselvamB/Intelligent-Trafﬁc-Light-
Controller-using-Uppaal-Stratego.
A. Trafﬁc Demand Generation
We generate the trafﬁc demand based on Poisson distribu-
tion mentioned in the following equation.
P(kcars in an hour ) =ke
k!;
whereis the average number of vehicles per hour in the
direction (as per data from [31]). In order to generate medium
and low trafﬁc demand we multiply by 60% and 30%
respectively. For generating the corresponding SUMO route
ﬁle, we sample by repeated Bernoulli trials.
B. Vehicle Parameters and Sublane
We consider standard values for the vehicle properties
mentioned in the Table IV. We use the notion of sublanes to
make the simulation more realistic. This models the situation
where more than one vehicle in parallel can be situated in
a single lane if its width ﬁts. This also allows the vehicles
overtake other vehicles on a single lane. We simulate the
demand using the open source trafﬁc simulator SUMO. Using
this, we adjust the parameters to generate trafﬁc demand for
our scenarios.

--- Page 8 ---
ControllersDelay
(Hour)Queue Length
(Km)CO
(Kg)CO2
(Kg)Throughput
(Veh / Sec)
Fixed-Time 891.2 10.1 267.7 4576.6 7.6
Actuated 835.1 9.5 242.6 4019.6 7.2
USSIC 722.0 9.2 223.3 3840.7 8.17
UCI 623.0 9.8 192.7 3408.7 8.24
Coordinated 612.3 9.6 189.7 3356.4 8.3
TABLE V
RESULTS FOR CONSTANT HIGHTRAFFIC
ControllersDelay
(Hour)Queue
Length (Km)CO
(Kg)CO2
(Kg)Throughput
(Veh / Sec)
Fixed-Time 583.8 6.63 175.7 3054.8 6.11
Actuated 560.5 6.24 179.7 2982.2 6.1
USSIC 414.2 4.81 125.6 2288.9 7.12
UCI 358.5 5.43 113.6 1944.2 7.35
Coordinated 355.9 5.48 109.2 2034.1 7.45
TABLE VI
RESULTS FOR VARYING TRAFFIC DEMAND
C. Trafﬁc Load Scenarios
Different trafﬁc demands are generated based on origin
and destination points of Ahmedabad from [31]. We consider
three cases of load scenarios – High, Medium and Low trafﬁc
demands. High trafﬁc has 100% of trafﬁc demand mentioned
in Ahmedabad city document, Medium has 60% and Low
trafﬁc has 30% of the trafﬁc demand. We consider four types
of vehicles, passenger bus, car, 3-wheeler and 2-wheeler. The
distribution of these types are also according to the distribution
occurring in Ahmedabad city, as provided in [31].
D. Results
We report results for two scenarios. In both scenarios, un-
surprisingly, the uncoordinated and cooordinated approaches
proposed in this paper outperform traditional Fixed Time and
Actuated strategies. The ﬁrst experiment concerns the high
trafﬁc scenario for 1200 seconds. The results are shown in
Table V. The advantage of using a two level hierarchy for local
and area-wise decision making is evident on all parameters.
The waiting time for each intersection with the ﬁve different
controllers is shown in Fig 9. The scatter plot for the vehicle
trip delay is given in Fig 11. The cumulative delays for the ﬁve
different controllers at every 2 seconds are plotted in Fig 10.
Fig. 9. Delay at the intersections with ﬁve different controllers and their mean
delay.
Fig. 10. Cumulative waiting time of vehicle with time.
Fig. 11. Individual vehicle waiting time.
We see that in all the cases, there is a reduction in emissions,
waiting times and queue lengths. Since the area controllers
update local coordinated controllers’ phase threshold dynami-
cally, the decision taken by the the coordinated controller will
ensure that the trafﬁc ﬂow is smooth. Therefore, we observe
a reduction in emissions.
The second experiment is performed with a varying trafﬁc
load starting from low trafﬁc, increasing through medium to
high, and returning to low at intervals of 200 seconds. Results
for this “triangle” shaped trafﬁc load is shown in Table VI. It
can be seen that there is an improvement over and above the
UCI for the coordinated approach. This is in spite of carefully
choosing a phase threshold for the UCI approach. The increase
in the queue length in both UCI and coordinated approach can
be explained by the heterogeneity of the vehicles considered
in these two models.
V. C ONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we propose a solution for the trafﬁc man-
agement problem that scales to two levels of hierarchy. We
leave the question open whether a multi-level generalization of
our technique helps in achieving better accuracy or scalability
in terms of the sizes of cities that can be handled. Further
generalizations would incorporate pedestrian trafﬁc and driver
characteristics.

--- Page 9 ---
REFERENCES
[1] D. I. Robertson and R. D. Bretherton, “Optimizing networks of trafﬁc
signals in real time-the scoot method,” IEEE Transactions on vehicular
technology , vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 11–15, 1991.
[2] P. Lowrie, “Scats-a trafﬁc responsive method of controlling urban traf-
ﬁc,” Sales information brochure published by Roads & Trafﬁc Authority,
Sydney, Australia , 1990.
[3] A. B. Eriksen, C. Huang, J. Kildebogaard, H. Lahrmann, K. G. Larsen,
M. Muniz, and J. H. Taankvist, “Uppaal stratego for intelligent trafﬁc
lights,” in 12th ITS European Congress , 2017.
[4] B. Thamilselvam, S. Kalyanasundaram, and M. P. Rao, “Coordinated
intelligent trafﬁc lights using uppaal stratego,” in 2019 11th International
Conference on Communication Systems & Networks (COMSNETS) .
IEEE, 2019, pp. 789–794.
[5] T. Le, P. Kov ´acs, N. Walton, H. L. Vu, L. L. Andrew, and S. S.
Hoogendoorn, “Decentralized signal control for urban road networks,”
Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies , vol. 58, pp.
431 – 450, 2015, special Issue: Advanced Road Trafﬁc Control.
[6] T. Le, H. L. Vu, N. Walton, S. P. Hoogendoorn, P. Kov ´acs, and R. N.
Queija, “Utility optimization framework for a distributed trafﬁc control
of urban road networks,” Transportation Research Part B: Methodolog-
ical, vol. 105, pp. 539 – 558, 2017.
[7] P. Kov ´acs, G. Raina, and N. Walton, “Ramp and signal control: Where
motorways and urban roads meet,” in 2015 7th International Conference
on Communication Systems and Networks (COMSNETS) , 2015, pp. 1–6.
[8] B.-L. Ye, W. Wu, and W. Mao, “A method for signal coordination in
large-scale urban road networks,” Mathematical Problems in Engineer-
ing, vol. 2015, 2015.
[9] C. Zhao-Meng, L. Xiao-Ming, and W. Wen-Xiang, “Optimization
method of intersection signal coordinated control based on vehicle
actuated model,” Mathematical Problems in Engineering , vol. 2015,
2015.
[10] T. T. Pham, T. Brys, M. E. Taylor, T. Brys, M. M. Drugan, P. Bosman,
M.-D. Cock, C. Lazar, L. Demarchi, D. Steenhoff et al. , “Learning
coordinated trafﬁc light control,” in Proceedings of the Adaptive and
Learning Agents workshop (at AAMAS-13) , vol. 10. IEEE, 2013, pp.
1196–1201.
[11] E. Van der Pol and F. A. Oliehoek, “Coordinated deep reinforcement
learners for trafﬁc light control,” Proceedings of Learning, Inference and
Control of Multi-Agent Systems (at NIPS 2016) , 2016.
[12] J. R. Kok and N. Vlassis, “Using the max-plus algorithm for multiagent
decision making in coordination graphs,” in Robot Soccer World Cup .
Springer, 2005, pp. 1–12.
[13] E. van der Pol, “Deep reinforcement learning for coordination in trafﬁc
light control,” Master’s thesis, University of Amsterdam , 2016.
[14] J. C. Medina and R. F. Benekohal, “Trafﬁc signal control using reinforce-
ment learning and the max-plus algorithm as a coordinating strategy,” in
2012 15th International IEEE Conference on Intelligent Transportation
Systems . IEEE, 2012, pp. 596–601.
[15] Y . Wang, X. Yang, Y . Liu, and H. Liang, “Evaluation and application of
urban trafﬁc signal optimizing control strategy based on reinforcement
learning,” Journal of Advanced Transportation , vol. 2018, 2018.
[16] S. A. Leaﬂet, “1: The” scoot” urban trafﬁc control system,” available
at scootutc. com/documents/1 SCOOT-UTC. pdf , 1995.
[17] R. Alur and D. L. Dill, “A theory of timed automata,” Theoretical
computer science , vol. 126, no. 2, pp. 183–235, 1994.
[18] R. Alur, C. Courcoubetis, and D. Dill, “Model-checking for real-time
systems,” in [1990] Proceedings. Fifth Annual IEEE Symposium on
Logic in Computer Science . IEEE, 1990, pp. 414–425.
[19] ——, “Model-checking in dense real-time,” Information and computa-
tion, vol. 104, no. 1, pp. 2–34, 1993.
[20] E. Asarin, O. Maler, and A. Pnueli, “Symbolic controller synthesis for
discrete and timed systems,” in Hybrid Systems II , P. Antsaklis, W. Kohn,
A. Nerode, and S. Sastry, Eds. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, 1995, pp. 1–20.
[21] O. Maler, A. Pnueli, and J. Sifakis, “On the synthesis of discrete
controllers for timed systems,” in STACS 95 , E. W. Mayr and C. Puech,
Eds. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 1995, pp. 229–
242.
[22] G. Behrmann, A. David, and K. G. Larsen, “A tutorial on uppaal,” in
Formal methods for the design of real-time systems . Springer, 2004,
pp. 200–236.[23] A. David, K. G. Larsen, A. Legay, M. Miku ˇcionis, and D. B. Poulsen,
“Uppaal smc tutorial,” International Journal on Software Tools for
Technology Transfer , vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 397–415, 2015.
[24] G. Behrmann, A. Cougnard, A. David, E. Fleury, K. G. Larsen, and
D. Lime, “Uppaal tiga user-manual,” Aalborg University , 2007.
[25] A. David, H. Fang, K. G. Larsen, and Z. Zhang, “Veriﬁcation and perfor-
mance evaluation of timed game strategies,” in International Conference
on Formal Modeling and Analysis of Timed Systems . Springer, 2014,
pp. 100–114.
[26] A. David, P. G. Jensen, K. G. Larsen, A. Legay, D. Lime, M. G.
Sørensen, and J. H. Taankvist, “On time with minimal expected cost!”
inInternational Symposium on Automated Technology for Veriﬁcation
and Analysis . Springer, 2014, pp. 129–145.
[27] A. David, P. G. Jensen, K. G. Larsen, M. Miku ˇcionis, and J. H.
Taankvist, “Uppaal stratego,” in International Conference on Tools and
Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis of Systems . Springer,
2015, pp. 206–211.
[28] K. G. Larsen, M. Miku ˇcionis, M. Muniz, J. Srba, and J. H. Taankvist,
“Online and compositional learning of controllers with application to
ﬂoor heating,” in International Conference on Tools and Algorithms for
the Construction and Analysis of Systems . Springer, 2016, pp. 244–259.
[29] P. A. Lopez, M. Behrisch, L. Bieker-Walz, J. Erdmann, Y .-P. Fl ¨otter ¨od,
R. Hilbrich, L. L ¨ucken, J. Rummel, P. Wagner, and E. Wießner, “Micro-
scopic trafﬁc simulation using sumo,” in The 21st IEEE International
Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems . IEEE, November
2018.
[30] A. Wegener, M. Pi ´orkowski, M. Raya, H. Hellbr ¨uck, S. Fischer, and
J.-P. Hubaux, “Traci: An interface for coupling road trafﬁc and network
simulators,” in Proceedings of the 11th Communications and Networking
Simulation Symposium , ser. CNS ’08. New York, NY , USA: Association
for Computing Machinery, 2008, p. 155–163.
[31] “Ahmedabad Trafﬁc Management and Information Control Centre
operation document, ahmedabad tmicc,” https://smartnet.niua.org/sites/
default/ﬁles/resources/ahmedabad tmicc.pdf, accessed: 2020-04-21.
