--- Page 1 ---
Complementary Veriﬁcation of Embedded Software
using ASD and Uppaal
Richard Doornbos
Embedded Systems Institute
Eindhoven
The NetherlandsJozef Hooman
Embedded Systems Institute
Radboud University Nijmegen
The NetherlandsBernard van Vlimmeren
FEI Company
Eindhoven
The Netherlands
Abstract —To increase the conﬁdence in the correctness of
software components, we investigated the use of two comple-
mentary formal methods in industrial software development. We
combine a commercial reﬁnement checker, the ASD:Suite of the
company Verum, with the academic veriﬁcation tool Uppaal to
encompass a larger range of veriﬁcation possibilities. Wheras the
ASD:Suite is based on the compositional veriﬁcation of a single
component with respect to its interface, Uppaal concentrates on
the global veriﬁcation of a closed system. Another difference is
that ASD:Suite includes code generation from formal models,
whereas Uppaal allows model simulation. The combination of
the two tools has been applied in industry on a case study of a
camera protection system.
I. I NTRODUCTION
We show how a combination of complementary formal
methods can be used to increase the conﬁdence in embedded
software. The approach emerged from the usage of a formal
approach in industry - namely at FEI Company - and experi-
ments with additional tooling.
A long standing industrial problem in the ﬁeld of embedded
systems concerns the correctness of the embedded software.
How can we increase conﬁdence in our software designs, and
how can we detect errors early? This is extremely advanta-
geous as it prevents long test and integration times, and by
that limits cost.
An approach to this problem is the use of formal methods.
At FEI Company the Analytical Software Design (ASD)
approach of the company Verum is used to develop control
software. ASD [1], [2] is based on a formalization of the
Cleanroom [3], [4] in CSP [5]. Verum’s commercial tool
ASD:Suite hides the formal CSP details for the user. It
provides a tabular notation to specify state machines which
are used to deﬁne interface models as well as design models.
For industrial users, the most important reason for using ASD
is that code can be generated from veriﬁed design models,
shifting most of the effort from plain coding to the modeling
level.
The ASD:Suite uses the FDR2 reﬁnement checker [6] to
verify that a design model conforms to a speciﬁcation model.
Scalability is obtained by restricting the modeling and veriﬁ-
cation to data-independent control decisions and the use of a
compositional approach [7]. This means that the veriﬁcation of
a component is based only on the interfaces of the componentsit uses. These used components can be developed and veriﬁed
separately according to their interfaces.
To obtain a user-friendly scalable tool, the ASD approach
only checks a ﬁxed set of properties. This approach certainly
helps to detect errors early. Inspired by this success and the
needs expressed by industrial users for extended veriﬁcation
capabilities, we experimented with additional support using the
Uppaal tool to check other properties and increase the range
of faults that can be detected early.
The Uppaal tool was chosen because of its nice and un-
derstandable user interface and simulation possibilities, which
appeared to be attractive for industrial users. Another reason
is that the tool was already known to some of the industrial
users from post-graduate courses.
Uppaal is an integrated environment for modeling, vali-
dation and veriﬁcation of systems modeled as networks of
automata. The tool uses timed automata with synchronous
communication along channels, extended with data types
(bounded integers, arrays, etc.). For a thorough treatment of
Uppaal see [8], [9].
We observed that ASD and Uppaal are complementary in
many respects. The main differences are listed in Table I.
TABLE I
COMPARISON OF ASD AND UPPAAL
ASD Uppaal
tabular representation of visual representation of
state machines timed automata
reﬁnement check property check
- standard properties - user deﬁned properties
- limited checks - expressive speciﬁcation language
- focus on traces - focus on sequences of states
speciﬁc execution model generic system modelling
code generation no code generation
no simulation simulation
single component multiple components
compositional, scalable requires closed model
- lower risk of - larger risk of
state space explosion state space explosion
no timing timing
Most relevant for the study described here is the comple-
mentary nature of the veriﬁcation approaches of both methods.2012 International Conference on Innovations in Information Technology (IIT)
978-1-4673-1101-4/12/$31.00 ©2012 IEEE

--- Page 2 ---
ASD performs reﬁnement checks with respect to the interface,
in contrast to user-deﬁned properties by Uppaal. We want
to investigate how to exploit both veriﬁcation capabilities by
combining them such that we get more conﬁdence that the
generated code actually delivers the intended system proper-
ties.
As far as we know, the coupling of the industrial software
tool ASD and a formal property veriﬁcation tool such as Up-
paal is new. Uppaal has been combined with other techniques,
such as a tool for modeling and performance simulation [10].
Related to our combination is work on a translation from
FDR2 models to Uppaal [11]; whereas that work concentrates
more on the semantics of the translation, our main interest is
to investigate industrial applicability.
This paper is structured as follows. Section II introduces
the case study. The ASD approach is presented in Section III.
Section IV describes the translation to Uppaal. The Uppaal
veriﬁcation techniques are applied to the case study in Sec-
tion V. Finally, Section VI contains concluding remarks.
II. C ASE STUDY
The ASD approach is used in a pilot project at FEI
Company, a company building electron microscopes, for a
camera safety system. This system under development should
guarantee that a particular expensive and very sensitive camera
is protected against a too high dose of electrons, at all times.
An important part of this system is the software that keeps
track of the location of the camera, the blocking of the electron
beam by other components and the intensity of the electron
beam.
In the case study described here, we selected a crucial part
of the large set of ASD models that are used to specify and
design the software for the camera protection. The selected
models are shown in Figure 1, expressed in UML. The clients
of the dose protection system are allowed to call the methods
described in the interface IDoseProtector. The design model
DDoseProtector implements this interface, using the interfaces
of two other components, IBlankerShutter and ISafetyList. The
SafetyList component calculates whether the intensity of the
beam is safe for the camera. If not, the BlankerShutter is asked
to block the beam, which is called ”blanking”.
Fig. 1. Component diagram of the Dose ProtectorIII. ASD M ODELS
We illustrate the ASD approach by the case study described
in the previous section. Interface models are described in
Section III-A and design models in III-B. Formal veriﬁcation
is addressed in Section III-C. Because of space limitations we
only describe the ASD features used in the current case study
and refer to [12] and the User Manuals available on [13] for
additional explanation and more details on other aspects such
as asynchronous callbacks and the use of variables.
A. Interface models of ASD
In ASD, an interface is not just a set of function calls, but
it also includes a state machine which speciﬁes the allowed
traces of calls and responses. It represents a protocol between
client and server, similar to the use of protocol state machines
of UML [14].
The interface model of the dose protector is shown in
Figure 2. It represents a state machine with three states:
Created, Off, and On. The model contains two groups of
function calls: sub interface Lifecycle with calls Initialize
and Terminate, and sub interface Test with calls Activate and
Deactivate. The ”+” behind the name indicates that they are
valued, i.e., they return a value upon completion.
Fig. 2. Interface model IDoseProtector
The model must be complete, in the sense that in each state
the response to all calls has to be deﬁned. In this model the
actions deﬁne the return value and the next state is deﬁned.
Observe that the state machine is non-deterministic; in state
On there are two possible return values for the calls Terminate
and Deactivate. Finally note that rules 2, 8 and 19 are not
shown; they are used for invariants which are not discussed in
this paper.
Similarly, the used interfaces are deﬁned. Figure 3 shows
the interface of the BlankerShutter component. Observe that
on lines 9 and 22 the response ”Illegal” is used which means

--- Page 3 ---
that the client should not call the corresponding function in
the current state.
Fig. 3. Interface model IBlankerShutter
B. Design models of ASD
Design models of ASD are similar to interface models
with a few differences. Design models must be deterministic
and they have a number of associated interface models: an
implemented interface model and a number of used interface
models. Figure 1 shows that the design model of the dose
protector should implement the IDoseProtector interface model
of Figure 2 and uses the IBlankerShutter model of Figure 3 and
the interface model of the SafetyList component (not shown
here).
Figure 4 shows a part of the design model of the dose
protector. Partly, it equals the interface model of Figure 2.
A difference can be observed on line 18 of Figure 4 where
function CheckChanges of a sub state machine called Han-
dleChanges is called. This sub state machine, depicted in
Figure 5, is accessible by means of the ”viaHandleChanges”
interface. After calling CheckChanges, the top-level state
machine enters state Activating. In this state the response to
all possible exit events of the sub state machine is deﬁned.
The HandleChanges sub state machine calls the used com-
ponents. For instance, if it receives the CheckChanges event
(line 11 of Figure 5) it calls CheckDose of the SafetyList com-
ponent and waits for the return value in the CheckDose state.
Based on this return value and the value of the ”IsBlanked”
variable, the BlankerShutter component might be used. E.g.,
line 45 performs a call to block the beam if exposure is unsafe
and blanking is not already on.
The ASD:Suite allows code generation from design models
for a number of programming languages (C, C++, C#, Java),
which is the key feature for industrial users.
C. ASD Veriﬁcation
The ASD:Suite contains a ﬁxed number of veriﬁcation
conditions that can be checked automatically. Figure 6 shows a
screenshot of the successful veriﬁcation of the dose protector.
Fig. 4. Part of Design Model DDoseProtector
Fig. 5. Sub state machine Handle Changes
The pre-deﬁned conditions include checks on the absence
of livelock and deadlock in all interface models and design
models. Most important is the Interface Compliance check on
the design model which veriﬁes that the design model con-
forms to the interface model. Conformance has been deﬁned
formally in the failures-divergence model of CSP [15] and is
checked with the underlying FDR 2 model checker [6]. This
check also veriﬁes that no illegal calls are performed on the
used interfaces.
When a property is not satisﬁed, ASD:Suite shows an
error trace in the form of a nice graphical representation of
a sequence diagram which illustrates the problem. This is
convenient for fast debugging and error correction.
IV. T RANSLATING ASD M ODELS TO UPPAAL
To extend the veriﬁcation described in Section III-C, we
translate the ASD models to Uppaal. The translation of ASD
used interface models and design models is described in
Sections IV-A and IV-B, respectively. We concentrate on the
ASD constructs needed for our case study and show the
application to this case study. In Section IV-C we explain
how a closed system is obtained which is needed for Uppaal

--- Page 4 ---
Fig. 6. ASD Veriﬁcation of the Dose Protector
veriﬁcation.
Currently, the translation has been done by hand, but in
view of possible automation later, the aim is to follow a simple
standard procedure as much as possible. Hence we translate
an ASD model line-by-line. Figure 7 shows a template of a
line in an ASD model.
Fig. 7. Template of line in ASD model
A function call ”E” is translated to a communication over
synchronous channel E in Uppaal. The caller will perform a
send command, written E! in Uppaal, and the callee a receive
command E?. Communication only takes place if both sender
and receiver are ready to execute the matching commands.
Similarly, reply ”R” is also represented by a synchronous
communication in Uppaal.
Calls where the Action ﬁeld contains ”Illegal” are not
translated. In this way, any illegal call will lead to a deadlock
which will be detected by the Uppaal veriﬁer.
ASD states are translated to Uppaal locations. The transla-
tion of guards and actions is straightforward. For brevity, sub
interface ”I” is only used to avoid confusion between events
with the same name.
A. Translation of used interface models
For a used interface, the ASD line of Figure 7 is translated
into the Uppaal fragment of Figure 8. Since two synchronous
communications (for the function call and the reply) are not
allowed on a single transition in Uppaal, two transitions areused with a so-called ”committed” location in between to
ensure that the two transitions are executed as an atomic step.
Fig. 8. Uppaal translation of ASD rule for used interface
Applying this translation to the ASD model of the Blanker-
Shutter interface of Figure 3 we obtain the Uppaal model of
Figure 9.
Fig. 9. Uppaal model of BlankerShutter interface
B. Translation of design models
A similar translation is applied to ASD design models. In
such models the Event ”E” might additionally be a return
value that is received from a used component. Moreover, the
Action part might contain calls to used components or sub
state machines. All these events and actions are translated to a
communication over a synchronous channel. As an illustrative
case, we show in Figure 10 a part of the Uppaal model
resulting from the translation of the design model for the
DoseProtector of Figure 4. Note that in location ”Off” the
receipt of an Activate message leads to a CheckChanges
message which triggers sub state machine HandleChanges.
Sub state machine HandleChanges (Figure 5) is modelled as
a separate parallel automaton in Uppaal. Part of this Uppaal
model is shown in Figure 11. Observe that after receiving
trigger CheckChanges in location Initial from the automaton
of Figure 10, it calls CheckDoseCommand of the SafetyList
(this automaton is shown later in Figure 13) and depending
on the received return value and boolean ”isBlanked” it might
call SetForcedBlankOff of the BlankerShutter.
C. Adding client model to obtain closed system
Simulation and veriﬁcation in Uppaal requires a closed set
of models which includes the environment of the component(s)

--- Page 5 ---
Fig. 10. Part of Dose Protector in Uppaal
Fig. 11. Part of HandleChanges in Uppaal
under study. In our case, we can easily obtain a closed system
using the implemented interface of an ASD design model. We
translate this model into an Uppaal model of a client of the
component. This is similar to the translation of used interface
models, however the direction of sending and receiving is
mirrored. Hence, the template of Figure 7 is translated to
Figure 12.
Fig. 12. Uppaal translation of implemented interface
V. V ERIFICATION OF THE CASE STUDY
The result of the translation described in the previous
section is a complete Uppaal model that can be simulated andveriﬁed. Since the code is generated from ASD models, the
Uppaal model is a truthful representation of the software.
The possibilities to simulate the Uppaal models are greatly
appreciated in our industrial context and provide additional
insight in the collaboration of the ASD models, since the
ASD:Suite does not provide simulation.
Uppaal allows the veriﬁcation of user-deﬁned properties
which have to be expressed in a version of temporal logic.
Both safety properties (nothing bad happens) and liveness
properties (eventually something good happens) can be ex-
pressed. In general, we concentrate on properties that have
not yet been veriﬁed by the standard checks of ASD:Suite. In
this paper, we illustrate the approach by means of a few safety
properties.
The properties to be veriﬁed have been deﬁned in coop-
eration with the software architect, supervising the creators
of the system design, and the system architect. From these
veriﬁcation efforts two major issues were found. These issues
could not be found in the ASD approach since it does not allow
this type of veriﬁcation. We show two veriﬁcation expressions
that illustrate how one of these issues was found.
A. Example veriﬁcation using temporal logic
As a ﬁrst step we extended the Uppaal automaton of the
SafetyList component with a variable ”safe” which records the
result of the safety computations, as depicted in Figure 13.
Fig. 13. Extended Uppaal model of SafetyList
First we expressed the property “when the dose protector
design is in a safe state (state SafeExposure) this should always
imply that the beam intensity is safe” as follows:
A[] DoseProtector.SafeExposure imply (safe==1)
The Uppaal veriﬁer shows that this property holds.
Next we checked the property “when the dose protector
interface is in a safe state this should always imply that the
intensity is safe and the BlankerShutter should not be in an
error state”. This is expressed as:
A[] DoseProtector.SafeExposure imply
(safe==1 and !BlankerShutter.Error)
This property does not hold, as shown by a trace of 20 steps.
This failure was not expected by the designers. We used the
diagnostic trace and the simulation capability of Uppaal to get
insight into the detected problem, which led to the conclusion
that this issue can be solved straightforwardly.

--- Page 6 ---
B. Veriﬁcation by means of observers
Disadvantage of above approach is that the temporal logic
expressions are not easy to read and construct by industrial
users. Moreover, it is annoying that some information had to
be added to record the occurrence of certain transitions.
As an alternative, we experimented with the use of ob-
servers, similar to [16]. An observer is an additional parallel
automaton which observes the communication between the
other automata and enters a location named Error when an
incorrect trace is observed. Figure 14 shows an example.
Fig. 14. Observer to detect bad traces
To be able to observe the relevant channels, they are
declared as broadcast channels in Uppaal. Figure 14 expresses
that after a Failed command of the BlankerShutter there should
not be an Unblanked event. The veriﬁcation reduces now to
the veriﬁcation of the very simple expression:
A[] not Observer.Error
Comparing both methods of veriﬁcation, we agree with [16]
that the observer method is easier to understand and very
convenient in an industrial setting.
VI. C ONCLUDING REMARKS
We are convinced by the positive results of our pilot project
that the combination of the proposed complementary tools
provides a promising and valuable new direction for industrial
software development.
On beforehand, we expected that a large effort would be
needed to obtain some industrially relevant results, but we
were able to select a small, essential set of components fairly
quickly. Next, it took a non-expert in ASD and Uppaal only
a few days to get the ﬁrst signiﬁcant results.
Since our ﬁrst concern was to get quick feedback about the
usefulness of the combined techniques, the translation from
ASD models to Uppaal has been constructed manually. Given
the promising results, future work will include automated
support for such a translation. When needed, also aspects of
ASD that have not been covered yet (such as asynchronous
callbacks) will be included. Moreover, it will be investigated
whether the timing aspects of Uppaal provide additional value
in our context. An important aspect of future applications
is scalability; when applying the approach to a larger set of
components, there is a danger that the Uppaal model cannot
be checked anymore. To avoid this, we expect to use the
compositional structure of the ASD models; main difﬁculty
would then be to split an end-to-end property in a sequence
of properties for the individual components.
The acceptance in industry of this combination of tools
depends strongly on the way it is integrated, the consequences
for the software development process, and the interest by theengineers. We think substantial support should be given in
the form of automated translation between ASD and Uppaal,
systematic methods to generate veriﬁcation expressions or
(preferably) observers, and expert support during the introduc-
tion phase. It is our expectation that designing and reasoning
at a higher abstraction level than code, will help to improve
conﬁdence and speed in creating software systems.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work has been carried out as a part of the Condor
project at FEI Company under the responsibilities of the
Embedded Systems Institute (ESI). This project is partially
supported by the Dutch Ministry of Economic Affairs under
the BSIK program. The second author was supported by the
Dutch national program COMMIT.
REFERENCES
[1] G. Broadfoot and P. Broadfoot, “Academia and industry meet: Some
experiences of formal methods in practice,” in APSEC ’03: Proceedings
of the Tenth Asia-Paciﬁc Software Engineering Conference Software
Engineering Conference . IEEE Computer Society, 2003, pp. 49–58.
[2] P. Hopcroft and G. Broadfoot, “Combining the box structure develop-
ment method and CSP for software development,” Electronic Notes in
Theoretical Computer Science , vol. 128, no. 6, pp. 127–144, 2005.
[3] H. Mills, M. Dyer, and R. Linger, “Cleanroom software engineering,”
IEEE Software , vol. 4, no. 5, pp. 19–25, 1987.
[4] S. Prowell, C. Trammell, R. Linger, and J. Poore, Cleanroom Software
Engineering - Technology and Process . Addison-Wesley, 1998.
[5] C. Hoare, Communicating Sequential Processes . Prentice-Hall, 1985.
[6]FDR2 model checker , Formal Systems (Europe) Ltd, 2011, http://www.
fsel.com/.
[7] J. Hooman, Speciﬁcation and Compositional Veriﬁcation of Real-Time
Systems , ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer, 1991, vol.
558.
[8]Uppaal , UP4ALL, Uppsala, 2011, http://www.uppaal.com/.
[9] G. Behrmann, A. David, and K. Larsen, “A tutorial on Uppaal,” in
Formal Methods for the Design of Real-Time Systems , ser. Lecture Notes
in Computer Science. Springer, 2004, vol. 3185, pp. 33–35.
[10] J. S. Xing, B. D. Theelen, R. Langerak, J. C. van de Pol, G. J. Tretmans,
and J. P. M. V oeten, “From POOSL to UPPAAL: Transformation and
quantitative analysis,” in Application of Concurrency to System Design,
Tenth International Conference on . IEEE Computer Society, 2010, pp.
47–56.
[11] J. Hoenicke and E.-R. Olderog, “Combining speciﬁcation techniques for
processes, data and time,” in Integrated Formal Methods , ser. Lecture
Notes in Computer Science. Springer, 2002, vol. 2335, pp. 245–266.
[12] J. Hooman, R. Huis in ’t Veld, and M. Schuts, “Experiences with a
compositional model checker in the healthcare domain,” in Foundations
of Health Information Engineering and Systems (FHIES 2011) , ser.
Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer, 2012, to be published.
[13] ASD:Suite , Verum, 2011, http://www.verum.com/.
[14] G. Booch, J. Rumbaugh, and I. Jacobson, The uniﬁed modeling language
user guide - the ultimate tutorial to the UML from the original
designers , ser. Addison-Wesley object technology series. Addison-
Wesley-Longman, 1999.
[15] A. Roscoe, The theory and practice of concurrency . Prentice Hall,
1998.
[16] M. Bozga, S. Graf, I. Ober, I. Ober, and J. Sifakis, “The IF toolset,”
inFormal Methods for the Design of Real-Time Systems , ser. Lecture
Notes in Computer Science. Springer, 2004, vol. 3185, pp. 131–132.
