--- Page 1 ---
electronics
Article
Analysis of ATO System Operation Scenarios Based on
UPPAAL and the Operational Design Domain
Zicong Meng1
, Tao Tang2, Guodong Wei1,* and Lei Yuan2
/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045 /gid00001
/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046
Citation: Meng, Z.; Tang, T.; Wei, G.;
Yuan, L. Analysis of ATO System
Operation Scenarios Based on
UPPAAL and the Operational Design
Domain. Electronics 2021 ,10, 503.
http://doi.org/10.3390/
electronics10040503
Academic Editor: Davide Astolﬁ
Received: 25 January 2021
Accepted: 18 February 2021
Published: 21 February 2021
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).1School of Electronic and Information Engineering, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing 100044, China;
m15212796324@163.com
2The State Key Laboratory of Rail Trafﬁc Control and Safety, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing 100044, China;
ttang@bjtu.edu.cn (T.T.); lyuan@bjtu.edu.cn (L.Y.)
*Correspondence: gdwei@bjtu.edu.cn; Tel.:+86-1761-060-9306
Abstract: With the gradual maturity of the automatic train operation (ATO) system in subways,
its application scope has also expanded to the high-speed railway ﬁeld. Considering that the
ATO system is still in the early stages of operation, it will take time to fully mature, and deﬁnite
speciﬁcations of the requirements for system operation have not yet been formed. This paper presents
the operational design domain (ODD) of the high-speed railway ATO system and proposes a scenario
analysis method based on the operational design domain to obtain the input conditions of the
system requirements. The article models and veriﬁes the scenario of the linkage control of the door
and platform door based on the UPPAAL tools and extracts the input and expected output of the
system requirements of the vehicle ATO system. Combined with the input conditions of the system
requirements, the system requirements of the vehicle ATO in this scenario are ﬁnally obtained, which
provides a reference for future functional speciﬁcation generation and test case generation.
Keywords: operation design domain; ATO; UPPAAL; timed automata
1. Introduction
At the end of 2019, the Beijing-Zhangjiakou Railway equipped with Chinese self-
developed high-speed rail automatic driving system opened, marking the arrival of the
era of intelligent high-speed rail. As the demand for intelligent automation in high-speed
railways continues to increase, ATO systems will play an increasingly important role in
train operation control. ATO system research is becoming more and more important due to
the signiﬁcance of high-speed railways, and related system tests are urgently needed.
The current research on the realization of the ATO function mainly focuses on the
ATO control algorithm. Liu et al. [ 1] designed an energy-saving algorithm for the ATO
system based on the tabu search algorithm. Wang et al. [ 2] proposed a fast optimiza-
tion method that considers both braking accuracy and driving comfort during the oper-
ation of the ATO system. Yang et al. [ 3] designed a hybrid model prediction framework
based on model predictive control, which achieved precise control under strict constraints.
Kong et al. [ 4] proposed a non-singular fast terminal sliding mode control strategy based
on self-organizing radial basis function neural network approximation to achieve safe and
reliable train operation. Cao et al. [ 5] discussed the application of fuzzy predictive control
to the ATO system and compared it with the traditional control technology. In the current
ATO system research, the research on the ATO control algorithm is to ﬁnd the optimal train
control scheme and the key elements that affect train operation. In addition to the detailed
and in-depth design of the system itself, a mature system needs to have detailed tests on
the operation of the system to ensure the safety of the system.
Scenario-based analysis is an important method in ATO system research. Yan et al. [ 6]
used STPA to conduct human error and management-related security risk analysis of the
Electronics 2021 ,10, 503. https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics10040503 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/electronics

--- Page 2 ---
Electronics 2021 ,10, 503 2 of 18
operating scenarios for the ATO system. Zhang et al. [ 7] took a typical temporary speed-
limit server switching scheme as an example, constructed its symbolic veriﬁcation program
model, and generated related test cases through mutation testing. One of the key points
of system testing is to systematically ﬁnd all possible situations for train operation and
design test cases for these situations. In order to fully obtain these scenarios, it is necessary
to combine the research of the control strategy of the high-speed railway ATO system to
explore the environment that the system needs to deal with and the design indicators of
the system. That means that before designing system test cases, various requirements of
the system, such as functional requirements, non-functional requirements, and system
requirements, need to be extracted.
Some scholars have carried out relevant research on the extraction of system require-
ments. John et al. [ 8] described and analyzed the requirement development process in a
scenario-based design through case studies. They used classroom scenarios to evaluate
and design the requirements. Bindschadler et al. [ 9] described a requirement development
method that is ﬂexible enough to serve various environments and constraints through
NASA’s project management process. Daniel et al. [ 10] proposed a method to describe
requirements formally by replacing natural language with state transition diagrams. A
control experiment was carried out using this method to verify its role in disambigua-
tion. Yang et al. [ 11] proposed a method to extract software requirements from existing
knowledge sources through natural language processing and evaluated the extracted early
requirements in terms of seismology, building products, and computational ﬂuid dynamics.
Michel et al. [ 12] proposed a SysML-based requirements engineering method based on
model-driven requirements and use case diagrams. Modeling user requirements graph-
ically and clearly maps the relationship between requirements and use case diagrams
and achieves system decomposition in early system development activities. Reggio [ 13]
introduced the extraction method of IoT system requirements, using UML and extended
domain models to generate functional requirement speciﬁcations.
Currently, most research on ATO is focused on how to realize the automatic driving
function of the ATO system. The test of the ATO system mainly revolves around the
construction of test cases, but before generating executable test cases, ATO needs to be
more speciﬁc to determine the system operation boundary and form the research of the
system requirements. With the continuous improvement of the high-speed railway ATO
system, related testing work has become more and more important; however, there are still
relatively few studies in the ﬁeld of ATO system testing, and mature system requirements
and functional requirements have not yet been formed. The research of this paper is to
construct the operational design domain of the high-speed railway ATO system by referring
to the operational design domain in the ﬁeld of autonomous vehicles, thereby proposing a
method of extracting system requirements from the speciﬁc operation scenarios of the high-
speed railway ATO system. The extracted system requirements will prepare the generation
of high-speed railway ATO system test cases and system functional speciﬁcations. The
research structure of this paper is shown in Figure 1.
Specification 
and related 
design of 
ATO system
Operational 
design 
domain of 
ATO systemDescription of 
the operating 
scenario
Scenarios 
model
Conditions for 
function 
realizationInput of ATO 
systemExpected 
output of 
ATO system
Test cases 
required for 
testingFunctional 
requirements 
of ATO 
systemResearch content of the article
Figure 1. Diagram of the research content of the article.

--- Page 3 ---
Electronics 2021 ,10, 503 3 of 18
2. Operational Design Domain of the High-Speed Railway ATO System
2.1. Introduction to the Operational Design Domain
SAE (Society of Automotive Engineers) deﬁnes the ODD as “The speciﬁc conditions
under which a given driving automation system or feature thereof is designed to function,
including, but not limited to, driving modes”. The operational design domain is a set
of normal working conditions deﬁned at the design level of the train automatic driving
system. Further, the ODD represents the conditions that support the normal operation of
the automatic driving system and the constraints that determine the normal operation of
the system. In general, the ODD is useful for the following tasks [14].
1. Design process: Deﬁning the ODD helps identify what scenarios the automated
driving system must handle. System-wide and system requirements can then be
deﬁned alongside the ODD.
2. Testing and veriﬁcation: The ODD can be sampled to generate test cases with varying
levels of detail for unit testing or integration testing via simulation.
3. Online monitoring: The ODD can be instantiated as a runtime object to be mea-
sured and validated during operation. This is also known as functional boundary
monitoring [15].
Thorn E. et al. [ 16] gave a classiﬁcation framework for ODD construction. This ODD
classiﬁcation adopts the form of a hierarchical structure of categories and subcategories.
Each category has a deﬁnition and a level where it is appropriate. This classiﬁcation is
descriptive, not normative, because it is foreseeable that these elements can be organized
into several different groups. The taxonomy provides a structured method to organize
and identify various ODDs for automated driving system functions. The Figure 2 shows
the ODD classiﬁcation framework with top-level categories and direct sub-categories
constructed in the text.
ODDRoad
InfrastructureRoad TypePavement 
MaterialsRoad WidthGeometric 
Characteristics
Operational 
ConstraintsSpeed LimitTraffic
Conditions
ObjectsSignageRoad
Users
Communication Other  
Vehicles Traffic Management 
System Fleet Management
System   Sensors 
Environmental
ConditionsWeather Ilumination
Operation 
Zones Management 
ZonesRestricted 
ZonesAdministrative 
ZonesInterference 
ZonesTraffic LightVehicle 
Restrictions
Visibility Road FrictionObstacle sTraffic Rules
Figure 2. The ODD classiﬁcation framework with top-Level categories and immediate subcategories.
After referring to the contents of the vehicle and system design in the literature [ 17–22],
combined with the concept of the operational design domain of auto-driving technology
in the literature [ 16], this paper extracts the operational design domain of the high-speed
railway ATO system.

--- Page 4 ---
Electronics 2021 ,10, 503 4 of 18
2.2. System Operation Characteristics
1. The terrain of China is complicated, and ramps, bends, and tunnels were built ac-
cording to the terrain during the construction of the running track. For high-speed
railways, generally, the maximum gradient is not allowed to be greater than 20 ‰,
and the difﬁcult areas are no greater than 30 ‰. Steel track-carrying trains are used to
run mainly ballastless tracks, and the standard gauge is usually 1435 mm.
2. Through the construction of various facilities, many stations have been established
along the railway for passengers to get on and off. Some stations are equipped with
platform screen doors. At the same time, turnouts are set to guide trains into different
platform lanes.
3. The operation of the system has its normal temperature, humidity, wind speed, and
other environmental requirements. In extreme weather such as strong winds, severe
rain, and snow, the operation of the system will be restricted.
4. System operation has a boundary: the maximum speed is limited to 350 km/h; the
speed in the ceiling speed zone is no less than 80 km/h; and the track the train enters
at the station is restricted by the operation plan. The system’s information interaction
has a maximum response time. The response time is regarded as a communication
timeout. The constraints in operation are also the basis for judging the normal
operation of the system.
5. The high-speed railway ATO system is based on the CTCS-2/CTCS-3 level train
control system. The train is equipped with an ATO unit to realize automatic driving
control, and a dedicated precision positioning transponder is installed on the ground
to achieve special positioning. The ground equipment communicates via GPRS
(General Packet Radio Service) to realize platform door control, data transmission
between stations, and train operation adjustment plan (referred to as the operation
plan) processing.
2.3. Structure and Interface of the High-Speed Railway ATO System
The high-speed rail ATO system is based on the CTCS-2/CTCS-3 level train control
system, with ATO equipment, GPRS radio, and other related equipment added to the train;
the ground equipment is in the temporary speed restriction server (TSRS), centralized
trafﬁc control (CTC), train control center (TCC), and other equipment. The function is
added to the upper part; the precise positioning transponder is added to the station stock
road. The high-speed rail ATO system mainly includes ﬁve items: automatic departure
from the station, automatic operation of the section, automatic stop at the station, automatic
door opening, and linkage control of the door and platform door. The high-speed rail
ATO system train equipment includes the newly added ATO and train, the ATO and
automatic train protection system (ATP) interface, the ATP and train interface, the ground
equipment added to TCC and platform door system interface, the modiﬁed TSRS and TCC,
the TSRS and CTC interface, the ATO train equipment, and the ground TSRS equipment
with the newly added GSM-R/GPRS interface. The high-speed rail ATO system interface
diagram is shown in Figure 3. The classiﬁcation of the existing operational design domains
according to requirement speciﬁcations and overall technical speciﬁcations is an important
part of constructing operational design domains. Accurate classiﬁcation is related to the
organization of the operational design domain and the completeness of the ﬁnal result, so
it is the basis for in-depth research.

--- Page 5 ---
Electronics 2021 ,10, 503 5 of 18
GSM-R/GPRS GSM-R/CSDOnboard 
equipmentTraction BrakingDoors of 
train
ATP ATO
MT MT MT
RBC
CBI
Platform 
doorTCC TSRS
CTCGround equipment
Mobile
Exchange 
CenterTRAU
BSC OTEBSC /PCUGSM-R GSM-R/GPRS
SGSN
GGSNTrain
Permission Of open door  
Operation plan
Data of inter-
station 
Operation planPlatform door control 
information
Platform door control 
information
Figure 3. The interface schematic diagram of the ATO system. MT, Mobile Terminal; CBI, Computer
Based Interlocking; OTE, Optical Transmission Equipment; TRAU, Transcoder and Rate Adaptor
Unit; BSC, Base Station Controller; PCU, Process Control Unit; SGSN, Serving GPRS Support Node;
GGSN, Gateway GPRS Support Node.
2.4. Operational Design Domain of ATO System Members
The operational design domain of the high-speed railway ATO system can be deﬁned
as the set of conditions that satisfy the normal operation of the high-speed railway ATO
system. Regarding the operational design domain of auto-driving trains, combined with
the operational characteristics of the Chinese high-speed railway ATO system, this article
divides the operational design domain of high-speed railway ATO into the following six
dimensions: railway infrastructure (RI), related system members (RSMs), information
transmission (IT), operation area (OA), operating environment (OE), and operational
constraints (OCs). This structure is shown in Figure 4.
ODD =fIT, OA, OC, OE, RI, RSM g (1)

--- Page 6 ---
Electronics 2021 ,10, 503 6 of 18
Figure 4. Operational design domain structure of the high-speed railway ATO system. OA, operation
area; OE, operating environment; RI, railway infrastructure; RSM, related system member; OC,
operational constraint; IT, information transmission.
2.4.1. Railway Infrastructure
Railway infrastructure represents a collection of physical infrastructure conditions
required for system operation, including the following ﬁve aspects: operating lines, operat-
ing tracks, electrical facilities, trackside facilities, and station facilities. Among them, the
running line is subdivided from two angles of the plane and longitudinal section, includ-
ing various line requirements such as radius of the plane curve, line spacing, maximum
slope, minimum ramp length, etc.; The running track includes the type of track structure
and the rail surface adhesion conditions that support the normal operation of the train;
Electrical facilities provide power and energy for trains, including power supply voltage
and phase-separation area settings. The phase-separation area settings are an important
factor affecting train operation. Trackside facilities are trackside signaling equipment,
including balise, track circuits, and switches. Station facilities refer to the newly added
platform doors for the operation of the high-speed railway ATO system. Infrastructure
is an indispensable physical basic condition for the operation of the high-speed railway
ATO system. This structure is shown in Figure 5.
2.4.2. Related System Members
Related system members represent other members of the system on which the opera-
tion of the high-speed railway ATO system depends, including trains, ground equipment,
and onboard equipment. The train is the control object of the system. The train bridge,
train control system, train door system, and dynamic system are all necessary parts of the
train. For the ground equipment, there is direct information communication between the
TSRS and ATO, which are responsible for the train registration, operation plan, platform
door commands and status, and forwarding of the train status. The CTC and radio block
center (RBC) do not have a direct interface with ATO, and only the CTC is considered in
the operational design, that is the operation plan formulation function of the CTC and the
function of the driving permit-issuing of the RBC. For the onboard equipment, the onboard
ATP and ATO have a direct interface. The balise transmission module (BTM) equipment is

--- Page 7 ---
Electronics 2021 ,10, 503 7 of 18
related to the reception of the transponder information, and the track circuit reader (TCR)
equipment affects the control commands of the ATP . This structure is shown in Figure 6.
Figure 5. Structure diagram of Railway Infrastructure.
Figure 6. Structure diagram of related system members.

--- Page 8 ---
Electronics 2021 ,10, 503 8 of 18
2.4.3. Information Transmission
Information transmission represents the relationship between the information in-
terface in the operation of the system and the information transmitted on the channel,
including train-ground communication, train inside communication, and the ground inside
communication. Referring to the ATO system interface diagram in the previous section,
the train-to-ground communication includes the communication channels among the RBC,
ATP , TSRS, and ATO. The train inside communication includes the interface between ATO
and the train, the interface between ATP and the train, the interface between ATP and ATO,
and the interface among the BTM, TCR, and ATP . The ground inside communication only
refers to the information channel related to ATO, the communication interface between
the CTC and TSRS, the adjacent TSRS, and the TSRS and TCC. Data in the information
transmitted have been described in the foregoing passages and will not be repeated here.
This structure is shown in Figure 7.
Figure 7. Structure diagram of information transmission.
2.4.4. Operating Area
The operating area refers to the division of the system operation in space, including
intra-station area and between-station area. There are many ways to divide the operating
space. Here, the area within the station and the area between the stations are divided
according to the impact on the operation of the ATO system: in addition to the traditional
sideline and the mainline, the station has added switch sections that require a speed limit.
The between-station area is divided into phase areas and non-phase areas according to the
layout of the electrical facilities. This structure is shown in Figure 8.

--- Page 9 ---
Electronics 2021 ,10, 503 9 of 18
Figure 8. Structure diagram of the operating area.
2.4.5. Operational Constraints
The operational constraints refer to the set of constraints that deﬁne the normal
operation of the system, including time constraints, control constraints, and distance
constraints. Time constraints include communication time and the normal delay of system
control; control constraints include hard ATP control commands and ﬂexible operation
plan constraints; distance constraints represent distance conditions that deﬁne whether the
system is operating normally or not, including but not limited to precise stopping criteria
and safe stopping distance. This structure is shown in Figure 9.
Figure 9. Structure diagram of the operational constraints.
2.4.6. Operating Environment
The operating environment refers to the natural environmental constraints of the sys-
tem operation, including weather, temperature, and humidity, that is wind, rain, snow, and
the accompanying natural environment such as temperature, humidity, and wind speed.
This structure is shown in Figure 10.

--- Page 10 ---
Electronics 2021 ,10, 503 10 of 18
Figure 10. Structure diagram of the operating environment.
3. Timed Automata and the UPPAAL Tool
3.1. Introduction to Timed Automata
Timed automata (TA) is an abstract model designed to capture the time behavior of
real-time systems [ 23]. It is essentially a ﬁnite state machine with extended real-valued
clock variables. When the system starts, these clocks increase monotonically at the same
rate and measure the elapsed time to control the triggering of events. A timed automata is
a tuple (Q,q,E,X,I,T,Y)where:
1. Qmeans a limited set of positions; q2Qis the initial position.
2. Emeans a limited set of observable behaviors.
3. Xrepresents a limited set of clock variables.
4. Imeans the mapping from position to position invariant.
5. Tmeans a ﬁnite set of integer variables.
6. Ymeans a set of transitions.
The scenario of the linkage control of the door and platform door mainly involves
the four modules of onboard ATP , TSRS, train, and onboard ATO. Therefore, the mod-
eling object selects these four modules, and we denote them as TAATO,TAATP,TATrain,
and TATSRS .
3.2. Introduction to the Veriﬁcation Tool UPP AAL
UPPAAL is a modeling and veriﬁcation tool speciﬁcally for real-time systems. With
TA as the modeling language, it provides an efﬁcient, easy-to-use, and portable system.
UPPAAL uses a graphical user interface. UPPAAL is mainly composed of the editor,
simulator, and validator. The editor can describe the system behavior as a TA network with
clock and data variables. The simulator can be used to check the information interaction
between the models after the model design is completed, thereby helping the model to
correct errors. The veriﬁer can study the state space of the system according to the symbol
state represented by the constraint, so as to realize the veriﬁcation of immutability and
reachability. The UPPAAL veriﬁcation model is based on the BNF (Backus Normal Form)
grammar [24], and the meaning of each expression is shown in Table 1.

--- Page 11 ---
Electronics 2021 ,10, 503 11 of 18
Table 1. The grammatical meaning of BNF.
Statement Meaning
E[]P There is an execution path; all states satisfy P
E<> P There is an execution path such that a certain state satisﬁes P
A[]P For all execution paths, all states satisfy P
A<> P For all execution paths, there are states satisfying P
P!Q IfPis satisﬁed, then Qmust be satisﬁed
4. Case Study
4.1. Scenario Description and Analysis
After ATP conﬁrms that the train is stopped, it sends the onboard ATO permission
to open the door. According to the pre-selected door control mode, if it is in AO/MC
(automatic opening and manual closing doors) mode, the onboard ATO will operate the
door. If it is in MO/MC (manual opening and manual closing doors) mode, the driver
will open the door manually. After the onboard ATO sends the door open command or
receives the state of the door button pressed, it needs to send the door open command of the
platform door. The platform door open command is sent by ATO to the TSRS in the ground
equipment that governs the train. Based on the train’s marshalling information and the
corresponding ground platform door settings, the TSRS conﬁrms that the corresponding
train is properly stopped and then sends a door opening command to the corresponding
train control center. After the platform door system opens the platform door, the TSRS
informs ATO of the platform door status, and the train ATO displays on the DMI (Driver
Machine Interface) whether the platform door linkage is successful. If the status of the
platform door is not received for a certain period of time, it will be regarded as a failure.
Using the operational design domain of the high-speed railway ATO system as a tool, the
scenario was re-deconstructed, and the Table 2 was designed to reﬂect the mapping of the
linkage control scenario of train doors and platform doors in the operational design domain.
Table 2. ODD members of the linkage control scenario.
ODD Type ODD Class ODD Members Details
RSMGround equipmentTSRSForwarding platform door
control and status information
TCC Control platform door
Onboard
equipmentATPOutputting door opening
permission and processing DMI
display information
Running trainTrain doors Controlled object
Train dynamic system stopping
Train control system AM(Automatic Driving Mode)
ITTrain insideATP-ATOOpen train doors permission and
information for display
ATO-trainDoor open command, the state
of the door button, door
control mode
Ground insideCTC-TSRS Operation plan
TSRS-TCCPlatform door control command
and platform door state
Train ground TSRS-ATOPlatform door control command,
platform door state, and
operation plan

--- Page 12 ---
Electronics 2021 ,10, 503 12 of 18
Table 2. Cont.
ODD Type ODD Class ODD Members Details
OA Intra-station Sideline platform
RI Station facilities Platform door Controlled object
OCControl constraint Operation plan Having passenger service
Position constraintPrecise stopping
criterionLess than 0.5 m
Time constraint Communication timeMaximum communication time
between the TSRS and ATO is
less than 6 s
4.2. Scenario Model Construction
The following interaction process as shown in Figure 11 can be extracted from the
description of the scenario.
ATP Train ATO TSRS
Open_train_door_permission
Train_door_
control_mode
Train_door_
control_command
Train_door_
control_
buttom_statealt
[door
control 
mode:
MO/MC][door
control 
mode:
AO/MC]
Platform door 
control command
Platform 
door_state
ATO_show_msgOperation _plan
Loop
Train_data
Train_location
Train_doors_state
Figure 11. Interaction process of the scenario.
The TA models can be built after ﬁnishing the interaction process analysis of the
scenario. Figures 12–15 show the models of ATP , train, ATO, and TSRS respectively. The
variables in the model are shown in Table 3.

--- Page 13 ---
Electronics 2021 ,10, 503 13 of 18
Figure 12. The ATP model of the linkage control scenario of train doors and platform doors.
Figure 13. The train model of the linkage control scenario of train doors and platform doors.
Figure 14. The ATO model of the linkage control scenario of train doors and platform doors.

--- Page 14 ---
Electronics 2021 ,10, 503 14 of 18
Figure 15. The TSRS model of the linkage control scenario of train doors and platform doors.
Table 3. Variables in the TA model.
Variable Name Type Meaning
plat f orm _cmd boolean The signal for open the platform doors permission.
PS integerThe signal for handling passenger transport service
(1: handle; 0: does not handle).
stop integerThe signal for the train stops accurately
(1: accurately; 0: inaccurately).
double _perm integerThe signal for open both side train doors permission
(1: both side; 0: one side).
send _message integerThe signal for send display information
(1: opening linkage results; 2: closing linkage results).
door _mode integer The signal for train doors control mode (1: MO/MC; 2: AO/MC).
door _state integer The signal for train doors status (1: opened; 2: closed).
end integer The signal for interactive termination (0: does not end; 1: end).
T_trans clock The clock for train door control time.
T_control clock The clock for platform message transmission time.
T_delate clock The clock for communication delay.
4.3. Veriﬁcation of the Scenario
After completing the construction of the model, the model needs to be veriﬁed to
conﬁrm whether the model is consistent with the scenario design. If the veriﬁcation fails,
the model should be positioned and analyzed according to the prompt results, and the
model should be continuously corrected and modiﬁed to ﬁnally realize the model, and the
consistency of the description ensures the credibility of subsequent demand extraction. In
accordance with the previous description of the model veriﬁcation technology, this article
uses the UPPAAL tools to carry out model veriﬁcation from two perspectives of dynamic
execution veriﬁcation and property veriﬁcation.
4.3.1. Performing Veriﬁcation Dynamically
In the scenario of the linkage control of the train door and platform door, the infor-
mation interaction relationship among ATO, ATP , the train, and the TSRS is shown in
Figure 16.
Taking the UML sequence diagram as a reference, the migration is performed step by
step in the UPPAAL simulator to observe the execution path of the model and analyze the
interactive behavior of the model. If a migration cannot be executed, an error message will
appear in the simulator to assist in the modiﬁcation of the model. Then, the veriﬁcation
process of the model interaction process is given in Figure 17.

--- Page 15 ---
Electronics 2021 ,10, 503 15 of 18
ATO
-send ATO _show _msg
-send Train _door _control _command
-send Platform _door_control _command
-recive Platform _door _state
-recive Open _train _door _permission
-recive Train _door _control _mode
-recive Train _door _control _buttom _state
-recive Operation _plan
Train
-send Train _door _control _mode
-send Train _door _control _buttom _state
-recive Train _door _control _commandATP
-send Open _train _door _permission
-recive ATO _show _msg
TSRS
-send Platform _door _state
-send Operation _plan
-recive Platform _door _control _command
Figure 16. The information interaction relation in the linkage control scenario of train doors and
platform doors.
Figure 17. The veriﬁcation diagram of the interaction process.

--- Page 16 ---
Electronics 2021 ,10, 503 16 of 18
4.3.2. Property Veriﬁcation
Property veriﬁcation is done to check whether the built model meets the logic function
characteristics and timing function characteristics required in the speciﬁcation through the
reachability of the model. The functional attributes are summarized and extracted and
converted into corresponding BNF sentences for veriﬁcation in the UPPAAL validator. The
Table 4 gives the function points of the veriﬁcation and veriﬁcation statements and results.
Table 4. TA model validation results.
Properties BNF Statement Result Calculating Time
Can restart platform
door linkageE[](ATO .showcloselink _f ailed implies
ATO .send _Plat f orm _door _open _cmd)pass 2.8 ms
Automatic door
openingE<>( ATO .idleimplies
ATO .ATO _control _door )pass 1.5 ms
Send platform door
control commandE<>( ATO .idleimplies
TSRS .rec_plat f orm _door _cmd)pass 1.6 ms
Send linkage resultsE<>( ATO .idleimplies
ATP .rec_ATO _show _msg)pass 1.9 ms
Information
interaction time is
less than 6 sA[](ATO .send _Plat f orm _door _open _cmd
implies T_delate <=6) and
(ATO .rec_Plat f orm _door _open _state
implies T_delate <=6) and
(ATO .send _close _door _cmd implies
T_delate <=6) and
(ATO .rec_Plat f orm _door _close _state
imply T_delate <=6)pass 3.8 ms
Total time 11.6 ms
4.4. Demand Extraction
Using the veriﬁed scenario model as the demand model, combined with the odd
mapping of the scenario, we extract the design input and expected output in the scenario
as Table 5.
Table 5. System requirement parameters in the scenarios.
Conditions Input Output
1. AM mode 1. Operation plan 1. Doors open command
2. Passenger service 2. Open train doors permission 2. Platform door control command
3. Sideline platform 3. The state of the door button 3. Information for display
4. Stop 4. Doors control mode
5. Platform door state
The following system requirements can be extracted:
1. In the door control mode AO/MO, the onboard ATO can automatically open the door
according to the plan when the sideline platform has the condition of stopping.
2. In the AM mode, the onboard ATO can send correct platform door control commands
to the TSRS based on the planning and marshalling information and the status of the
door buttons.
5. Conclusions and Future Work
This paper constructs the operational design domain of the high-speed railway ATO
system with reference to the framework of the operational design domain of autopilot and
analyzes the linkage control scenarios of train doors and platform doors. The article uses
TA grammar and UPPAAL tools to build a model of the scenario and verify it and ﬁnally

--- Page 17 ---
Electronics 2021 ,10, 503 17 of 18
extracts the system requirements of the onboard ATO in the scenario. The extracted system
requirements will provide support for future test case design. The next research will focus
on further improving the extraction results of the system requirements. Further study will
be done of the effective method for generating test cases based on system requirements to
meet the requirements of laboratory system testing.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, Z.M. and T.T.; methodology, Z.M.; software, Z.M.; val-
idation, Z.M.; formal analysis, Z.M.; resources, T.T.; data curation, Z.M.; writing—original draft
preparation, Z.M.; writing—review and editing, G.W. and L.Y.; visualization, Z.M.; supervision, G.W.;
project administration, G.W.; funding acquisition, L.Y. All authors read and agreed to the published
version of the manuscript.
Funding: This work was supported by the key project of the national science technology research
and development program of the National Railway Group: “Research on the key technologies of
integrated simulation and test environment evaluation for high-speed railway automatic driving
system” (W19D00071) and by the National Engineering Research Center for Rail Transportation
Operation Control System.
Acknowledgments: The authors would like to thank the State Key Laboratory of rail transit control
and safety and the National Engineering Research Center for Rail Transportation Operation Control
System for their continuous support of this study.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
Abbreviations
The following abbreviations are used in this manuscript:
ODD Operational design domain
ATO Automatic train operation
CTCS Chinese train control system
GPRS General packet radio service
TSRS Temporary speed restriction server
CTC Centralized trafﬁc control
TCC Train control center
ATP Automatic train protection
RBC Radio block center
BTM Balise transmission module
TCR Track circuit reader
MT Mobile terminal
CBI Computer based interlocking
OTE Optical transmission equipment
TRAU Transcoder and rate adaptor unit
BSC Base station controller
PCU Process control unit
SGSN Serving GPRS support node
GGSN Gateway GPRS support node.
TA Timed automata
BNF Backus Normal Form
SAE Society of Automotive Engineers
AO Automatic opening doors
MC Manual closing doors
MO manual opening doors
AM Automatic driving mode
DMI Driver machine interface

--- Page 18 ---
Electronics 2021 ,10, 503 18 of 18
References
1. Liu, S.; Cao, F.; Xun, J.; Wang, Y. Energy-Efﬁcient Operation of Single Train Based on the Control Strategy of ATO. In Proceedings
of the 2015 18th International Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC), Gran Canaria, Spain, 15–18 September
2015; pp. 2580–2586. [CrossRef]
2. Wang, L.; Xia, L.; Ye, H.; Jiang, M.; Wang, J.; Wang, Y. A Fast Optimization Method for Automatic Train Stop Control. In
Proceedings of the 2019 15th International Conference on Control and Automation(ICCA), Edinburgh, UK, 16–19 July 2019;
pp. 1405–1410. [CrossRef]
3. Yang, Y.; Xu, Z.; Liu, W.; Li,H.; Zhang, R.; Huang, Z. Optimal Operation of High-Speed Trains Using Hybrid Model Predictive
Control. J. Adv. Transp. 2018 ,16, 1–16. [CrossRef]
4. Kong, X.; Zhang, T. Non-Singular Fast Terminal Sliding Mode Control of High-Speed Train Network System Based on Improved
Particle Swarm Optimization Algorithm. Symmetry 2020 ,12, 205. [CrossRef]
5. Cao, Y.; Ma, L.; Zhang, Y. Application of fuzzy predictive control technology in automatic train operation. Clust. Comput. 2018 ,22,
14135–14144. [CrossRef]
6. Yan, F.; Tang, T.; Yan, H. Scenario based STPA analysis in Automated Urban Guided Transport system. In Proceedings of the 2016
IEEE International Conference on Intelligent Rail Transportation (ICIRT), Birmingham, UK, 23–25 August 2016; pp. 425–431.
[CrossRef]
7. Zhang, Z.; Li, K.; Yuan, L.; Yu, G. Mutation Model-Based Test Case Generation of Chinese Train Control System with Automatic
Train Operation Function. In Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE International Conference on Intelligent Rail Transportation (ICIRT),
Singapore, 12–14 December 2018; pp. 1–5. [CrossRef]
8. John, M.C.; Mary, B.R.; George, C.J.; Jürgen, K. Requirements Development in Scenario-Based Design. Trans. Software Eng. 1998 ,
24, 1156–1170. [CrossRef]
9. Bindschadler, D.; Boyles, C. A Scenario-Based Process for Requirements Development: Application to Mission Operations
Systems. In Proceedings of the 2008 SpaceOps Conference, Heidelberg, Germany, 12–16 May 2008; p. 3516.
10. Daniel, A.; Gursimran, S.W.; Hyunsook, D.;Seok-Won, L. Model-based requirements veriﬁcation method: Conclusions from two
controlled experiments. Inf. Softw. Technol. 2014 ,56, 321–334. [CrossRef]
11. Yang, L.; Emitza G.; Konstantina, T.; Florian, S.; Bernd, B. Automated Requirements Extraction for Scientiﬁc Software. In
Proceedings of the 2015 International Conference on Computational Science(ICCS), Reykjavik, Iceland, 1–3 June 2015; pp. 582–591.
[CrossRef]
12. Michel, D.S.S.; Jos, L.M.V . Model-Driven User Requirements Speciﬁcation using SysML. J. Softw. 2008 ,3, 57–68. [CrossRef]
13. Reggio, G. A UML-Based Proposalfor IoT System Requirements Speciﬁcation. In Proceedings of the 10th International Workshop
on Modelling in Software Engineering (MiSE), Gothenburg, Sweden, 22–30 May 2018; pp. 9–16. [CrossRef]
14. Ian, C.; Buu, P .; Shahwar, S.; Rick, S.; Krzysztof, C. An Automated Vehicle Safety Concept Based on Runtime Restriction of the
Operational Design Domain. In Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV), Suzhou, China, 26–30 June
2018; pp. 1910–1917. [CrossRef]
15. Markus, H.; Karl-Heinz, S. Strategy and architecture of a safety concept for fully automatic and autonomous driving assistance
systems. In Proceedings of the 2010 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV), La Jolla, CA, USA, 21–24 June 2010; pp. 955–960.
[CrossRef]
16. Thorn, E.; Kimmel, S.C.; Chaka, M.; Hamilton, B.A. A Framework for Automated Driving System Testable Cases and Scenarios.
Available online: https://rosap.ntl.bts.gov/view/dot/38824 (accessed on 1 September 2018).
17. Abramov, I.V .; Nikitin, Y.R.; Abramov, A.I.; Sosnovich, E.V .; Božek, P . Control and diagnostic model of brushless DC motor. J.
Electr. Eng. 2014 ,65, 277–282. [CrossRef]
18. Božek, P .; Turygin, Y. Measurement of the Operating Parameters and Numerical Analysis of the Mechanical Subsystem. Meas. Sci.
Rev. 2014 ,14, 198–203. [CrossRef]
19. Blatnický, M.; Sága, M.; Dižo, J.; Bruna, M. Application of Light Metal Alloy EN AW 6063 to Vehicle Frame Construction with an
Innovated Steering Mechanism. Materials 2020 ,13, 817. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
20. Sága, M.; Blatnický, M.; Vaško, M.; Dižo, J.; Kopas, P .; Gerlici, J. Experimental Determination of the Manson-Cofﬁn Curves for an
Original Unconventional Vehicle Frame. Materials 2020 ,13, 4675. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
21. Fan, L.X.; Cai, M.Y.; Lin, Y.; Zhang, W.J. Axiomatic design theory: Further notes and its guideline to applications. Int. J. Mater.
Prod. Technol. 2015 ,51, 359–374. [CrossRef]
22. Zhang, W.J.; van Luttervelt, C.A. Toward a resilient manufacturing system. CIRP Ann. 2011 ,60, 469–472. [CrossRef]
23. Rajeev, A.; David, L.D. A theory of timed automata. Theor. Comput. Sci. 1994 ,126, 183–235. [CrossRef]
24. Li, S.; Balaguer, S.; David, A.; Larsen, K.G.; Nielsen, B.; Pusinskas, S. Scenario-based veriﬁcation of real-time systems using
Uppaal. Form. Methods Syst. Des. 2010 ,37, 200–264. [CrossRef]
