--- Page 1 ---
Uppaal Coshy : Automatic Synthesis of
Compact Shields for Hybrid Systems
Asger Horn Brorholt1, Andreas Holck Høeg-Petersen1, Peter Gjøl Jensen1,
Kim Guldstrand Larsen1, Marius Mikučionis1, Christian Schilling1, and
Andrzej Wąsowski2
1Aalborg University, 9220 Aalborg, Denmark
{asgerhb,ahhp,pgj,kgl,marius,christianms}@cs.aau.dk
2IT University of Copenhagen, 2300 Copenhagen, Denmark
wasowski@itu.dk
Abstract. Wepresent Uppaal Coshy ,atoolforautomaticsynthesisof
a safety strategy—or shield—for Markov decision processes over continu-
ousstatespacesandcomplexhybriddynamics.Thegeneralmethodology
is to partition the state space and then solve a two-player safety game [8],
which entails a number of algorithmically hard problems such as reach-
ability for hybrid systems. The general philosophy of Uppaal Coshy is
to approximate hard-to-obtain solutions using simulations. Our imple-
mentation is fully automatic and supports the expressive formalism of
Uppaal models, which encompass stochastic hybrid automata.
The precision of our partition-based approach benefits from using finer
grids, which however are not efficient to store. We include an algorithm
called Caapto efficiently compute a compact representation of a shield
in the form of a decision tree, which yields significant reductions.
Keywords: Shield synthesis ·Uppaal ·Decision tree.
1 Introduction
In prior work, we proposed an algorithm to synthesize shields(i.e., nondetermin-
istic safety strategies) for Markov decision processes with hybrid dynamics [8].
The algorithm partitions the state space into finitely many cells and then solves
a two-player safety game, where it uses approximation through simulation to ef-
ficiently tackle algorithmically hard problems. In this tool paper, we present our
implementation Uppaal Coshy , which is fully integrated in Uppaal, offering
an automatic tool3that supports the expressive Uppaal modeling formalism,
including reinforcement learning under a shield.
Our algorithm represents a shield by storing the allowed actions for each cell
individually,whichresultsinalarge datastructure.Sincemanyneighboringcells
allow the same actions in practice, as a second contribution, we propose a new
algorithm called Caapto compute a compact representation in the form of a
decision tree. We demonstrate that this algorithm leads to significant reductions
as part of the workflow in Uppaal Coshy .
3Available at https://uppaal.org/features/#coshyarXiv:2508.16345v1  [cs.LO]  22 Aug 2025

--- Page 2 ---
2 Brorholt, Høeg-Petersen, Jensen, Larsen, Mikučionis, Schilling, Wąsowski
1.1 Related Tools for Shield Synthesis and Compact Representation
Shielding. Shields are obtained by solving games, for which there exist a wide
selection of tools for discrete state spaces [9,10,18]. Notably, Tempest [20] syn-
thesizes shields for discrete systems and facilitates learning through integration
withPrism[19].Uppaal Tiga synthesizes shields for timed games [4].
In contrast, our tool applies to a richer class of models, including stochastic
hybrid systems with non-periodic control and calls to external C libraries.
One benefit of our tool is the full integration with Uppaal Stratego [11]
to directly use the synthesized shield in reinforcement learning.
Decision trees. Encoding strategies as decision trees is a popular approach to
achieving compactness and interpretability [2,3,6,15,21]. However, these works
focus on creating approximate representations from tabular data. For a fixed
set of predicates, the smallest possible tree can be obtained by enumeration
techniques [12,13]. In contrast, our method transforms a given decision tree into
anequivalent decisiontree.Ourmethodisspecificallydesignedtoefficientlycope
with strategies of many axis-aligned decision boundaries.
2 Shield Synthesis for Hybrid Systems
In this section, we recall a general shield synthesis algorithm for hybrid systems
outlinedinpriorwork[8].Westartbyrecallingtheformalismforcontrolsystems.
2.1 Euclidean Markov Decision Processes
Definition 1 (Euclidean Markovdecision process[17]). Ak-dimensional
Euclidean Markov decision process (EMDP) is a tuple M= (S, A, T )where
–S⊆Rkis a closed and bounded subset of the k-dimensional Euclidean space,
–Ais a finite set of actions, and
–T:S×A→(S→R≥0)maps each state-action pair (s, a)to a probability
density function over S, i.e., we haveR
s′∈ST(s, a)(s′)ds′= 1.
For simplicity, the state space Sis continuous. However, the extension to
discrete variables, e.g., locations of hybrid components, is straightforward. Since
optimizing strategies is not our focus, we do not formally introduce the notion
of cost and rely on the reader’s intuition. (See [8] for details.)
Arunπof an EMDP is an alternating sequence π=s0a0s1a1. . .of states
and actions such that T(si, ai)(si+1)>0for all i≥0. A (memoryless) stochastic
strategy for an EMDP is a function ¯σ:S→(A→[0,1]), mapping a state to a
probability distribution over the actions. A run π=s0a0s1a1. . .is anoutcome
of¯σif¯σ(si)(ai)>0for all i≥0. Similarly, a (memoryless) nondeterministic
strategy is a function σ:S→2A, mapping a state to a set of actions. A run
π=s0a0s1a1. . .is an outcome of σifai∈σ(si)for all i≥0.
Asafety property (or invariant) φis a set of states φ⊆S. A run π=
s0a0s1a1. . .issafewith respect to φifsi∈φfor all i≥0. A nondeterministic
strategy σis ashieldwith respect to φif all outcomes of σare safe.

--- Page 3 ---
Automatic Synthesis of Compact Shields for Hybrid Systems 3
(a) Player component.
 (b) Ball component.
Fig.1: The bouncing ball modeled in Uppaal.
2.2 Running Example (Bouncing Ball)
We introduce our running example: a bouncing ball that can be hit by a player to
keep it bouncing [8,17]. We shortly explain our two-component Uppaal model.
The player component is shown in Fig. 1(a). In the (initial) location Choose,
there are two available control actions (solid lines). The player chooses every 0.1
seconds (enforced by the clock x). The hitaction (upper edge) attempts to hit
the ball, and increments the cost counter cto be used for reinforcement learning
in Section 5.1. The other action (lower edge) does not attempt to hit the ball.
The ball component, shown in Fig. 1(b), is described by two state variables,
position pand velocity v, which evolve according to the ordinary differential
equations shown below the initial location InAir. The two dashed edges on the
right model a successful hitaction, which is only triggered if the ball is high
enough (four meters or higher above the ground); they differ in whether the ball
is currently jumping up or falling down. The two dashed edges on the left model
abounceon the ground. The ball bounces back up with a random dampening
(upper edge) or goes to the state Stopif the velocity is very low (lower edge).
In the following, we shall see how to obtain a shield that enforces the safety
property that Stopis never reached, i.e., φ={s|Ball is not in Stopins}.
2.3 Partition-Based Shield Synthesis
Since an EMDP consists of infinitely many states, we employ a finite-state ab-
straction. For that, we partition the state space S⊆Rkwith a regular rectan-
gulargrid. (In [8], we only allowed a grid of uniform size in all dimensions.) For-
mally, given a (user-defined) granularity vector γ∈Rkand offset vector ω∈Rk,
we partition the state space into disjoint cellsof equal size. Each cell Cis the
Cartesian product of half-open intervals [ωi+piγi, ωi+(pi+1)γi[in each dimen-
sioni, for cell index p∈Nk. We define the gridas the set Pω
γ={C|C∩S̸=∅}
of all cells that overlap with the bounded state space. Note the number of cells
will depend on γ. For each s∈S,[s]Pωγdenotes the unique cell containing s.

--- Page 4 ---
4 Brorholt, Høeg-Petersen, Jensen, Larsen, Mikučionis, Schilling, Wąsowski
M
EMDPTM,γ,ω
Transition systemσφ
ShieldM |σφ
Shielded EMDPσ∗
Shielded,
near-optimal
strategyNew integration in Uppaal
GridPω
γ SynthesisApply
shieldReinforcement
learning
Fig.2: Workflow for obtaining a near-optimal shielded strategy in Uppaal.
An EMDP M, a granularity vector γand offset vector ωinduce a finite
labeled transition system TM,γ,ω= (Pω
γ, A,→), where
Ca− →C′⇐⇒ ∃ s∈C.∃s′∈C′. T(s, a)(s′)>0. (1)
Given a safety property φ⊆Sand a grid Pω
γ, letC0
φ={C∈ Pω
γ|C⊆φ}
denote those cells that are safe in zero steps. We define the set of safe cells as
the maximal set Cφsuch that
Cφ=C0
φ∩ {C∈ Pω
γ| ∃a∈A.∀C′∈ Pω
γ. Ca− →C′=⇒C′∈ Cφ}.(2)
Given the finiteness of Pω
γand monotonicity of Eq. (2), Cφmay be obtained
in a finite number of iterations using Tarski’s fixed-point theorem [22].
A (nondeterministic) strategy for TM,γ,ωis a function ν:Pω
γ→2A. The
most permissive shield νφ(i.e., safe strategy) obtained from Cφ[5] is given by
νφ(C) ={a∈A| ∀C′∈ Pω
γ. Ca− →C′=⇒C′∈ Cφ}.
A shield νforTM,γ,ωinduces a shield σforMin the standard way [8]:
Theorem 1. Given an EMDP M, a safety property φ⊆S, and a grid Pω
γ, ifν
is a shield for TM,γ,ω, then σ(s) =ν([s]Pωγ)is a shield for M.
Fig. 2 shows the overall workflow of the shield synthesis and how the shield
can later be used to (reinforcement-) learn a near-optimal strategy under this
shield. The green box marks the steps that we newly integrated in Uppaal.
For thebouncing ball , we will obtain the shield shown in Fig. 3(a). To effec-
tively implement the aforementioned approach, there are additional challenges
which we address in the following section.
3 Effective Implementation of Shield Synthesis
In this section, we discuss our implementation of the approach to synthesize
a shield as outlined in Section 2 in Uppaal Coshy . In particular, a practical
implementation faces the following two main challenges.
First, we receive the safety property φin the form of a user query (described
in Appendix A). Thus, the definition of the cells C0
φthat are immediately safe
generally requires symbolic reasoning, which is not readily available. Instead, we
check a finite number of states within each cell, which we describe in Section 3.1.

--- Page 5 ---
Automatic Synthesis of Compact Shields for Hybrid Systems 5
vp
(a) It is safe to leave the bounds.
vp
(b) It is unsafe to leave the bounds.
Fig.3: Two shields for the bouncing ball . Colors represent the allowed actions in
the corresponding state of velocity vand position pwhile in location InAir.
Second, determining Eq. (1) requires to solve reachability questions for in-
finitely many states. While this can be done for simple classes of systems, we deal
with very general systems (e.g., nonlinear hybrid dynamics), for which reacha-
bility is undecidable [14]. This motivated us to instead compute an approximate
solution, which we outline in Section 3.2.
Thanks to the above design decisions, our implementation is fully automatic
andsupportstheexpressiveformalismofgeneral Uppaal models(e.g.,stochastic
hybrid automata with calls to general C code).
We also identified further practical challenges, which we address in the later
parts of this section. Definition 1 requires a bounded state space, but it is for
instance difficult to determine upper bounds for the position and velocity of the
bouncing ball ; in Section 3.3, we explain how we treat such cases in practice. In
Section 3.4, we discuss an optimization to omit redundant dimensions.
3.1 Determining Initial Safe Cells
We apply systematic sampling from a cell, i.e., samples are not drawn at random.
Rather,weuniformlycoverthecellwith nksamples,where n∈N, n̸= 0isauser-
defined parameter. Recall from Section 2.3 that a cell Cof a grid Pω
γis rectangu-
lar and defined by an index vector p, an offset ωand a granularity vector γ, all of
dimension k. Let δi=γi
n−1be the distance between two samples in dimension i
when n >1, and δi= 0otherwise. For any cell, we define the corresponding set
of samples as {(ω1+p1γ1+q1δ1, . . . , ω k+pkγk+qkδk)|qi∈ {0,1, . . . , n −1}}.
To account for the open upper bounds, we subtract a small number ϵ >0from
the highest samples. An example of a two-dimensional set of samples for n= 4
is shown as the dark blue points inside the light blue cells in Fig. 4.
We note that the above only applies to continuous variables. Our implemen-
tation treats discrete variables (e.g., component locations) in the natural way.

--- Page 6 ---
6 Brorholt, Høeg-Petersen, Jensen, Larsen, Mikučionis, Schilling, Wąsowski
Finally, to approximate the set C0
φ, we draw samples from each cell and check
for each sample whether it violates the specification. A cell is added to C0
φonly
if all samples in that cell satisfy the specification.
For thebouncing ball , the ball should never be in the Stoplocation. Since
the location is a discrete variable, and each cell only belongs to one location,
checking a single sample from a cell Calready determines whether C∈ C0
φ.
Thus, our approach is exact and efficient in the common case where the safety
property is given via an error location.
3.2 Determining Reachability
We approximate cell reachability Ca− →C′, as defined in Eq. (1), similarly to [8]
but adapted to work in Uppaal. In a Uppaal model, actions a∈Acorrespond
to controllable edges (indicating that the controller can act).
For each cell Cand action a∈A, we iterate over all sampled states s(as
described before) and select the edge corresponding to a, which gives us a new
state s′; starting from s′, we simulate the environment (using the built-in sim-
ulator in Uppaal) until a state s′′is reached in which the controller has the
next choice (i.e., multiple action edges are enabled) again.4Thus, s′′is a wit-
ness to add the corresponding cell [s′′]Pωγto the transition relation Ca− →[s′′]Pωγ.
Assuming the simulator is numerically sound, the resulting transition system
underapproximates TM,γ,ω. As observed in [8], the more simulations are run,
the more likely do we obtain the true solution. To check whether this under-
approximation is sufficiently accurate, the existing queries for statistical model
checking in Uppaal can be used, as we shall see in Section 5.
In general, two simulations starting in the state smay not yield the same
state s′′due to stochasticity. In [8], stochasticity was treated as additional di-
mensions over which to sample (systematically). This was possible by manually
crafting the reachability sampling for each model. Detecting stochastic behavior
inUppaal modelsautomaticallyturnedouttobedifficultduetotherichformal-
ism. Instead, we decided to simply let the simulator sample from the stochastic
distribution. As a side effect, this new design allows us to support stochasticity
with general distributions, particularly with unbounded support.
Since this design may generally miss some corner-case behavior, we expose a
user-defined parameter mto control the number of times sampling is repeated.
Weillustratethereachabilityapproximationforthe bouncing ball inFig.4for
n= 4(number of samples per dimension) and m= 1(number of re-sampling).
When the ball moves through the air, it behaves deterministically. In Fig. 4(a),
when the ball is not hit, we obtain successor states that keep a regular “forma-
tion” (top right green dots). When the ball is hit, the successor states are affected
by randomness (bottom left green dots). Fig. 4(b) shows a similar randomized
effect when the ball touches the ground.
4Where [8] required a fixed control period, Uppaal Coshy supports non-periodic
control. We include an example of this feature in Appendix B.

--- Page 7 ---
Automatic Synthesis of Compact Shields for Hybrid Systems 7
(a) The ball is rising and high enough to
be hit. When the ball is hit, the outcome
is partially random.
(b) The ball is too low to be hit, but it
bounces off the ground. The velocity loss
upon a bounce is partially random.
Fig.4: Example of a grid for the bouncing ball . By sampling from the initial cell
(blue) and simulating the dynamics, we discover reachable cells (green).
3.3 Generalization to Unbounded State Spaces
Definition 1 requires the state space to be bounded, but bounds can be hard
to determine for some systems. This includes the bouncing ball , for which upper
boundsforpositionandvelocityarenotimmediatelyclear.Indeed,ifweconsider
theboundedstatespacewhere p∈[0,11]andv∈[−13,13],thesystemdynamics
do not guarantee that the ball stays within these bounds. If we plot velocity
against position, as in Fig. 3, then a falling ball near the left end of the plot may
leave the bounds on the left (because it becomes too fast).
Conceptually, our implementation deals with out-of-bounds situations by
modifying the transition system. All samples leading to a state outside the spec-
ified bounds go to a dummy cell Cout, for which all transitions lead back to itself.
A user-defined option with the following choices determines the behavior:
1. Raise an error when reaching Coutduring simulation (default behavior).
2. Include CoutinC0
φ, i.e., leaving the bounds is always safe.
3. Exclude Coutfrom C0
φ, i.e., leaving the bounds is always unsafe.
4. Automatically choose between options 2 and 3 using sampling.
With Option 4, samples are taken outside the specified bounds, similar to
Section3.1.Forthe bouncing ball ,ourtoolsamplesstatessuchas (v= 26,p= 22,
Ball.Stop), even though these states may not be reachable in practice. If any
sample state is found to be unsafe, Coutis considered unsafe, and safe otherwise.
The result of synthesizing a shield with this option is shown in Fig. 3(b). In
particular, that shield forbids to hit the ball when it is too fast, which ensures
that it does not leave the bounds. Alternatively, we obtain a more permissive
shield by choosing Option 2, as shown in Fig. 3(a) (and also Fig. 7(b)).
3.4 Omitting Variables from Consideration
As emphasized in [1], a shield can be obtained from an abstract model that
only simulates behaviors relevant to the safety specification. For example, cost

--- Page 8 ---
8 Brorholt, Høeg-Petersen, Jensen, Larsen, Mikučionis, Schilling, Wąsowski
variables may only be relevant during learning. While every variable in a model
can be included in the partitioning, this is computationally demanding.
Therefore, we allow that variables are omitted from the grid specification.
However, this raises a new challenge when sampling a state from a cell, since a
concrete state requires a value for each variable. To address that, we set each
omitted variable to the unique value of the initial state, which must always be
specified in a Uppaal model. Hence, the user must define the initial state such
that the values of omitted variables are sensible defaults. (Note that the initial
state is ignored by the shield synthesis in all other respects.)
The choice not to include a variable in the grid must be made carefully, as
this can change the behavior of the transition system and potentially lead to an
unsound shield. As a rule of thumb, it is appropriate to omit variables if they
always have the same value when actions are taken, or if they are only relevant
for keeping track of a performance value such as cost.
For thebouncing ball , the player (Fig. 1(a)) is always in the location Choose
when taking an action. By setting Chooseas the initial location, this compo-
nent’s location is not relevant to keep track of in the partitioning. Moreover, the
variable cis used to keep track of cost and does not matter to safety. Lastly,
the clock variable xis used to measure time until the next player action. It is
always 0when it is time for the player to act, and so it can also be omitted.
4 Obtaining a Compact Shield Representation
In this section, we present a new technique for obtaining a compact represen-
tation of shields that stem from an axis-aligned state-space partitioning (as de-
scribed in Section 2.3). Here, we choose to represent the shield as a decision
tree. We note that we aim for a functionality-preserving representation, i.e., we
transform a grid-based shield to an equivalent decision-tree-based shield.
Recall that each cell prescribes a set of allowed actions. Let two cells be
similarif the shield assigns the same set of actions to them. Our goal is to
form (hyper)rectangular clusters of similar cells, which we call regions; in other
words, we aim to find a coarser partitioning. In a nutshell, our approach works as
follows.Initially,westartfromthefinestpartitioningwhereeachcellisaseparate
region. Then, we iteratively merge neighboring regions of similar cells, thereby
obtaining a coarser partitioning, such that the resulting region is rectangular
again. We call our algorithm Caap(CoarsifyAxis-AlignedPartitionings).
4.1 Representation of Partitionings and Regions
We start by noting that an axis-aligned partitioning of a state space S⊆Rk
can be represented by a binary decision tree Twhere each leaf node is a set of
actions and each inner node splits the state space with a predicate of the form
ρ(s) =si< c, where sis a state vector, siis a state dimension, and c∈R. Given
a state s, the tree evaluation, written T(s), is defined as usual: Start at the root
node. At an inner node, evaluate the predicate ρ(s). Ifρ(s) =⊤, descend to

--- Page 9 ---
Automatic Synthesis of Compact Shields for Hybrid Systems 9
(a)
 (b)
 (c)
 (d)
Fig.5: Expansion example. Yellow and purple denote distinct actions. Striped
regions have been fixed in previous iterations. The dashed border is the new
candidate region R′. (a) An input partitioning. (b) A violation of Rule 1, since
the expanded region contains different actions. (c) A violation of Rule 2, since
the expanded region overlaps with a striped area. (d) A violation of Rule 3, since
the expansion cuts the rightmost region into two new regions.
the left child; otherwise, descend to the right child. At a leaf node, return the
corresponding set of actions. We denote the partitioning induced by a decision
treeTasPT. Our goal in this section is: given a decision tree Tinducing a
partitioning PT, find an equivalent but smaller decision tree.
1 2 3 4
s10 2 3 4
s20 2 3 4Given a tree T, we store all bounds cof the predicates si< c
in a matrix Mofkrows where the i-th row contains the bounds
associated with state dimension siin ascending order. For exam-
ple, consider the bounds in Fig. 5(a) and Mon the right.
We extract a bounds vector from Mvia an index vector p∈
Nksuch that the i-th entry of pcontains the column index for the i-th row.
In other words, the resulting vector consists of the values Mi,pi. For instance,
p= (1,3)yieldsthevector sp= (0,3)(rows1column 1androw s2column 3).We
canviewthisvectorasastateinthestatespacegivenas sp= (M1,p1, . . . , M k,pk).
We define a region Rin terms of two index vectors (pmin, pmax)represent-
ing the minimal and maximal corner in each dimension. Then, increasing pmax
i
corresponds to expanding Rin dimension i.
4.2 Expansion of Rectangular Regions
For an expansion to be legal, it must satisfy the following three expansion rules :
Definition 2 (Expansion rules). LetR′be a candidate region for a new
partitioning P′derived from PT. Then R′is legal if it satisfies these three rules:
1. All cells in region R′have the same action set,
2. Region R′does not intersect with other regions in P′,
3. Region R′does not cut any other region Rfrom the original partitioning PT
in two, i.e., the difference R\R′is either empty or rectangular.
The first two cases are directly related to the definition of the problem, i.e., the
produced partitioning should respect Tand only have non-overlapping regions

--- Page 10 ---
10 Brorholt, Høeg-Petersen, Jensen, Larsen, Mikučionis, Schilling, Wąsowski
Table 1: Queries run on the bouncing ball model. All statistical results are given
with a 99% confidence interval.
# Query Result
1strategy efficient = minE(c) [<=120]
{} -> {v, p} : <> time>=120✓
2 simulate [<=120]{ p, v } under efficient ✓
3 E[<=120;100] (max: c) under efficient ≈0
4 Pr[<=120;10000] (<> Ball.Stop) under efficient [0.9995,1]
5strategy shield = acontrol: A[] !Ball.Stop
{ v[-13, 13]:1300, p[0, 11]:550, Ball.location }✓
6 saveStrategy("/shield.json", shield) ✓
7 strategy compact_shield = loadStrategy("/compact.json") ✓
8 simulate [<=120]{ p, v } under compact_shield ✓
9strategy shielded_efficient = minE(c) [<=120]
{} -> {v, p} : <> time>=120 under compact_shield✓
10 simulate [<=120]{ p, v } under shielded_efficient ✓
11 E[<=120;100] (max: c) under shielded_efficient 34.6±0.6
12 Pr[<=120;10000] (<> Ball.Stop) under shielded_efficient [0,0.00053]
(see Fig. 5(b) and Fig. 5(c)). The third case is required in order to ensure that
in each iteration, the algorithm does not increase the overall number of regions
when adding a region from the original partitioning to the new partitioning. To
appreciate this, consider the visualization in Fig. 5(d). The candidate expansion
cuts the rightmost region (given by (3,0)and(4,4)) in two such that the remain-
der would have to be represented by tworegions — one given by ((3,0),(4,2))
and one given by ((3,3),(4,4)). Clearly, all three expansion rules of Definition 2
can be checked in time linear in the number of nodes of PT.
The rules induce a nondeterministic greedy algorithm for expanding regions.
This algorithm is included in Appendix C.
5 Case Studies and Evaluation
Inthissection,weevaluateourimplementationof Uppaal Coshy andCaap.In
Section 5.1, we demonstrate a typical application. In Section 5.2, we benchmark
the implementations on several models.
5.1 A Complete Run of the Bouncing Ball
Table 1 shows a typical usage of Uppaal with a sequence of queries on the
bouncing ball example to produce a safe and efficient strategy (cf. Fig. 2). A
detailed explanation of the new query syntax can be found in Appendix A.
Documentation is also available online,5including standard Uppaal queries.
5https://docs.uppaal.org/language-reference/query-syntax/controller_synthesis/
#approximate-control-queries

--- Page 11 ---
Automatic Synthesis of Compact Shields for Hybrid Systems 11
In Query 1, we train a strategy called efficient , which is only concerned
with cost and does not consider safety. Such a strategy is trivial: simply never
pick the hitaction. This is seen in Query 2, which simulates a single run of 120
seconds. It outputs position pand velocity v, which are visualized in Fig. 6(a).
Query 3 statistically evaluates the strategy in 100 runs to estimate the expected
value of c. The result “ ≈0” indicates that only this value was observed. Query 4
estimates the probability of a run being unsafe to be in the interval [0.9995,1]
with 99% confidence; in this case, as expected, all 10 000runs were unsafe.
Query 5 synthesizes a shield shield. The shield matches the one shown in
Fig. 3(a). In queries 6 and 7, the shield is converted to a compact representation
by saving it to a file, calling the Caapimplementation, and loading the result
back into Uppaal. The shield is simulated in Query 8, for which any of the
allowed actions is selected randomly (this happens implicitly); while safe, this
shielded but randomized strategy is not efficient and hits the ball more often
than needed, as visualized in Fig. 6(b).
In Query 9, we learn a strategy shielded_efficient under the shield using
Uppaal Stratego [11]. This strategy keeps the ball in the air without excessive
hitting, as shown by the output of Query 10 in Fig. 6(c). The result of Query 11
shows the expected cost, and Query 12 shows that the safety property holds
with high confidence: None of the 10 000runs were unsafe.
5.2 Further Examples
State-spacetransformationscanbeusedtosynthesizeashieldmoreefficiently[7].
Since Uppaal supports function calls, transformations can also be applied in our
tool by modifying the model. We demonstrate that in Appendix D.
Next, we show quantitative results of the shield synthesis and subsequent
shield reduction, for which we also use three additional models. Firstly, the boost
converter [8] models a real circuit for stepping up the voltage of a direct current
(DC) input. The controller must keep the voltage close to a reference value,
without exceeding safe bounds for the voltage and current. The state space is
continuous, with significant random variation in the outcome of actions.
In therandom walk model [8,16], the player must travel a certain distance
before time runs out by choosing between a fast but expensive and a slow but
(a)efficient
 (b)compact_shield
 (c)shielded_efficient
Fig.6:Bouncing ball simulations (position, velocity) under different strategies.

--- Page 12 ---
12 Brorholt, Høeg-Petersen, Jensen, Larsen, Mikučionis, Schilling, Wąsowski
Table 2: Computation time and sizes for synthesizing and reducing shields for
three models. The original size is the number of cells, whereas the reduced size
is the number of regions. All shields were statistically evaluated to be at least
99.47% safe with a confidence interval of 99% (no unsafe runs observed).
Model n m Synthesis time Size Reduction time Reduced size
Bouncing ball 3 1 218s 1430000 53s 2972
Boost converter 3 20 1430s 136800 21s 571
Random walk 4 20 82s 40000 1.5s 60
Water tank 3 1 0.1s 168 0.1s 24
cheap action. The state space is continuous and the outcomes of actions follow
uniform distributions.
In thewater tank model inspired from [1], a tank must be kept from overflow-
ing or running dry. Water flows from the tank at a rate that varies periodically.
At each time step, the player can control the inflow by switching a pump on or
off. The state space is discrete.
We show results for computing and reducing shields in Table 2. The water
tankis fully deterministic, and the bouncing ball only has low-variance stochastic
behavior. The boost converter andrandom walk have a high variance in action
outcomes, which is why we use m= 20simulation runs per sampled state. We
evaluated the shields statistically and found no unsafe runs in 10 000trials. The
reduction yields significantly smaller representations at acceptable run time.
6 Conclusion
We have described our implementation of the shield synthesis algorithm from [8]
in the tool Uppaal Coshy . Our tool can work with rich inputs modeled in
Uppaal. We have also presented the Caapalgorithm to reduce the shield rep-
resentation significantly, which is crucial for deployment on an embedded device.
We see several directions for future integration into Uppaal. As discussed,
our implementation does not apply systematic sampling for random dynamics;
however, we think that many sources of randomness in Uppaal models can be
handledsystematically.Currently,thereductionalgorithm Caapisimplemented
as a standalone tool, but it would be useful to also integrate it directly with Up-
paal. During development, we found it helpful to visualize shields, as in Fig. 3,
which could be offered in the user interface. In the same line, an explanation
why a state is marked unsafe in a shield would help in debugging a model.
Acknowledgments. ThisresearchwaspartlysupportedbytheIndependentResearch
Fund Denmark under reference number 10.46540/3120-00041B, DIREC - Digital Re-
search Centre Denmark under reference number 9142-0001B, and the Villum Investi-
gator Grant S4OS under reference number 37819.
Disclosure of Interests. TheUppaal tool is developed by Aalborg University.

--- Page 13 ---
Automatic Synthesis of Compact Shields for Hybrid Systems 13
References
1. Alshiekh, M., Bloem, R., Ehlers, R., Könighofer, B., Niekum, S., Topcu, U.: Safe
reinforcement learning via shielding. In: McIlraith, S.A., Weinberger, K.Q. (eds.)
AAAI. pp. 2669–2678. AAAI Press (2018). https://doi.org/10.1609/AAAI.V32I1.
11797
2. Ashok, P., Jackermeier, M., Jagtap, P., Kretínský, J., Weininger, M., Zamani,
M.: dtControl: decision tree learning algorithms for controller representation. In:
Ames, A.D., Seshia, S.A., Deshmukh, J. (eds.) HSCC. pp. 17:1–17:7. ACM (2020).
https://doi.org/10.1145/3365365.3382220
3. Ashok, P., Jackermeier, M., Kretínský, J., Weinhuber, C., Weininger, M., Yadav,
M.: dtControl 2.0: Explainable strategy representation via decision tree learning
steeredbyexperts.In:Groote,J.F.,Larsen,K.G.(eds.)TACAS.LNCS,vol.12652,
pp. 326–345. Springer (2021). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-72013-1_17
4. Behrmann, G., Cougnard, A., David, A., Fleury, E., Larsen, K.G., Lime, D.:
Uppaal-tiga: Time for playing games! In: Damm, W., Hermanns, H. (eds.)
CAV. LNCS, vol. 4590, pp. 121–125. Springer (2007). https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-540-73368-3_14
5. Bernet, J., Janin, D., Walukiewicz, I.: Permissive strategies: from parity games
to safety games. RAIRO Theor. Informatics Appl. 36(3), 261–275 (2002). https:
//doi.org/10.1051/ita:2002013
6. Breiman, L., Friedman, J.H., Olshen, R.A., Stone, C.J.: Classification and Regres-
sion Trees. Wadsworth (1984)
7. Brorholt, A.H., Høeg-Petersen, A.H., Larsen, K.G., Schilling, C.: Efficient shield
synthesis via state-space transformation. In: Steffen, B. (ed.) AISoLA. LNCS, vol.
15217, pp. 206–224. Springer (2024). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-75434-0_
14
8. Brorholt, A.H., Jensen, P.G., Larsen, K.G., Lorber, F., Schilling, C.: Shielded re-
inforcement learning for hybrid systems. In: Steffen, B. (ed.) AISoLA. LNCS, vol.
14380, pp. 33–54. Springer (2023). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-46002-9_3
9. Chatterjee, K., Henzinger, T.A., Jobstmann, B., Radhakrishna, A.: Gist: A
solver for probabilistic games. In: Touili, T., Cook, B., Jackson, P.B. (eds.)
CAV. LNCS, vol. 6174, pp. 665–669. Springer (2010). https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-642-14295-6_57
10. Chatterjee, K., Henzinger, T.A., Jobstmann, B., Singh, R.: QUASY: quantitative
synthesis tool. In: Abdulla, P.A., Leino, K.R.M. (eds.) TACAS. LNCS, vol. 6605,
pp. 267–271. Springer (2011). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-19835-9_24
11. David, A., Jensen, P.G., Larsen, K.G., Mikucionis, M., Taankvist, J.H.: Uppaal
Stratego. In: Baier, C., Tinelli, C. (eds.) TACAS. LNCS, vol. 9035, pp. 206–211.
Springer (2015). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-46681-0_16
12. Demirovic, E., Lukina, A., Hebrard, E., Chan, J., Bailey, J., Leckie, C., Ra-
mamohanarao, K., Stuckey, P.J.: Murtree: Optimal decision trees via dynamic
programming and search. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 23, 26:1–26:47 (2022), https:
//jmlr.org/papers/v23/20-520.html
13. Demirović, E., Schilling, C., Lukina, A.: In search of trees: Decision-tree policy
synthesis for black-box systems via search. In: AAAI. pp. 27250–27257. AAAI
Press (2025). https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v39i26.34934
14. Doyen, L., Frehse, G., Pappas, G.J., Platzer, A.: Verification of hybrid systems. In:
Handbook of Model Checking, pp. 1047–1110. Springer (2018). https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-3-319-10575-8_30

--- Page 14 ---
14 Brorholt, Høeg-Petersen, Jensen, Larsen, Mikučionis, Schilling, Wąsowski
15. Du, M., Liu, N., Hu, X.: Techniques for interpretable machine learning. Commun.
ACM 63(1), 68–77 (2020), https://doi.org/10.1145/3359786
16. Jaeger, M., Bacci, G., Bacci, G., Larsen, K.G., Jensen, P.G.: Approximating eu-
clidean by imprecise markov decision processes. In: Margaria, T., Steffen, B. (eds.)
ISoLA. LNCS, vol. 12476, pp. 275–289. Springer (2020). https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-030-61362-4_15
17. Jaeger, M., Jensen, P.G., Larsen, K.G., Legay, A., Sedwards, S., Taankvist, J.H.:
Teaching Stratego to play ball: Optimal synthesis for continuous space mdps. In:
Chen, Y., Cheng, C., Esparza, J. (eds.) ATVA. LNCS, vol. 11781, pp. 81–97.
Springer (2019). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-31784-3_5
18. Kwiatkowska, M., Norman, G., Parker, D., Santos, G.: PRISM-games 3.0: Stochas-
tic game verification with concurrency, equilibria and time. In: Lahiri, S.K.,
Wang, C. (eds.) CAV. LNCS, vol. 12225, pp. 475–487. Springer (2020). https:
//doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-53291-8_25
19. Kwiatkowska, M.Z., Norman, G., Parker, D.: PRISM 4.0: Verification of
probabilistic real-time systems. In: Gopalakrishnan, G., Qadeer, S. (eds.)
CAV. LNCS, vol. 6806, pp. 585–591. Springer (2011). https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-642-22110-1_47
20. Pranger, S., Könighofer, B., Posch, L., Bloem, R.: TEMPEST - synthesis tool for
reactive systems and shields in probabilistic environments. In: Hou, Z., Ganesh, V.
(eds.) ATVA. LNCS, vol. 12971, pp. 222–228. Springer (2021). https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-3-030-88885-5_15
21. Quinlan, J.R.: Learning decision tree classifiers. ACM Comput. Surv. 28(1), 71–72
(1996), https://doi.org/10.1145/234313.234346
22. Tarski, A.: A lattice-theoretical fixpoint theorem and its applications. Pacific
J. Math. 5(2), 285–309 (1955), https://www.projecteuclid.org/journalArticle/
Download?urlId=pjm%2F1103044538

--- Page 15 ---
Automatic Synthesis of Compact Shields for Hybrid Systems 15
A Query Syntax
Eq. (3) shows a query to compute the shield in Fig. 3(a) for the bouncing ball .
Declarationz }| {
strategy shield = acontrol:Desired invariantz }| {
A[] !Ball.Stop
{ v[-13, 13]:1300, p[0, 11]:550, Ball.location }| {z }
Parameters of the grid(3)
InUppaal,strategiesarefirst-classobjectsofthequerylanguage[11].Inthis
case, we declare a strategy named shield. The query starts with the keyword
acontrol to indicate synthesis of a control strategy by approximating a tran-
sition system, as previously described. Next comes the safety property, which
must be an invariant property, indicated by a (mandatory) A[]prefix, followed
by an expression in the Uppaal language. Finally, the query expects a descrip-
tion of the grid. The user must list all relevant variables of the system; all other
variables are ignored, as described in Section 3.4. For each relevant variable,
we expect lower and upper bounds of the state space as well as the number of
cells. In the example, the velocity vis bounded to [−13,13]and we ask for 1300
cells in that dimension, corresponding to a cell diameter of 0.02. The location
of a component is a special case of a (discrete) variable and requires no further
parameters. In the example, we want to keep track of Ball.location , for which
the tool automatically infers that there are two possible values. This results in
a grid of 1300×550×2 = 1 430 000 cells.
We note that, for the bouncing ball model, a coarser grid yields a less per-
missive shield, or even a shield where no action is considered safe (i.e., Cφis
empty). From the plots, we see that neighboring cells often have the same al-
lowed actions. In fact, every cell where the ball is in location Stop(half of all
cells) is immediately marked as unsafe. In the next section, we describe a general
method to obtaining a compact shield representation.
B Nonperiodic Controllers
The previous work [8] focused on systems with periodic control, i.e. there is a
constant amount of time between player actions. In contrast, Uppaal Coshy
allows the time between player actions to vary according to the environment. As
described in Section 3.2, it does so by running the simulation until the player
faces a new choice. We demonstrate this by modifying the player component
from Fig. 1(a), which uses guards and invariants to ensure that the player can
act exactly when x==0.1.
The guard on the edge between Waitand Chooseis changed to allow the
system to stay in Waitfor any period in the interval ]0.05,0.1](see Fig. 7(a)). For
the modified system, we obtain a slightly different shield, as shown in Fig. 7(b).

--- Page 16 ---
16 Brorholt, Høeg-Petersen, Jensen, Larsen, Mikučionis, Schilling, Wąsowski
(a) Stochastic player component. Com-
pared to Fig. 1(a), the guard has been up-
dated to x>0.05. The ball component re-
mains unchanged.
 vp
(b) Resulting shield.
Fig.7: Variant of the bouncing ball with uniformly random decision periods.
CCaapalgorithm
Let(pmin, pmax)define a region. We then want to find a vector ∆p∈Zksuch
that(pmin, pmin+∆p)defines a region that obeys the three expansion rules and
is (locally) maximal, in the sense that increasing it in any dimension would
violate at least one of the expansion rules. Note that a vector ∆p=pmax−
pminsatisfies the expansion rules trivially but is possibly not maximal. Thus,
a solution is guaranteed to exist. However, note that there is not necessarily
a unique maximal solution, and that the set of solutions is not convex, i.e.,
there may exist solutions ∆1
pand∆2
psuch that ∆1
p≤∆2
pbut no other ∆′
pwith
∆1
p≤∆′
p≤∆2
psatisfies the expansion rules. Formally:
Definition 3 (Expansion vector ∆p).Given pmin∈Zk, a decision tree T
over a k-dimensional state space, and a set Pof fixed regions, ∆p∈Zkis a
vector such that for pmax=pmin+∆pthe region R= (pmin, pmax)does not
violate any of the expansion rules in Definition 2 and for any vector ∆′
p=
(∆p1, . . . , ∆ pi+ 1, . . . , ∆ pk)at least one of the rules is violated.
In Algorithm 1, we formally present our greedy approach to finding ∆p.
It that starts with ∆p=pmax−pminfor some region R= (pmin, pmax). It then
iteratively selects a dimension dand attempts to increment the d-th entry of ∆p.
For that, we define the candidate region R′= (pmin, pmin+∆p)and check the
rules 1 and 2. If any of them is violated, we mark the corresponding dimension d
as exhausted, roll back the increment, and continue with a new dimension not
marked as exhausted yet, until none is left.
We implement the nondeterminism in line 4 by prioritizing lower regions; this
accountsforonlyexpandingtheupperbounds.Ontheotherhand,weimplement
the nondeterminism in line 8 with a uniformly random choice.
As mentioned above, the set of solutions is not convex. Correspondingly, if
Rule 3 is violated, the algorithm initiates an attempt at repairing the candidate

--- Page 17 ---
Automatic Synthesis of Compact Shields for Hybrid Systems 17
Algorithm 1 Caap
Input T: A binary decision tree inducing the partitioning PT
Output P′: A partitioning
1:P′← {}
2: Initialize matrix MfromPT
3:while P′does not cover PTdo
4: (pmin, pmax)←select an unexplored region from M
5: ∆p←pmax−pmin
6: ∆′
p←∆p
7: whilenot all dimensions have been exhausted do
8: d←select a non-exhausted dimension
9: ∆′
pd←∆pd+ 1
10: R′←(pmax, pmax+∆′
p)
11: ifR′violates rules 1 or 2 then
12: ∆′
pd←∆pd
13: mark das exhausted
14: else if R′violates Rule 3 (Definition 2) then
15: ∆′′
p←Repair (∆′
p, d)
16: ifrepair was successful then
17: ∆′
p←∆′′
p
18: else
19: ∆′
p←∆p
20: mark das exhausted
21: else
22: ∆p←∆′
p
23: R←region defined by (pmin, pmin+∆p)according to M
24: P′← P′∪ {R}
25:return P′
expansion by continuing the expansion to the largest bound in the expansion
dimension of any of the broken regions. This way, we check whether the violation
can be overcome by simply expanding more aggressively. For conciseness, we
do not describe the operation Repairfurther. When all dimensions have been
exhausted, ∆padheres to Definition 3.
We note that the algorithm is not guaranteed to find a local optimum. One
reason is that the repair only expands in one dimension. This choice is deliberate
to keep the algorithm efficient and avoid a combinatorial explosion.
D State-Space Transformation
In [7], we showed that state-space transformations can drastically reduce the
synthesis time of a shield. The idea is to define the grid in a transformed state
space S′⊆Rk′. The method relies on a function f:S→S′, mapping each
state to a transformed state, and another function f−1:S′→Smapping back.
Fig. 8(a) shows how to compute successors in S′, which is required for approxi-
mating reachability as described in Section 3.2. Given a state s′
0∈S′, we wish

--- Page 18 ---
18 Brorholt, Høeg-Petersen, Jensen, Larsen, Mikučionis, Schilling, Wąsowski
to find a possible successor s′
1for a given action. The transition function Tof
the EMDP is defined over S. Hence, we apply f−1to obtain a corresponding
state s0∈S. Then, we simulate Tas before. Finally, we apply fto obtain s′
1.
The same method can be applied in Uppaal Coshy by modifying the model,
which we show using the bouncing ball model. In [7], the transformation uses the
ball’s mechanical energy einstead of p, with transformation function f(p, v) =
(9.81p+1
2v2, v).
s′
0 s′
1
s0 s1T′
f−1
Tf
(a) Commutative diagram.
 (b) Augmented player component (cf. Fig. 1(a)).
Fig.8: State-space transformations and template implementation in Uppaal.
Thanks to the rich modeling language in Uppaal, it is easy to augment a
Uppaal model to support state-space transformations. We propose the following
general modifications. First, add corresponding new variables and implement the
transformation functions as standard functions (e.g., called f()and f_inv())
in the Uppaal language. Then, modify the controller actions as illustrated in
Fig. 8(b): add calls to f_inv() immediately after the Chooselocation is left, and
add calls to f()right before the Chooselocation is entered again.
The following query ran for 5 seconds and produced a shield of just 2×25×
26 = 1300 cells, which Caapcan further reduce to just 79regions.
strategy safe = acontrol: A[] !Ball.Stop
{ e[0, 100]:25, v[-13, 13]:26, Ball.location }
E From Regions to a Decision Tree
The output of the Caapalgorithm is a set of regions, each of which has an
associated set of actions. While this set of regions represents a shield, it is not
efficientforqueryingatruntime.Hence,weaimtorepresentthesetwithanother
decision tree. However, it is unlikely that the suggested partitioning can be
perfectly represented by a decision tree. For instance, the predicate in the root
node always splits the whole state space, but we may have partially eliminated
that split. To that end, we propose a simple algorithm that constructs a new tree
from a list of regions by recursively searching for a predicate that balances the
task of splitting as few regions as possible while also dividing the regions into
two nearly equal-sized subsets. The resulting tree induces a partitioning that is
finer than the partitioning used to create it. Still, as we will see, the reduction

--- Page 19 ---
Automatic Synthesis of Compact Shields for Hybrid Systems 19
gained from applying Caapto the original input is so significant that the cost
of converting its output to a decision tree is negligible.
Since Caapdoes not guarantee optimal reduction but selects its expansion
dimensions nondeterministically, we can achieve a better reduction by repeated
application of the algorithm. That is, after obtaining a smaller partitioning and
converting it to a decision tree, we use that new tree as input to the algorithm
once again. This process is repeated until no significant reduction is observed.
Note that the process does not converge to a fixed-point due to the nondeter-
ministic choices. We found experimentally that the main reduction is achieved
in the first application, and that the size of the output typically stabilizes after a
few iterations. Later repetitions are also less expensive due to the reduced input.
