--- Page 1 ---
A Formal Method for Evaluating the Performance of
TSN Trafﬁc Shapers using UPPAAL
Wang Guoy, Yanhong Huangy, Jianqi Shiy, Zhe Houz, Yang Yangy
yNational Trusted Embedded Software Engineering Technology Research Center,
East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
fwang.guo,yang.yang g@ntesec.ecnu.edu.cn
fyhhuang, jqshig@sei.ecnu.edu.cn
zGrifﬁth University, Australia
z.hou@grifﬁth.edu.au
Abstract —Deterministic low latency network plays an impor-
tant role in control systems, such as industrial control sys-
tem(ICS), Advanced Driver Assistance Systems (ADAS), et al.
There are quite tight timing requirements in these areas. The
IEEE 802.1 Time-Sensitive Networking (TSN) task group has
proposed several trafﬁc shapers to satisfy real-time communi-
cations requirements. Traditionally, the performance of TSN is
analyzed by simulations, whereas these methods cannot cover all
corner cases. With limited knowledge, this paper ﬁrstly presented
formal models of the TSN’s time-aware and peristaltic shapers
using UPPAAL, tactically solving the problem mentioned above.
Afterwards, we veriﬁed some real-time critical properties of the
shapers models, of which the results could evaluate whether these
shapers are able to satisfy strict timing requirements or not.
Based on the shapers models, we can make a further discussion
about the performance of time-critical frames combining the
preemption mechanism. Preemption is used to handle the conﬂict
in scheduling data frames with different priority levels. Moreover,
we can also analyze the resource utilization and transmission
latency. Under the time properties analysis and veriﬁcation of
TSN trafﬁc shapers, we can provide engineers with an accessible
reference which may assist them in developing the TSN.
Index Terms —IEEE 802.1TSN, Preemption, Performance
Analysis, Real-Time, UPPAAL
I. I NTRODUCTION
With the rapid development of various areas including
intelligent manufacturing, autonomous vehicles, the Internet
of things, and other automation ﬁelds, bandwidth and deter-
ministic delay requirements are becoming highly necessary for
the network. Unfortunately, traditional network like CAN or
FlexRay have been unable to meet the requirements. Instead,
Ethernet has gradually become a backbone network in those
areas to satisfy the scalability and ultra-high-speed require-
ments. It also supports complex topology [1]. However, The
deterministic timing guarantees for critical trafﬁc are essential
to the complex temporal behavior of Ethernet. Therefore, 8
trafﬁc classes have been deﬁned in the standard Ethernet IEEE
802.1Q [2]. These classes can be scheduled in order by a strict
priority in the non-preemptive (SPNP) scheduler at each output
port of each switches and endpoints. But this order introduces
a major source of delayor the reason that critical trafﬁc might
be blocked by lower priority trafﬁc.To cope with this problem,
*Corresponding author.the IEEE 802.1 TSN Task Group develops several shapers
, such as time-aware (TAS) and peristaltic shapers (PS) [3].
These shapers are capable of accommodating hard real-time
trafﬁc with deterministic end-to-end delays. The TSN network
stations communicate up to 18 times faster than with any
protocol available on the market today. This opens up new
possibilities in areas such as tightly synchronized motion and
control applications.
Although a number of common methods have appeared
for evaluating network performance, there is a lack of ef-
fective methods for real-time performance analysis. Among
those methods for evaluating network performance, the most
common one is simulation [4], which is used to assess a
network’s response to a given set of stimuli. However, due to
the extremely high reliability requirements, simulations often
require long simulation runs and usually do not expose all
corner cases. Another common method is real-time calculus.
It’s impossible to automate the veriﬁcation, and only the
worst-case scenario can be assessed, which can lead to rather
pessimistic conclusions for engineers.
To address these challenges, we recommend applying model
checking [5] in this paper. Model checking is one of the most
important and successful automatic techniques for verifying
highly sensitive systems such as security protocol. It exhaus-
tively searches the state space of the system to cover all corner
cases. In order to analyze the timing requirements about TSN,
we speciﬁcally adopt a timed model checker UPPAAL [6] to
model the TSN trafﬁc shapers.
UPPAAL is an integrated tool for modeling, simulation
and veriﬁcation of real-time systems [7]. It is well suited
for verifying such systems that can be modeled as non-
deterministic processes [8]–[10]. During the modeling of sys-
tems, the simulator may detect possible problems existed. The
veriﬁer may check the safety and liveness properties of the
system by searching the system state space on-the-ﬂy.
With UPPAAL, we model the shaping process at each router
node. Each process is modeled as a timed automaton. In
particular, Window automata deal with the time slots division
of the cycle. Trafﬁc automata deal with the data forwarding
processes. Moreover, we provide the models of the trafﬁc
shapers combining preemption mechanism. We validate our

--- Page 2 ---
models using the simulator and verify some properties of
our models. Furthermore, we conduct a formal analysis that
focuses on resource utilization of networks and end-to-end
delay of time-critical frames under four scenarios respectively,
i.e., TAS, TAS with preemption, PS, PS with preemption.
The main contributions of this article can be summarized
as follows.
1)Modeling and Veriﬁcation: We build formal models
of the TSN time-aware and peristaltic shapers mech-
anisms as well as those with preemption mechanism
using UPPAAL. Based on the shapers models, we verify
several properties, i.e., deadlock-free, reachability of
preemption, and low latency.
2)Timing Analysis: We analyze the resource utilization of
shapers and the transmission latency of real-time critical
frames. We provide the formal performance analysis of
TSN trafﬁc shapers and preemption mechanism.
Related Work There have been some work on the analysis
of TSN in related industries and academia. Bello et al. [11]
gave an overview of TSN in industrial systems. This paper
identiﬁed validation and veriﬁcation as one of the TSN re-
search challenges. Luxi Zhao et al. [12] proposed a network
calculus-based approach to determine the worst-case end-to-
end delays of audio/video bridging trafﬁc with non-preemption
and preemption. Peng Zhang et al. [13] presented an analysis
framework of TSN to analyse the worst-case latency through
real-time calculus. Although the above two approaches can
calculate the worst-case delay by arithmetic, they rely too
much on parameters and cannot automatically calculate. [14]
used network simulation tool NeSTiNg to investigate the TSN
scheduling mechanism. However, it’s very time consuming
and can not cover all cases. In [15], IEEE 802.1i security
protocol is modeled and veriﬁed based on timed automata
using model checker UPPAAL. It could check correctness
of the communication protocol automatically and provide
better security. In this article, we recommend applying model
checking.
In our paper, we consider the real-time performance of time
critical frames under the time-aware and peristaltic shapers
with preemption and non-preemption. To the best of our
knowledge, there is no other study to model and verify the
TSN’s TAS and PS for evaluation.
Paper Organization The remainder of this paper is or-
ganized as follows: a brief overview of TSN protocol and
UPPAAL is given in Section II. In Section III, we give the
formal models of the TSN trafﬁc shapers using UPPAAL.
Section IV presents experimental conﬁguration, veriﬁcation
and formal analysis of the TSN shapers. Section V concludes
this article.
II. P RELIMINARIES
The IEEE 802.1 TSN has deﬁned new mechanisms that
enable real-time systems using Ethernet technologies. Speciﬁ-
cally, TSN deﬁned time-aware and peristaltic shapers to allow
the convergence of low-latency scheduled trafﬁc (ST) and
standard best-effort (BE) Ethernet trafﬁc on the same network.
Fig. 1. Operation of Shapers.
Data frames for scheduled trafﬁc are real-time frames, smaller
in size, but more demanding in terms of real time. Data frames
for best-effort trafﬁc are larger in size, but less demanding for
real-time.
As shown in Fig.1, there are eight queues to accommodate
the two types of data frames mentioned above. A time-aware
gate on each queue port controls the timing of data frame
forwarding. The number 0 in the scheduling table on the
right indicates that the gate is closed and transmission is
suspended. The number 1 indicates that the gate is open
and transmission is allowed. In the module of transmission
selection algorithm, the engineering developer can choose
various scheduling algorithms depending on the latency needs
of different applications.
The bottom part of Fig.1 shows the time slots division of
the periodic time cycle shaped by TAS and PS. The shaping
rules in the corresponding time slots are described as follows.
A. IEEE 802.1 Qbv: Time Aware Shaper
Time-aware shaper deﬁnes a mechanism for time-driven
control and scheduling of data frames. It is designed to
separate the communication into ﬁxed length and repeating
time cycles. In this paper, each cycle is further divided into
three time slots. As shown in the TAS at the bottom of Fig.1,
the time slot BEallows for standard best-effort Ethernet trafﬁc
to be sent and the time slot STonly allows the transmission of
low-latency scheduled trafﬁc with high priority. The time slot
GBis called guard band which is explained in the following
scenario.
As shown in Fig.2, the top row shows a typical conﬂict
scenario. A new best-effort ( BE) frame transmission is started
in time slot T0(BE time slot) and it infringed the following
time slot T1(ST time slot). By partially or completely blocking
the time-critical ST time slot, the real-time frames ST1 and
ST2 can be delayed up to the point where they cannot meet
the application requirements any longer. In the non-preemptive
mode (NP in the second row), time-aware shaper handles this
conﬂict by setting a guard band in front of T1. The duration

--- Page 3 ---
Fig. 2. Time-Aware Shaper (TAS)
of the guard band is as long as the length of the maximum
best-effort frame. None of new frame transmission is allowed
to start within guard band. While the guard bands manage to
protect the time slot with high-priority trafﬁc, they also have
a signiﬁcant drawback. They waste bandwidth for trafﬁc on
the Ethernet link.
B. IEEE 802.1 Qch: Peristaltic Shaper
Peristaltic shaper provides a trafﬁc shaping method that can
deliver deterministic and easily calculated latency for time-
sensitive trafﬁc. As shown in the PSat the bottom of Fig.1,
peristaltic shaper also divides the transmission time of data
frames into ﬁxed length and consecutive time cycles. The
peristaltic phase is dependent on the required maximum end-
to-end latency the width of real-time frames. PSdivides a
time cycle into two equal-length slots ( ODD andEVEN time
slots). In addition, each time slot allows for both scheduled
trafﬁc and best-effort trafﬁc to be sent. PSspeciﬁes that data
frames arriving in ODD time slot are required to wait until
the following EVEN time slot to send, and vice versa [16].
Fig. 3. Peristaltic Shaper (PS)
As shown in Fig.3, the top row shows a typical conﬂict
scenario. When a real-time frame STarrives before the start
of the ODD , there is a best-effort frame BEbeing transmitting.
Unfortunately, the frame BEis too large to ﬁt into the time slot
ODD . The frame STwill be blocked, because the transmission
of the frame BEcannot be interrupted. In non-preemptive
mode (NP in the second row), the frame STis forwarded
until the frame BEto complete transmission. The worst-case
STframe delay can be two cycles.
C. IEEE 802.1 Qbu: Frame Preemption
IEEE 802.1Qbu has speciﬁed the frame preemption tech-
nology [17]. Preemption allows one or more express (higher-
priority) frames to interrupt the transmission of a preemptable(lower priority) frame. It also deﬁnes procedures to resume
the transmission of the preemptable frames once the express
frames have been transmitted.
To mitigate the negative effect from the guard bands in Qbv
and improve the real-time performance of frame STin Qch,
we recommend the frame preemption technology. The bottom
row (P) in Fig.2 indicates the preemption behavior of the real-
time frames ST1 andST2 in Qbv. They can be forwarded as
soon as they arrive. Likewise, the bottom row (P) in Fig.3
means that the frame STis allowed to be forwarded at the
start of the following time slot ODD with preemption in Qch.
As a result, preemption can reduce the end-to-end latency of
real-time frames.
D. UPPAAL Model Checker
The core functionality of UPPAAL is model-checking of
hard real-time properties on timed automata models. It is
supported by a veriﬁer and simulator, which enables manual
and random tracing through the model. All the clocks progress
synchronously. The simulator can be used in three ways: 1) the
user can run the system manually and choose which transitions
to take, 2) the random mode can be toggled to let the system
run on its own, or 3) the user can go through a trace to see
how certain states are reachable. By the ways, we can cover
all corner cases. The main purpose of a model checker is to
verify the model against requirement speciﬁcations.
UPPAAL gives a pseudo-formal semantics for the require-
ment speciﬁcation language. UPPAAL uses A[]to represent
AG of CTL. A[]pevaluates to true only when every reachable
state satisﬁes predicate p. The property A<>p to represent
AF of CTL, which evaluates to true only when all possible
transition sequences eventually reach a state satisfying p. the
propertyE <>p to denote EF of CTL that evaluates to true if
and only if there is a sequence where there exists a reachable
state satisfying p. The state property deadlock evaluates to true
for a state only when there is no action successor.
III. M ODELLING THE TRAFFIC SHAPERS
In this section, we formally model the processes of the TSN
time-aware and peristaltic shapers using UPPAAL.
A. Abstracting Data Structures in TSN Protocol
In the text below, We deﬁne abstract data structures in the
TSN protocol. The terminal station generates data frames that
are sent to the switch.
Deﬁnition 1 (Data Frame) .A data frame Fis deﬁned as a
tuple (FrameSize;ReceiveTime;Class;FrameInterval ),
where each component is explained below.
FrameSize indicates the byte size of the data frame.
ReceiveTime is the arrival time of the frame.
Class gives the priority of the frame, i.e., ST and BE
frames.
FrameInterval indicates how often the data is sent.
Deﬁnition 2 (Queue) .A queue Q is deﬁned as a quadruple
(Array[n], Class, Head, Tail ), where

--- Page 4 ---
Array[n] indicates a sequence of frames in the queue,
and the length of the sequence is n.
Class is the priority of the queue, ranging from 0 to 7.
Head is the index of the ﬁrst element in the queue.
Tailis the index of the last element in the queue.
Fig. 4. Terminal Station
As shown in the Fig.4, we create an automaton that sim-
ulates the process of data producing. In the initial location,
if the global clock variable time[*] equals to the value of
F .FrameInterval , the terminal station starts to generate a frame.
newFrame(F) is a function used to generate a frame. Then the
frame is queuing in the switch. enqueue(F) is responsible for
queuing the frame. The process will repeat according to the
frame interval.
B. Transmission Substandards Models
We abstract the shaping behavior of the time-aware and
peristaltic shapers into two parts. One part is about the time
slots division, which is represented as Time Window Automata .
The other part is about controlling the data trafﬁc transmission
within the corresponding time slots. The part is described as
Trafﬁc Automata . A complete shaping process is described as
a network of timed automata with the two parts above.
TABLE I
ABSRTACT TIMING STATES IN SHAPERS
States Description
BE Best-effort trafﬁc transmission time slots
GB Guard band time slots
ST Scheduled trafﬁc transmission time slots
ODD/EVEN Odd/Even time slots
preempted Preempting transmission time slots
resumeBE Resuming transmission time slots
waitTimeout Waiting for timeout error
Locations: We extract some states of time slots in the com-
munication. Table I lists the time slots states fBE, GB, STg
under TAS rules, states fODD, EVENgunder PS rules and
statesfpreempted,resumeBE gunder the preemption behavior.
The state BE (ST) allow for only BE(ST) frames transmission.
The state GB represents time slots Guard Band. There is no
new frame allowed to start within GB. The states ODD (EVEN)
means that the current time slot is marked as ODD (EVEN).
The mark is used as a basis for determining whether data
frames can be forwarded or not. The state preempted indicatesthe point where the preemption happen, and state resumeBE is
for resuming BE frames transmission. The state waitTimeout
warns that the the waiting time of real-time frames has expired.
Channels: Time Window Automata and Trafﬁc Automata
synchronise over shared channels and exchange data via shared
variables. Table II lists several channels. The channels act as
synchronization signals to trigger the transmission of related
frames. Further explanation will be given later.
TABLE II
ABSTRACT CHANNELS IN TSN P ROTOCOL
Channels Functionalities
tranBE Sync signal used to transmit best-effort frames
tranST Sync signal used to transmit real-time frames
preempt Sync signal used to trigger preemption
resume Sync signal used to trigger resumption transmission
1)Modeling the TAS mechanism :This section presents
the modeling process of TSN’s Time-aware shaper (TAS),
including TAS Window Automaton andTAS Trafﬁc Automata .
Fig. 5. TAS Window automaton
TAS Window Automaton: The time slots division rules
for TAS are given in part A of the preliminaries before.
As shown in Fig.5, the TAS window imitates a time cycle
throughout the system. We denote the three time slots in the
cycle with locations BE,GB, and ST. The variables GBstart
andSTstart are the start moments of time slots GBandST,
respectively. The variables BEend, GB endandSTendare
the end moments of time slots BE, GB, andST, respectively.
The TAS window starts in Initial location, where the global
clock variable time records the elapsed time. The window
determines whether to move by comparing the current time
with the starting values of different time slots. When the
window enters the BE (ST) location, the BE (ST) Trafﬁc
Automaton gets the permission tranBE!(tranST!) to transmit
with tranBE?(tranST?) synchronisation. The variable count
records the total number of time cycle and can be used to
calculate the resource utilization.
TAS Trafﬁc Automata: The rules for the data trafﬁc
transmission have been given in part A of of the preliminaries
above. Fig.6 displays the ST Trafﬁc Automaton in TAS.
Firstly, the STframes are in the wait location, where they
wait to receive the permission ( tranST? ). By the waiting delay
waitDelay , we can make a judgment that whether the critical

--- Page 5 ---
frames meet the real-time performance requirements or not.
In the preST location, if the waiting delay is greater than the
maximum, then the error warning waitTimeout will be issued.
If the waiting delay is acceptable, then function Empty() will
check that whether the queue is empty or not. If it is not empty,
then the frames is started to transmit.
Secondly, we deﬁne the variable tranDelayST , which in-
dicates the length of time to transmit a single STframe.
The clock variable watch records the duration of the frame
transmission. By comparing watch andtranDelayST insendST
location, we can see whether a single STframe is completely
transmitted or not. The variable totalTimeST records the total
transmission duration of ST frames in the whole task. It is
used to analyze resource utilization later.
Finally, in the tranSuccess location, the ST trafﬁc automaton
determines whether to move to the next time slot by comparing
time with STend. The transmission process of the BE Tafﬁc
Automaton is similar to this, so we do not repeat it.
Fig. 6. ST Trafﬁc automaton in TAS.
2)Modeling the PS Mechanism :This section presents the
modeling process of TSN’s peristaltic shaper(PS).
PS Window Automaton: The time slots division rules for
PS are given in part B of the preliminaries before. As shown
in Fig.7, the PS window imitates a time cycle throughout the
system. There are two equal length time slots in every cycle,
namely ODD and EVEN .count records the slot tag. SLOT
(CYCLE ) is the length of one time slot (cycle). By comparing
the elapsed time with the SLOT and CYCLE , the window
enables the rotation of time slots. Once the window switches
the time slot, the signal judege1! synchronises with judge1?
in the trafﬁc automata. Then the trafﬁc autoamta will check if
frames meet the transmission conditions or not.
Fig. 7. PS Window automaton.PS Trafﬁc Automata: The transmission rules have been
given in part B of the preliminaries above. Fig.8 displays the
ST Trafﬁc automaton in PS.
Firstly, the STframes are in the wait location. Step 1 ,
the function Empty() detects if the queue is empty or not.
If it is empty, waiting again. If it is not empty, frames
are ready in preST location. The method to evaluate the
wait timeout is similar to the one above in TAS window.
Step 2 , when the time slot is switched ( judge1? ), or the
frame being transmitted is ﬁnished ( judge2?) , frames in the
queue will check themselves to see if they meet the sending
conditions ( count ! =ReceiveTime ) or not. At this point,
if the conditions are met, then frames go to the next step.
Step 3 , variable lock indicates whether the network channel is
occupied or not. When the lock equals 0, the channel is idle.
Fig. 8. ST Trafﬁc automaton in PS.
Fig. 9. Gate in PS.
Secondly, frames transmission starts in sendST location. ST
frames occupy the network channel by lock=2 . The signal
tranST! synchronise with tranST? ingate, shown in Fig.9.
The role of watch andtotalTimeST here are the same as the
ones of the ST Trafﬁc Automaton in TAS above.
Finally, in tranSuccess location, the frames transmission
are completed and unlock the network channel. The signal
ﬁnished! informs the gate to go to idle. The transmission
process of the BE Trafﬁc Automaton is similar to this, so we
do not repeat it.
3)Modeling the TAS with Preemption Mechanism :This
section presents the modeling process of time-aware shaper
combined with the preemption mechanism in TSN. We imitate
the preemption behavior based on the TAS automata and create
the automata for the preemption process.
TAS with Preemption Window Automaton: When TAS
is combined with preemption, the guard band mechanism is

--- Page 6 ---
no longer used here. The time cycle is divided into BEand
STslots. Preemption may occur in the scenario. When the ST
frame arrives during the BEslot, there is a BEframe being
transmitted.
Fig. 10. BE Trafﬁc automaton in TAS with Preemption.
TAS with Preemption Trafﬁc Automata: The preemption
rules have been given in part C of the preliminaries above.
Fig.10 demonstrates that how frame preemption works based
onBE Trafﬁc Automaton in TAS. The transmission process of
BEframes is similar to the transmission process of STframes
in TAS described above. During the process of sending a BE
frame, if the STframe arrives, it synchronises with the BE
Trafﬁc Automaton . This is done by the channel synchronisation
preempt? on the transition to interrupt location, where the BE
frame is suspended.
Then the STframe starts transmission and the BEframe
enters the preempted state. When the STframe transmission
is completed, the interrupted frame transmission is resumed
inresumeBE location. The following process is similar to the
BE Trafﬁc Automaton in TAS described above. The rest of
automata are not shown here due to the space issues.
Fig. 11. BE Trafﬁc automaton in PS with Preemption.
4)Modeling the PS with Preemption Mechanism :This
section presents the modeling process of peristaltic shaper
combined with the preemption mechanism in TSN.
For PS with preemption window, the time slot rules remain
unchanged.
PS with Preemption Trafﬁc Automata: The transmission
process of BEframes is similar to the transmission process
ofSTframes in PS described above. Fig.11 demonstrates thathow frame preemption works based on BE Trafﬁc Automaton
in PS. The preemption process is similar to that in TAS with
preemption above.
TABLE III
TRAFFIC CLASSES .
Class ST BE
FrameSize 128B 256B
TransTime 12 s 25s
FrameInterval 200 s 125s
Priority HP LP
IV. VERIFICATION OF SHAPERS MODELS
This section validates and veriﬁes our trafﬁc shapers models
by using the simulator and veriﬁer in UPPAAL, respectively.
A. Experimental Conﬁguration
In our experimental study, we consider two classes of data
frames: ST and BE frames. Table III shows the parameters of
these frames, whose explanations can be found as follows:
FrameSize indicates the frame size in bytes. The size is
made up of the payload of a message plus its header, i.e.,
Size =Payload +Header .
TranTime denotes the frame transmission time (or the
length), which is calculated by the size of the frame
and the network bandwidth. In this paper, we assume
the bandwidth is 100 Mbps.
FrameInterval indicates how often the data is sent.
Priority HP stands for high priority and LP stands for
low priority.
According to IEEE 802.1 TSN, the period of cycle in TAS is
500s. The length of guard band equals the maximum-sized
best-effort frame, Lgb= 25s. IEEE 802.1TSN speciﬁes the
maximum end-to-end latency for real-time frames over 5 hops
to be 100s.
B. Verifying Fundamental Properties
To vlidate that the model in this paper follows the rules
of shapers, we deﬁne properties 1-7. To verify that the real-
time frames meet the real-time performance requirements, we
deﬁne property 8. The veriﬁcation results and analysis are also
presented in Table IV.
Property 1 (Deadlock-freedom (DF)) .This property ensures
that the system never moves to a (deadlock) state where no
moves are possible. A deadlock may lead to data loss or even
system breakdown. It can be speciﬁed in CTL as
A[ ]not deadlock
This formula states that, for all paths, the system will never
enter a deadlock state.
Property 2 (Frame Mutual Exclusion (FME)) .This property
ensures that the shaping mechanism does not transmit frames

--- Page 7 ---
of different priorities at the same time. We specify this property
as the conjunction of the below formulae:
TAS :A[ ]not(window:BE and window:ST )
PS:A[ ]not(window:ODD and window:EVEN )
PS=TAS :A[ ]not(STtraffic:sendST and
BEtraffic:sendBE )
The ﬁrst formula indicates that the time slot BEstate and
STstate of process window must not occur at the same time in
TAS. The second formula means that the time slot ODD state
andEVEN state of process window must not occur at the same
time in PS. The third formula indicates that the best-effort and
scheduled trafﬁc must not occupy the communication channel
at the same time. BEtrafﬁc andSTtrafﬁc denote the trafﬁc
automata.
Property 3 (Liveness of Forwarding Processes (LFP)) .It
is crucial that the forwarding process of a data frame is
eventually completed; otherwise, there might be data loss. We
specify this property as the conjunction of the formulae below.
PS=TAS :A<> (STtraffic:sendST imply
STtraffic:tranSuccess )
With the above formula, the model checker can verify if the
frame has ﬁnished the forwarding process or not.
Property 4 (Non-interleaving (NI)) .This property guarantees
that the BE data frames cannot be transmitted within the ST
interval, and vice versa. We formulate this property as below.
TAS :A[ ]window:ST imply not BE traffic:sendBE
The formula states that STframes cannot be transmitted
during time slot BE.
Property 5 (Sequentiality of Trafﬁc (ST)) .This property
checks that when a data frame has arrived, it must wait until
a later time slot to be forwarded. We express this property in
CTL below.
PS:A< > ST traffic:sendST imply
(ReceiveTime ! =count )
Property 6 (Reachability of Preemption (RP)) .When the
transmission of low-priority frames blocks the transmission of
real-time critical frames, the latter may interrupt the former
and take precedence over the transmission. We formulate this
event as below.
TAS=PS :E <> BE traffic:preempted
and STtraffic:preemption
The above formula indicates that preemption events can
occur during the BE frames transmission.
Property 7 (Low Latency (LL)) .IEEE 802.1TSN speciﬁes
the maximum end-to-end latency for time critical frames over5 hops as 100 s. We formulate the latency requirement as
below.
TAS=PS :A[ ]not(STtraffic:waitTimeout )
This property checks whether the ST frames meet the la-
tency requirement. We can use this property to verify concrete
real-time performance.
C. Veriﬁcation Results
TABLE IV
VERIFICATION RESULTS
Category TAS PS TAS+Qbu PS+Qbu
DF YES YES YES YES
FME YES YES YES YES
LFP YES YES YES YES
NI YES / NO /
ST / YES / YES
RP NO NO YES YES
LL NO NO YES YES
The results of veriﬁcation are shown in Table IV. An entry
of YES indicates that the property has passed the veriﬁcation
while NO indicates otherwise. The blank entries indicate that
the property is no relevant to the shaper. The value of the
property NIinTAS+Qbu is NO, which means the preemption
can not happen. It is same as the reason why the values of
the property RPinTAS andPSare NO. Therefore, the results
of properties 1-7 prove that our models follow the time-aware
and peristaltic shaper’s shaping rules.
By observing and analysing the diagnostic traces generated
in the simulator of UPPAAL, we give the reasons why the
property LLcan not pass the veriﬁcation in TAS andPSbelow.
ForTAS, if the real-time frames arrive at the start instant of BE
time slots, they will be blocked for a long time. The waiting
delay is too long for time-critical frames For PS, the time slot
is very short. When best-effort frames are being transmitted,
they will occupy the next time slot. In the worst case, the
waiting delay of the real-time frames exceed two time slots,
which is far greater than the delay requirement.
ForTAS+Qbu , the preemption guarantees that the latency
of real-time frames will meet the maximum delay requirement.
Real-time frames do not need to wait for the length of BE
time slot or the guard band. When the real-time frames
arrive, they can be transmitted ﬁrst. For PS+Qbu , real-time
frames will not be interfered by best-effort frames with low-
priority anymore. They can be sent immediately after sufﬁcient
residence time, so the waiting delay is much shorter. Fig.12
shows that the shapers with preemption mechanism can satisfy
the time requirement.
D. Timing Analysis
By running and simulating on the shapers models we have
established, we can obtain the recorded total time, the total
transmission time, waiting delay and other variables. As shown

--- Page 8 ---
TABLE V
TIME PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS
Mechanism TsumTglobal Utilization
TAS 916 s 1000s 91.6%
1836s 2000s 91.8%
2754s 3000s 91.8%
3642s 4000s 92.1%
TAS+Qbu 976 s 1000s 97.6%
1956s 2000s 97.8%
2943s 3000s 98.1%
3928s 4000s 98.2%
in Table V and VI, we analyze the time performance of
experiments based on these data. Tglobal represents the value of
global clock time after all frames have been transmitted. Tsum
denotes the total transmission time of all frames. The resource
Fig. 12. Veriﬁcation results.
utilization rate can be roughly calculated by the formula:
utilization =Tsum
Tglobal100%
In Table V, we calculate the resource utilization rate when
Tglobal = 1000;:::;4000 . It shows that the resource utilization
of TAS is much lower than that of TAS with preemption
mechanism. Table VI shows the maximum delay time that an
ST frame may have to wait. Experimental results show that
when the payloads increase, the preemption mechanism can
signiﬁcantly improve the latency of time-critical frames and
the resource utilization of the original protocol.
TABLE VI
DELAY ANALYSIS OF ST F RAMES
Mechanism maxDelay/frame
TAS 250 s
PS 40 s
PS+Qbu 20 s
TAS+Qbu 2 s
V. C ONCLUSION
Time-sensitive network is an effective solution to transmit
real-time trafﬁc in control systems. Meanwhile, the feasibilityanalysis of TSN is particularly important. Motivated by this,
this paper presents formal models of the TSN trafﬁc shapers.
In order to evaluate whether these shapers are able to satisfy
the strict timing requirements or not, we applied CTL formulas
to describe the properties of the TSN protocol, i.e., deadlock-
freedom, frame mutual exclusion,liveness of forwarding pro-
cesses, non-interleaving, sequentiality of trafﬁc, reachability of
preemption and low latency. These properties could be veriﬁed
by the veriﬁer in UPPAAL. Besides, we also conducted a
formal analysis of different shapers based on our models.
In particular, we compared the resource utilization and the
transmission latency of real-time frames with and without
preemption. We found that the preemption mechanism can
not only reduce the end-to-end latency but also signiﬁcantly
improve resource utilization. Through our models, designers
and engineers can easily understand and develop the TSN
better with higher reliability and hard real-time performance.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is partially supported by National Key Research
and Development Program (2019YFB2102602).
REFERENCES
[1] C. E. Spurgeon, Ethernet: the deﬁnitive guide . ” O’Reilly Media, Inc.”,
2000.
[2] “Ieee standard for local and metropolitan area networks–bridges and
bridged networks,” 2014.
[3] I. of Electrical and E. E. (2019), “Time-sensitive networking task group.
accessed: Jul. 6 [online],” 2016.
[4] G. Alderisi, A. Caltabiano, G. Vasta, G. Iannizzotto, T. Steinbach, and
L. L. Bello, “Simulative assessments of ieee 802.1 ethernet avb and
time-triggered ethernet for advanced driver assistance systems and in-car
infotainment,” in 2012 IEEE Vehicular Networking Conference (VNC) ,
pp. 187–194, IEEE, 2012.
[5] E. M. Clarke Jr, O. Grumberg, D. Kroening, D. Peled, and H. Veith,
Model checking . MIT press, 2018.
[6] G. Behrmann, A. David, and K. G. Larsen, “A tutorial on uppaal,”
inFormal methods for the design of real-time systems , pp. 200–236,
Springer, 2004.
[7] K. G. Larsen and P. Pettersson, “Wang yi,” Uppaal in a nutshell. STTT ,
vol. 1, no. 1-2, pp. 134–152, 1997.
[8] S. Saini and A. Fehnker, “Evaluating the stream control transmission
protocol using uppaal,” 2017.
[9] M. Kamali, “Modeling and verifying the olsr protocol using uppaal,”
2014.
[10] J. Bengtsson and D. Grifﬁoen, “Automated veriﬁcation of an audio-
control protocol using uppaal,” The Journal of Logic and Algebraic
Programming , vol. s 52–53, no. 1, pp. 163–181, 2002.
[11] L. L. Bello and W. Steiner, “A perspective on ieee time-sensitive
networking for industrial communication and automation systems,”
Proceedings of the IEEE , vol. 107, no. 6, pp. 1094–1120, 2019.
[12] L. Zhao, P. Pop, Z. Zheng, and Q. Li, “Timing analysis of avb trafﬁc
in tsn networks using network calculus,” in 2018 IEEE Real-Time and
Embedded Technology and Applications Symposium (RTAS) , pp. 25–36,
IEEE, 2018.
[13] P. Zhang, Y . Liu, J. Shi, Y . Huang, and Y . Zhao, “A feasibility analysis
framework of time-sensitive networking using real-time calculus,” IEEE
Access , vol. 7, pp. 90069–90081, 2019.
[14] D. Hellmanns, J. Falk, A. Glavackij, R. Hummen, S. Kehrer, and F. D ¨urr,
“On the performance of stream-based, class-based time-aware shaping
and frame preemption in tsn,” in 2020 IEEE International Conference
on Industrial Technology (ICIT) , pp. 298–303, IEEE, 2020.
[15] Y . Lu and M. Sun, “Modeling and veriﬁcation of ieee 802.11 i security
protocol for internet of things.,” in SEKE , pp. 270–269, 2018.
[16] M. J. Teener, “Peristaltic shaper in clause 8 style,” 2013.
[17] IEEE, “802.1qbu—frame preemption,” 2015.
