--- Page 1 ---
Better railway engineering through
statistical model checking
Enno Ruijters and Mari elle Stoelinga
University of Twente, EWI-FMT, P.O. Box 217, 7500 AE Enschede, The Netherlands
e-mail: fe.j.j.ruijters, m.i.a.stoelinga g@utwente.nl
Abstract. Maintenance is essential to ensuring the dependability of a
technical system. Periodic inspections, repairs, and renewals can prevent
failures and extend a system's lifespan. At the same time, maintenance
incurs cost and planned downtime. It is therefore important to nd a
maintenance policy that balances cost and dependability.
This paper presents a framework, fault maintenance trees (FMTs), inte-
grating maintenance into the industry-standard formalism of fault trees.
By translating FMTs to priced timed automata and applying statistical
model checking, we can obtain system dependability metrics such as sys-
tem reliability and mean time to failure, as well as costs of maintenance
and failures over time, for dierent maintenance policies.
Our framework is exible and can be extended to include eects specic
to the system being analysed. We demonstrate that our framework can
be used in practice using two case studies from the railway industry:
electrically insulated joints, and pneumatic compressors.
1 Introduction
In today's world, safety-critical systems are all around us. Complex systems like
nuclear power plants, pacemakers, and trains have become essential to the oper-
ation of society, and failure of these systems can have disastrous consequentes.
It is therefore important to analyse such systems to ensure that they meet de-
pendability requirements.
In addition to safe design, proper maintenance is essential to keeping tech-
nological systems functioning. Few systems can remain operational for decades
without any maintenance or repairs, and so this must be included in the safety
analysis. Traditionally, this has been examined separately from the system de-
sign: First components manufacturers specify what maintenance is required, and
what the reliability properties are if this maintenance is performed. Then, these
properties are used to analyze whole-system dependability, thus assuming this
maintenance is performed as specied.
A recent trend in asset management is towards reliability-centerd, a.k.a. risk
based, maintenance [10]. This involves focussing maintenance eorts on the more
critical components, while performing less maintenance on less important parts.
Thus, better dependability can be achieved at lower cost. Planning such mainte-
nance, however, requires knowledge of how maintenance at the component level
aects whole-system dependability. We have developed a framework called fault

--- Page 2 ---
maintenance trees [11] combining maintenance and system design, which can
be analysed using statistical model checking to obtain quantitative information
about system dependability under dierent maintenance policies. This can then
be used to nd cost-optimal maintenance plans without compromising on safety.
Concretely, we combine the industry-standard for dependability analysis,
fault trees, with maintenance models. The combined models are translated into
timed automata, which can be analysed using the UPPAAL-SMC [6] model
checking tool. We can obtain key performance indicators such as system re-
liability, expected number of failures over time, and expected costs. Our case
studies for the railway industry show that this framework is suitable to mainte-
nance policies found in practise, and yields the information necessary to optimize
maintenance policies.
This paper rst explains key information about maintenance and mainte-
nance policies in Section 2. Next, Section 3 explains our framework of fault
maintenance trees. Section 4 describes two case studies, and we conclude in
Section 5.
1.1 Related work
The automata used in this work are based on the Input/Output Interactive
Markov Chains used by the DFTCalc tool [2], which uses stochastic model check-
ing to analyse dynamic fault trees without maintenance.
For an overview of a large number of analysis techniques and extensions for
fault trees, we refer the reader to [12]. We mention some of the most closely
related works here.
Bucci et al. [4] extend tradition fault trees with non-Markovian failure distri-
butions and present a tool to analyse such FTs. This tool can be used to analyze
components that wear out over time, but does not consider maintenance to undo
this wear.
Buchacker et al. [5] present an alternative extension called Extended fault
trees, to model systems where the failure rates of some components depend on
the status of other components. This formalism does not include repairs or non-
exponentially-distributed failure times, nor maintenance decisions based on the
state of an entire subtree.
Aside from fault trees, numerous methods have been developed for the anal-
ysis and optimization of maintenance strategies. As this eld is very broad, we
refer the reader to surveys such as [1] for techniques based on simulation or [15]
on o.a. analytic approximations and Bayesian reasoning.
One technique that is particularly close to our work is by Carnevali et al. [7]
and examines the eect of maintenance in phased systems. Here resources are
used by several tasks in a sequence, and in-between these tasks faults can be
detected and repaired.
2

--- Page 3 ---
2 Maintenance
Most long-lived systems require some form of maintenance to avoid premature
failures. From simple procedures like inating your tires, to large overhauls of
entire power plants, certain operations must be performed to keep a system in
working order. This section explains how maintenance is typically performed in
the railway industry.
2.1 Types of maintenance
Maintenance actions can be broadly divided into two categories: preventive and
corrective maintenance. Preventive maintenance is performed before a system
or component experiences a failure, where failure means that the system or
component is no longer able to performs one of its intended functions. Corrective
maintenance is performed after a failure has occurred, and is intended to restore
the system or component to a functioning state.
Note that we consider component failures separate from system failures, as
not all components are always necessary for the entire system to operate. For
example, a datacenter with a redundant power supply can experience a failure
of one power source while the datacenter as a whole remains fully functional.
Section 3 explains fault trees, which are a formalism to describe how component
failure combine to cause system failures.
An important aspect to preventive maintenance is the notion of degradation
of components. Due to time and use, components typically degrade over time
until they reach a point where a failure occurs. For example, the treads on a
car's tires gradually decreases with use, until the tread is too worn to perform a
necessary function of the tires, namely retain grip on the road when wet.
The choice of which type of maintenance depends on several factors, includ-
ing the dierent costs of maintenance and failures, and the practical applicability
of preventive maintenance. In systems where failures are much more expensive
than maintenance, such as a nuclear power plant, preventive maintenance is al-
most always cost-benecial. Conversely, when failures not more expensive than
the planned downtime for maintenance, such as for your home lightbulbs, correc-
tive maintenance is the better options. Some types of failures, such as lightning
strikes, cannot be prevented by periodic maintenance.
2.2 Planning of maintenance
Besides what maintenance needs to be performed, it is important to decide when
to do this maintenance. In general, we can distinguish three types of planning:
use-based ,condition-based , and failure-based maintenance [9].
Use-based maintenance is the simplest type of maintenance plan for preven-
tive maintenance: It performs certain activities after some specied amount of
use of the system, in whatever units of use are relevant. For example, changing
the oil in a car can be performed after a given number of miles have been driven,
or after a given length of time has elapsed.
3

--- Page 4 ---
Condition-based maintenance is more elaborate, as it specied the future
maintenance plan given the current condition of the system. A simple example
of such a plan is replacing the battery in your smoke-detector when it starts
emitting low-battery beeps. Most condition-based maintenance plans also in-
volve some use-based component, such as inspections at xed times, since most
systems do not measure their own condition well enough to completely on for
maintenance.
Finally, failure-based maintenance is mostly used for corrective maintenance,
where action is only taken when a failure occurs. This type of plan is not nec-
essarily the same as only performing corrective maintenance, as it may involve
repairing or replacing still-functional parts of a system as preventive maintenance
against future failures.
3 Fault maintenance trees
One of the industry-standard methods for reliability analysis is fault tree anal-
ysis. A fault tree describes how failures at a component level interact to cause
system failures. Our framework of fault maintenance trees extends fault trees
by including maintenance. This section gives a brief overview of fault trees and
fault maintenance trees.
3.1 Fault trees
k/N
basic AND OR k/N
event gate gate gate
Fig. 1. Images of the elements in a
standard fault treeFault trees are directed acyclic graphs describ-
ing the combinations of component failures
that lead to a system failures. The leaves of
a fault tree, called basic events (BEs), denote
the component failures. The internal nodes of
the graph, called gates orintermediate events ,
describe the dierent ways that failures can
interact to cause (sub)system failures. The
root node of the graph is called the top level
event (TE), and denotes the failure of the en-
tire system.
The gates in a fault tree can be of several types, shown in Figure 1, describing
the various forms of interactions between failures. The AND-gate fails when all
of its children fail, the OR-gate when any of its children fail, and the k=N-gate
when at least kout of itsNchildren fail.
These fault trees, also called standard orstatic fault trees, do not capture all
possible interactions that can occur in practical systems, and many extensions
have been developed to model more complex behaviours. An overview of such
extensions can be found in [12].
To analyse the dependability of a system modeled using a fault tree and
obtain quantitative values, the basic events must be decorated with numeric
attributes describing their failure behaviour. The most common approach is to a
4

--- Page 5 ---
attach probabilities or failure rate to each basic event. Fault trees decorated with
probabilities abstract away the evolution over time, while failure rates provides
the parameters of exponential distributions governing the times when the events
fail.
3.2 Metrics
Given an FT with failure information, several metrics of the system can be
computed:
Reliability denotes the probability of the system failing within a given time
window. Formally, if we describe the behaviour of the system described by
a fault tree FusingXF(t) = 1 when this system has failed at time t, and 0
if it has not, the reliability is dened as ReF(t) =P(XF(t) = 0). Conversely,
we use the term unreliability for the probability that the system has failed.
For fault trees with only probabilities, the reliability is constant over time.
Availability denotes the expected fraction of time in a given time window that
the system is functioning. Formally, we say AF(t) =E(1
tRt
0XF(x)dx).
Mean time to failure denotes the expected time before a failure occurs. For-
mally, MTTF (F) =E(argmintXF(t) = 1).
Expected cost denotes the expected cost incurred within a given time frame.
Although not very useful for FTs without maintenance, costs are very use-
ful when comparing dierent maintenance strategies. Typically costs are
incurred either on a per-event basis, e.g. a xed cost to replace a broken
component, or per unit time, e.g. lost productivity while a system is down.
Formally, we write C(t) for the cumulative cost incurred up to time t, hence
the expected cost is either E(C(t)) for a xed time window, or1
tE(C(t)) for
the average cost per unit time.
3.3 Fault maintenance trees
The industry-standard approach to including repairs in a fault tree is to equip
basic events with a repair rate as well as a failure rate [16]. This repair rate gives
the parameter of an exponential distribution governing the time taken to repair
the component after it has failed.
More complicated repair policies can be modeled using repair boxes described
in [3] and [8]. While this approach supports complex policies for repairs after
component failures, is does not allow for preventive maintenance, nor does it
support the modeling of components with non-exponentially-distributed failure
times.
We propose the formalism of fault maintenance trees , which supports complex
preventive and corrective repair policies as well as components with arbitrary
distributions of failure times. This formalism extends basic events by introduc-
ingdegraded states (similar to those in extended fault trees [5]) in which the
component is still functional but has worn to some extent. The tree structure is
also augmented with repair modules andinspection modules , which act on the
5

--- Page 6 ---
extended basic events by returning them to a less degraded state, or initiating
a repair depending on the current state.
We further introduce a new gate type, the rate dependency or RDEP, depicted
in Figure 2. This gate describes a situation where the failure of one component
(called the trigger causes the accelerated degradation one or more other compo-
nents (called the dependent children . For example, if one pump in a redundant
setup fails, the other pump is sucient to keep the system functioning but the
increased load results in faster wear of the functional pump. When the trigger is
subsequently repaired, the dependent children return to the normal wear rate,
but do not return to their original state of degradation.
3.4 Analysis through priced timed automata
RDEP
T

A
B
Fig. 2. RDEP gate
where the failure of BE T
leads to accelerated wear
of BE A with a factor ,
and of BE B with factor
.To compute quantitative metrics of FMTs, such as re-
liability and availability, we translate the FMT into
a network of priced timed automata (PTA), which
we then analyze using the UPPAAL-SMC [6] model-
checking tool.
A priced time automaton is a model consisting of
locations and transitions between these locations. The
locations represent states of the system, and transi-
tions describe situations when the system may move
from one state to another. Constraints on the edges
and invariants on locations may be used to block or
force certain transitions at certain times. These con-
straints and invariants are specied in terms of clocks,
which increase linearly over time but may be reset
when a transition is taken. Multiple PTAs can be
combined using synchronisation on transitions, where
some edges waiting for a signal sig? can only be taken simultaneous with a
transition in another PTA emitting the corresponding signal sig!.
An example of a PTA can be seen in Figure 4, describing an inspection
module (IM). The initial location is the one on the left. Here, the clock xdenotes
the time since the previous inspection, and increases until it is reset when an
inspection is performed. The invariant on the initial location prevents the PTA
from remaining in this state when the time to perform an inspection has been
reached. Before this time, the guard on the self-looping transition prevents a
premature inspection. When the clock xis equal to the time interval , the self-
loop is taken and the clock is reset. The edge to the location on the right is a
synchronization transition on the channel thres, and is taken when a component
has degraded enough to take the corresponding transition its PTA. After this,
the IM still waits for the inspection time, but the transition back to the initial
location now also synchronizes with the repair module to begin a repair. Finally,
both transitions corresponding to performing an inspection add a xed amount
costto a global counter.
6

--- Page 7 ---
CC
n+= 1
fail[id]!
p==NT==N
thres [insp id]!T!=Nrepair [repid]?
repaired [id]!
p:= 1
p:= 1; repair [repid]?=;fail[fdep id]?==;repaired [fdep id]?fail[fdep id]?
=repaired [fdep id]?
==
C Cp<N
p!=T
thres [insp id]!p==Tp+= 1
Fig. 3. PTA of a basic event with a failure time governed by a ( N,)-Erlang
distribution, with a threshold for the inspection at phase T. The counter pdenotes
the current phase, and is incremented according to exit rate of the initial state. If
the current phase is equal to the threshold phase, a signal thres [insp id] is send to the
listening IM. When the current phase equals the number of phases Nin the distribution,
the PTA emits a signal fail[id] to all listening gates, possibly emits the threshold signal,
and waits for a signal repair [redid] from the RM. When this repair signal is received,
the PTA emits a signal repaired [id] to any listening gates, reset the current phase to 1,
and returns to the initial state. The signal fail[fdep id] triggers an acceleration of the
degradation due the the failure of an FDEP trigger, and repaired [fdep id] return the
rate to normal.
An addition to PTA for statistical model checking is the option to attach an
exit rate to a location, which species an exponential distribution for the time
that a transition is taken, unless an invariant forces a transition before this time.
To analyze an entire FMT, we convert each element (i.e. basic event, gate,
IM, and RM) into a PTA, with appropriate synchronization depending on the
structure of the FMT. Each element is assigned a unique ID to coordinate the
signals for synchronization. The PTA for the basic event, IM, RM, and AND-gate
are shown in Figures 3, 4, 5, and 6 respectively. The other gates are constructed
analogously to the AND gate.
After converting an FMT into a network of PTA, the model-checking tool
UPPAAL-SMC is used to compute quantitative metrics of the model. The dif-
ferent metrics described in Section 3.2 can be expressed in the tCTL-like logic
of UPPAAL as follows, where xdenotes a clock counting global time:
Reliability For convenience we describe only the unreliability, which is the
probability of experiencing a failure within time t. If we denote the failed
state of the top event as T.Failed , the unreliability corresponds to the formula
P[xt]fT:Failedg.
Availability To compute the expected fraction of time the system is up, we
introduce an auxiliary clock athat is stopped, but not reset, while the top
event is in the failed state. The availability within time tcan then be ex-
pressed as E[xt]fmax :a=tg.
7

--- Page 8 ---
Expected number of failures : To count the expected number of failures
within a time bound, we introduce a variable that is incremented every time
the top event enters its failed state, and use the formula E[xt]fmax :ng.
Expected cost : Our model tracks several variables corresponding to dierent
costs (e.g.Ctotal for total costs, Cinspfor the cost of inspections, etc.). To
nd the expected total cost of the system, we use the formula E[xt]fmax :
Ctotalg. The other costs can be expressed by changing the counter.
4 Case studies
To demonstrate the practical applicability of fault maintenance trees and SMC in
practice, we have applied this method to two cases from the railway industry: The
electrically insulated railway joint (EI-Joint) [14], and a trainbound pneumatic
compressor [13].
4.1 EI-joint
The electrically insulated joint is a component used to physically connect two
railroad tracks while maintaining electrical separation between them. This is
necessary since many train detection systems use electrical signals to determine
whether a train is present, and such systems can only detect which isolated
section of track the train is occupying. Failures of these joints are a major con-
tributor to disruptions of train service.
x<=Tperiod
x<=Tperiodthres[id]?
force[rep id]!
x==Tperiod
Ctotal+=C
Cinsp+=Cx==Tperiod
x:= 0
Ctotal+=C
Cinsp+=C
Fig. 4. PTA for an inspection mod-
ule. The PTA begins in the leftmost
state, and waits until either the time
until the inspection interval ( Tperiod)
elapses, or until a threshold signal
(thres[id]) is received from a BE. If the
time elapses before a signal is received,
then the inspection cost is incurred and
the timer resets. If a threshold signal is
received, the module waits for the sched-
uled inspection time, then signals its as-
sociated repair module to begin a repair
(force[rep id]), and then resets the timer.x:= 0x==Tperiod
x<=Tperiodforce[id]?
x:= 0x<=Trepairx==Trepair
Ctotal+=C
Cmaint +=Cx:= 0
repair[id]!
Fig. 5. PTA for a repair module. The
PTA begins in the leftmost state with
clock xinitially zero. It waits until ei-
ther the waiting time for a periodic repair
(Tperiod) elapses, or a repair request sig-
nal ( force[id] ) is received. In either case,
the module waits some time Trepair, in-
curs theCfor a repair, sends a signal
(repair[id] ) to any BEs repaired by this
module, and resets the timer.
8

--- Page 9 ---
fail[c1]?
fail[c2]?fail[c2]?
fail[c1]?fail[id]!repaired
[c2]?
repaired[c1]?repaired[id]!
repaired
[id]!repaired [c1]?
repaired [c2]?
Fig. 6. PTA of an AND gate with two
children with IDs c1 and c2. The gate lis-
tens for the failure signals of its children,
and emits its own failure signal when both
children have failed. Likewise, it listens for
the signals that its children have been re-
paired, and emits its own repaired signal if
either child is repaired after the gate emits
its failure signal.A fault tree of the EI-joint can
be seen in Figure 7, the exact failure
modes are listed in Table 1. In broad
terms, failures of the joints can be di-
vided into mechanical failures where
the physical connection between the
rails is broken, and electrical failures
where an electrical connection is made
between the rails.
Aside from the distribution of the
failure time, all failure modes have
an associated `condition' which is re-
quired for the failure to occur. For ex-
ample, a joint can be short-circuited
by metal shavings when the wheels of
a train scrape against the track, which
only occurs in joints installed where
the track curves. We model this by a
probability in each basic event, corre-
sponding to the fraction of all joints
that are susceptible to the particular
failure mode.
The maintenance policy for the joints is fairly straightforward: Periodic visual
inspections are performed, and any problems found are corrected shortly after.
Some failures, such as when a conductive path is formed by iron shavings, can
be easily corrected, e.g. by sweeping away the shavings. Mechanical defects and
faults internal to the joint can only be repaired by replacing the entire joint. We
leave out exact details of the current policy for reasons of condentiality.
The goal of this case study was to improve the current maintenance policy
with respect to cost. We consider three categories of costs: (1) costs of inspec-
tions, (2) costs of maintenance (preventive and corrective), and (3) costs of
failures. These costs were provided by ProRail, as an average over all the joints
they maintain (as the actual costs vary, e.g. a failure in a high-trac rail is
more expensive than in some rarely-used sidetrack). The costs of failure include
both monetary cost, and a model of the social costs of unavailability based on
passenger delays.
Results. We have analyzed the model of the EI-joint, both under the current
maintenance policy and under several possible improvements. In general, we
nd that our results for the current policy closely match historical records of
failures, indicating that the model is a good representation of the actual system.
we nd that the current policy is close to optimal, and that this optimum is
fairly insensitive to small variations in inspection frequency.
The results shown in this section are computed using 40,000 simulation runs,
resulting in a 95% condence interval with a width less than 1% of the indicated
9

--- Page 10 ---
Parameters Failure rates
BE nr. Failure mode ETTF (yrs) Phases Prob. cnd. Predicted Actual Dierence
1 Poor geometry 5 4 10% 110 48 62
2 Broken shplate 8 4 33% 129 83 46
3 Broken bolts 15 4 33% 2.3 2.1 0.2
4 Rail head broken out 10 4 33% 68 30 38
5 Glue connection broken 10 4 33% 70 37 33
5a Manufacturing defect - - 0.25%
5b Installation error - - 0.25%
6 Battered head 20 4 5% 3.4 5.5 2.1
7 Arc damage 5 3 0.2% 7 3.4 3.6
8 End post broken out 7 3 33% 12 9.4 2.6
9 Joint bypassed: overhang 5 4 100% 212 200 12
10a Joint shorted: shavings (normal) 1 4 12%
10b Joint shorted: shavings (coated) 10 4 3%
10 Joint shorted: sharings (total) 156 150 6
11 Joint shorted: splinters 200 1 100% 254 261 7
12 Joint shorted: foreign object 250 1 100% 199 200 1
13 Joint shorted: shavings (grinding) 5000 1 100% 10 10 0
14 Sleeper shifted 5000 1 100% 19 18 1
15 Internal insulation failure 5000 1 100%
Table 1. Parameters and results of the basic events of the FMT for the EI-joint.
The column `ETTF' lists the expected time to failure, assuming no maintenance is
performed. The column `prob. cnd.' gives the probability that a given joint is subject
to the condition that allows this failure mode to occur. The last three columns give the
number of failures per year in a population of 50,000 joints as predicted by the model
and as observed in practice. Modes 5a and 5b have a xed probability of occurring every
time a joint is installed. Failure data for mode 15 was not available, and therefore not
included in the analysis.
values. When comparing to historical records, we consider the entire population
of 50,000 EI-joints in the Netherlands.
In detail, Table 1 also shows the predicted and actual number of occurrences
of the various failure modes. We observe that most failure modes occur about
as frequently as predicted. Furthermore, we consider the total number of fail-
ures each year, which the model predicts at 3680 replacements per year, while
historical records indicate approx. 3000 joints are purchased. We expect that
this dierence is due to some failure modes being modeled as needing a com-
plete joint replacement, but which can be repaired by minor maintenance if the
degradation has not progressed very far.
Figure 8 shows a breakdown of the costs of a joint over a 50-year timespan. We
note that the costs increase almost linearly, and thus we do not need to consider
a specic time bound when evaluating the annual cost of a maintenance policy.
We now consider alternative maintenance policies where we vary the inspec-
tion frequency. The results of this analysis are shown in Figure 9. As expected,
the cost of inspections increases linearly with frequency and the cost of failures
decreases but with diminishing returns. The cost for maintenance is nearly con-
stant, as the inspection will only determine whether a repair action is performed
before or after failure, but does not change the number of needed repairs.
10

--- Page 11 ---
Failure EI-joint
Mechanical failure Failure electrical isolation
4 2 3 5
5a 5bRDEP
RDEP
1 814 15
Joint shorted
9 10a 10b 11 12 13RDEP
6
Fig. 7. Fault tree of the electrically insulated railway joint. The numbers in
the basic events correspond to those in Table 1.
We nd that the optimal inspection frequency is approx. four inspections per
year, but the total cost is nearly constant between two and six inspections per
year. The current policy lies within this range, so it is as optimal as our model
can predict.
Next, we examine several qualitative changes to the maintenance policy. The
three changes are: (1) always replacing the entire joint rather than correcting
single defects, (2) reducing the threshold for when corrective action is taken
after an inspection, and (3) periodically replace the entire joint after a given
time rather than waiting for its condition to deteriorate. The results of these
policies are shown in Table 2.
We observe that periodic replacements have only a small impact on the failure
frequency but incur signicant costs, and are thus not useful. Replacing whenever
a defect is found is more productive, but still prohibitively expensive. Finally,
the reduced threshold cuts the number of failures nearly in half for only a small
increase in total cost. Nonetheless, since the total cost includes the social costs
of the failures, we do not expect this policy to be an improvement overall.
4.2 Pneumatic compressor
Our second case study concerns the pneumatic compressor used in a Dutch
trains of the VIRM type. Each train has one such compressor, which provides
compressed air for the operation of the brakes, automatic doors, etc. The sys-
tems that operate on this compressed air are designed to be fail-safe (e.g. the
11

--- Page 12 ---
 0  10  20  30  40  50Cost
YearsT otal cost
Cost of inspections
Cost of corrective and preventive maintenance
Cost of failuresFig. 8. Cumulative costs of one EI-joint
over time, split up by type of cost.
 0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8Cost
Nr. of inspections per yearT otal cost
Cost of inspections
Cost of corrective and preventive maintenance
Cost of failuresFig. 9. Dierent types of total costs for
one joint, depending on the inspection fre-
quency.
Policy Maint. cost Total cost Failure frequency
Current 1 1 1
Replace instead of repair 2.20 1.65 0.76
Reduce threshold by1
31.49 1.16 0.48
Replace every 5 yrs. 2.49 1.85 0.88
Replace every 10 yrs. 1.59 1.34 0.96
Replace every 20 yrs. 1.30 1.17 0.97
Table 2. Comparison of the eects of dierent maintenance policies, relative to the
current policy.
brakes are automatically applied when air pressure drops), but a failure of the
compressor leaves the train stranded resulting in delays for the passengers.
The model of this compressor was developed in cooperation with NedTrain,
the company responsible for maintenance of Dutch trains, among others. For
reasons of condentiality, all times in this section (e.g. failure rates, inspection
intervals, etc.) are scaled by a constant factor.
Figure 10 shows the fault tree for the compressor, and the exact failure modes
are listed in Table 3.
The compressor has a more complex maintenance policy than the EI-joint,
with dierent kinds of inspections and repairs. The policy consists of (1) inspec-
tions and minor corrective repairs every two days, (2) more involved check-ups
and preventine maintenance every three months, (3) a minor overhaul every
three years, and (4) a major overhaul every six years after which the compressor
is considered as good as new.
Results We again consider various alternative maintenance policies, the results
of which are shown in Figure 11. We notice that removing the overhauls has very
little eect on the failure rate, which leads us to question their cost-eectiveness
(with the caveat that degradation behaviour past the 6-year overhaul time is not
known, so nonlinear eects such as metal fatigue may cause a large increase in
12

--- Page 13 ---
Train stranded due to compressor failure
No operation Reduced capacity
1Safety relay
engaged
3
2Oil temperature
safety engaged
4 5 67 8
Compressor screws worn
10 1213
RDEP
9
11
Fig. 10. Fault tree of the pneumatic compressor. The numbers in the basic events
correspond to the failure modes in Table 3.
failure rate). Changing the service interval does have a substantial eect, indicat-
ing that this is an important parameter when deciding the policy. Unfortunately,
since we do not have information on costs, we cannot show what frequency would
be optimal.
5 Conclusion
Nr.Failure mode Nr. of phases ETTF
1Motor does not start when asked 3 16.6
2De-aeration valve defective 3 200
3Two starts in short time 2 0.001
4Radiator obstructed 4 5.5
5Oil thermostat defective 3 16.6
6Low oil level 4 5.5
7Pressure valve leakage 3 3.3
8Air lter obstructed 2 500
9Degraded air lter 4 5
10Particle-induced rupture 4 120
11Oil pollution 4 5.5
12Lubrication-induced wear 4 120
13Motor/bearings degraded 4 120
Table 3. Parameters of the failure
modes of the compressor. The values
have been scaled for anonymity.This paper presents the framework of
fault maintenance trees, integrating
maintenance into fault trees to ana-
lyze the dependability of systems un-
der dierent maintenance regimes.
We have shown how these fault
maintenance trees can be analyzed by
converting them into priced timed au-
tomata and applying statistical model
checking. This analysis yields quan-
titative metrics such as system reli-
ability and expected cost, which can
be used to nd optimal maintenance
strategies.
Two case studies from the railway
industry demonstrate that this frame-
work is applicable in practice, and
13

--- Page 14 ---
 0 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25
 0  1  2  3  4  5  6Expected number of failures
YearsEvery 6 months
Every 3 months
Every 1.5 months(a) Eect of dierent frequencies of the
small service.
 0 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25
 0  2  4  6  8  10  12Expected number of failures
YearsNormal policy
No minor overhauls
No major overhauls(b) Eect of the minor and major over-
hauls.
Fig. 11. Expected number of failures for variations on the maintenance pol-
icy of the pneumatic compressor.
yields results that can be used in decision-making to reduce expenses and im-
prove system dependability.
Acknowledgements
This work has been supported by the STW-ProRail partnership program Explo-
Rail under the project ArRangeer (122238) with participation by Movares.
References
1. A. Alrabghi and A. Tiwari. State of the art in simulation-based optimisation for
maintenance systems. Computers & Industrial Engineering , 82:167 { 182, 2015.
2. F. Arnold, A. Belinfante, F. van der Berg, D. Guck, and M. Stoelinga. DFTCalc: A
tool for ecient fault tree analysis. In Proc. 32nd Int. Conf. on Computer Safety,
Reliability and Security (SAFECOMP) , volume 8153 of LNCS , pages 293{301,
Toulouse, Fance, 2013.
3. A. Bobbio and D. Codetta-Raiteri. Parametric fault trees with dynamic gates and
repair boxes. In Proc. Reliability and Maintainability Symp. , pages 459{465, 2004.
4. G. Bucci, L. Carnevali, and E. Vicario. A tool supporting evaluation of non-
markovian fault trees. In Proc. 5th Int. Conf. on Quantitative Evaluation of Sys-
tems (QEST) , pages 115{116, September 2008.
5. K. Buchacker. Modeling with extended fault trees. In Proc. 5th IEEE Int. Symp.
High Assurance Systems Engineering (HASE) , pages 238{246, 2000.
6. P. Bulychev, A. David, K. G. Larsen, M. Miku cionis, D. B. Poulsen, A. Legay, and
Z. Wang. UPPAAL-SMC: Statistical model checking for priced timed automata. In
Proc. 10th workshop on Quantitative Aspects of Programming Languages (QAPL
2012) , 2012.
7. L. Carnevali, M. Paolieri, K. Tadano, and E. Vicario. Towards the quantitative
evaluation of phased maintenance procedures using non-markovian regenerative
analysis. In Proc. 10th European Performance Engineering Workshop (EPEW) ,
volume 8168 of LNCS , pages 176{190, September 2013.
14

--- Page 15 ---
8. Daniele Codetta-Raiteri, Giuliana Franceschinis, Mauro Iacono, and Valeria Vit-
torini. Repairable fault tree for the automatic evaluation of repair policies. In
Proceedings of the International Conference on Dependable Systems and Networks
(DSN) , pages 659{668. IEEE, 2004.
9. C.W. Gits. Design of maintenance conceps. International Journal of Production
Economics , 24(3):217{226, March 1992.
10. J. Moubray. Reliability centered maintenance . Industrial Press, 1997.
11. E. Ruijters, D. Guck, P. Drolenga, and M. Stoelinga. Fault maintenance trees:
reliability centered maintenance via statistical model checking. In Proc. Reliability
and Maintainability Symp. , January 2016.
12. E. Ruijters and M. Stoelinga. Fault tree analysis: A survey of the state-of-the-art
in modeling, analysis and tools. Computer Science Review , 15{16:29{62, 2015.
13. Enno Ruijters, Dennis Guck, Peter Drolenga, Margot Peters, and Mari elle
Stoelinga. Maintenance analysis and optimization via statistical model check-
ing: Evaluating a train pneumatic compressor. In Proc. Int. Conf. Quantitative
Evaluation of SysTems (QEST) , 2016. Submitted for publication.
14. Enno Ruijters, Dennis Guck, Martijn van Noort, and Mari elle Stoelinga.
Reliability-centered maintenance of the electrically insulated railway joint via fault
tree analysis: A practical experience report. In Proc. Int. Symp. Dependable Sys-
tems and Networks (DSN) , 2016. Accepted for publication.
15. A. Sharma, G. S. Yadava, and S. G. Deshmukh. A literature review and future
perspectives on maintenance optimization. Journal of Quality in Maintenance
Engineering , 17(1):5{25, 2011.
16. W. E. Vesely, F. F. Goldberg, N. H. Roberts, and D. F. Haasl. Fault Tree Handbook .
Oce of Nuclear Regulatory Reasearch, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commision, 1981.
15
